S/2018/703

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 July 2018
Original: English

Seventy-third year

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Report of the Secretary-General
Reporting period from 1 March 2018 to 20 June 2018

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my report on 8 March 2018
(S/2018/210), including on the specific provisions of Security Council resolution
2373 (2017). During the reporting period, there was no progress with regard to the
outstanding obligations of the parties under resolution 1701 (2006) or towards a
permanent ceasefire. The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
2.
Despite the continued relative calm along the Blue Line and in the area of
operations and the reaffirmed commitment by the Israeli and Lebanese authorities to
resolution 1701 (2006), several developments heightened tensions. The UNIFIL Head
of Mission and Force Commander and my Acting Special Coordinator for Lebanon
maintained permanent liaison with both parties to de-escalate tensions and continued
to urge them to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric or any action threatening the
cessation of hostilities and to utilize established channels to address concerns.
3.
As in other parts of Lebanon, the UNIFIL area of operations was calm
throughout the electoral period, including on Election Day on 6 May. The Lebanese
Armed Forces and other security institutions increased their presence during the
election period in the UNIFIL area of operations. At the request of UNIFIL, the Israel
Defense Forces suspended construction works south of the Blue Line on 6 May.
Celebratory shooting was heard in Tyre (Sector West) when preliminary election
results were released.

18-11711 (E)

190718

*1811711*

S/2018/703

4.
UNIFIL continued to monitor the construction works by the Israel Defense
Forces south of the Blue Line, which started in January and led to tense situations on
several occasions. On 8 April, as the works started east of the Blue Line close to the
Kafr Kila Udaysah road (Sector East), a protester aimed what appeared to be a pistol
towards UNIFIL. UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces, which dispersed the
protesters. On 12 April, in Kafr Kila, a sound from the backfire of a vehicle that was
mistaken for a gunshot prompted the Israel Defense Forces to deploy to the location
with rocket launchers, while the Lebanese Armed Forces took up positions with heavy
machine guns. UNIFIL, through its liaison branch, de-escalated the situation.
5.
UNIFIL observed in four separate instances weapons pointed by the Israel
Defense Forces towards the north, including two incidents in which Israeli soldiers
pointed their weapons towards Observer Group Lebanon and UNIFIL troops. On
31 March, UNIFIL observed Lebanese Armed Forces and Israel Defense Forces
personnel pointing their weapons at each other near Udaysah. UNIF IL personnel
intervened to defuse the situation.
6.
On 10 May, the Israel Defense Forces alerted UNIFIL of potential spillover into
the Shabʻa area (Sector East) from kinetic activity on the Golan, outside the UNIFIL
area of operations, and advised UNIFIL troops in the area to take protective measures.
UNIFIL heard 41 explosions and observed 21 traces of rockets being fired south of
Kfar Shuba (Sector East). Later that day, the Lebanese Armed Forces informed
UNIFIL that they had found and removed debris from an air defence missile in
Habbariyah close to Shabʻa. UNIFIL increased its counter-rocket-launching
operations in the area.
7.
The Lebanese Armed Forces and other security institutions successfully
maintained calm during peaceful public gatherings thro ughout Lebanon during
Palestinian Land Day on 30 March, the inauguration of the United States Embassy in
Jerusalem on 14 May, Nakbah Day on 15 May and al-Quds Day on 8 June, when more
than 1,000 people gathered in Marun al-Ra’s (Sector West). The situation in the
UNIFIL area of operations remained calm.
8.
In reference to the visit of an Iranian official to the UNIFIL area of operations
on 28 January cited in my last report (S/2018/210), the Lebanese Minister of Defense,
in a letter dated 13 April addressed to the President of the Security Council, stated
that the Iranian official was accompanied by a member of the Lebanese Parliament,
and that “his escort was not visibly carrying weapons”.
9.
From 1 March to 19 June, UNIFIL recorded 475 Blue Line ground violations,
including 347 violations by shepherds, predominantly in the Shabʻa Farms area, and
by farmers cultivating their fields, mainly near Rumaysh, and 127 violations
involving civilians and 1 violation by an unarmed Lebanese Armed Forces soldier
accessing the Shu‘ayb well near Blida (Sector East).
10. On six occasions, UNIFIL observed firing in the air by the Israel Defense
Forces, apparently to deter civilians, mainly shepherds, from crossing the Blue Line,
in the Shabʻa area. On 2 May, the Israel Defense Forces fired two smoke grenades
close to seven individuals crossing the Blue Line in Kafr Kila. The Israel Defense
Forces apprehended a woman and a shepherd crossing south of the Blue Line on
28 March and 2 May, respectively. Both individuals were returned within 24 hours in
the presence of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces. UNIFIL is investigating the
incidents. UNIFIL repeatedly urged the Israel Defense Forces to refrain from using
live ammunition when firing warning shots and repeatedly urged the Lebanese Armed
Forces to prevent Blue Line violations by civilians.
11. Israel continued to violate Lebanese airspace almost daily, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty. From 1 March to 19 June, UNIFIL
2/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

recorded 456 air violations, totalling 1,518 overflight hours. Unmanned aerial
vehicles accounted for 368 (80.7 per cent) of these violations, with the remaining
violations involving fighter jets or unidentified aircraft. UNIFIL protested all air
violations to the Israel Defense Forces and urged their immediate cessation.
12. Early on 31 March, UNIFIL detected an unmanned aerial vehicle entering
Lebanese airspace from south of the Blue Line. Two hours later, the Israel Defense
Forces informed UNIFIL that an Israeli unmanned aerial vehicle was missing in the
UNIFIL area of operations near Bayt Yahun (Sector West). As the Lebanese Armed
Forces and UNIFIL arrived at the crash site, UNIFIL ob served the remains of a
tactical reconnaissance drone and four Mikholit missiles with Hebrew markings. An
explosive ordnance disposal team of the Lebanese Armed Forces conducted a
controlled demolition of the four missiles.
13. The Israeli occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue
Line continued, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty.
Israel has not responded to the UNIFIL proposal submitted to both part ies in 2011,
aimed at facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the occupied
area. The Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL in July 2011 of the agreement of
Lebanon to the proposal.
14. The delineation of the maritime boundary between Israel and Lebanon remains
disputed. Lebanon protested the alleged violations of its sovereignty by Israeli vessels
operating near the Israeli line of buoys. Lebanon maintains that the line of buoys,
installed unilaterally by Israel, runs through its terri torial waters, and does not
recognize it. The United Nations does not recognize the line of buoys. Lebanon also
alleged that Israel continues to violate its sovereignty by conducting electronic
monitoring, espionage and surveillance through infrastructure deployed south of and
along the Blue Line and devices placed on Lebanese territory.
15. Pursuant to resolution 1701 (2006), UNIFIL continued to assist the Lebanese
Armed Forces in establishing an area between the Blue Line and the Litani River free
of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons other than those of the
Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL. With an increasing focus on inspections,
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces operated 8 permanent checkpoints daily and
a daily average of 4 temporary checkpoints and 10 counter-rocket-launching
operations across the area of operations, with the Lebanese Armed Forces spot checking vehicles. UNIFIL stands ready to act independently within the full scop e of
its mandate and capabilities should there be credible evidence or information
supporting the presence of unauthorized weapons or the imminent threat of hostile
activity emanating from the area of operations. UNIFIL continued to monitor
locations where the Israel Defense Forces alleged the presence of unauthorized
weapons and infrastructure in the UNIFIL area of operations, but has not observed
any violations of resolution 1701 (2006).
16. In the course of its activities, UNIFIL observed 190 instances of individuals
carrying unauthorized arms in violation of resolution 1701 (2006), 189 of which
involved hunting weapons, mostly in the areas of Yarun (Sector West), Bastrah, Blida,
Mays al-Jabal and Sarda (all Sector East), in the vicinity of the Blue Line. The other
incident occurred on 9 May, when UNIFIL, patrolling in coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, observed an individual in camouflage with an automatic rifle
in a vehicle near Adshit al Qusayr (Sector East). UNIFIL alerted the Lebanese Armed
Forces in all instances, including in a letter to the Commander of the Lebanese Armed
Forces South Litani Sector, and requested that appropriate measure s be taken (see
para. 35 below).
17. Pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution 2373 (2017), UNIFIL further increased
its visible presence and activities, with a focus on preserving the cessation of
18-11711

3/20

S/2018/703

hostilities. In monitoring the cessation of hostilities, UNIFIL sustained its operational
tempo as well as non-operational activities to mitigate risks in a timely manner,
thereby preventing small incidents from escalating into larger-scale violence. The
number of UNIFIL monthly operational activities has increased from 13,362 in
August 2017 to 14,871 in May 2018, with a 68 per cent increase in foot patrols and a
28 per cent increase in the average flight hours of reconnaissance air patrols. More
than a third of all activities were conducted at night.
18. From 1 March to 19 June, UNIFIL conducted 53,285 military operational
activities, including 25,174 patrols. UNIFIL increased its static operational activities,
with 120 permanent and temporary observation posts in May, up from 73 in February.
UNIFIL continued its intensified foot patrols in urban areas where narrow roadways
and community concerns do not allow for the use of heavy vehicles. UNIFIL
increased the number of foot patrols along the Blue Line from 1,767 in January to
1,909 in May. UNIFIL’s vehicular, foot and air patrols covered all municipalities and
villages in the area of operations. UNIFIL maintained close contact with the Lebanese
Armed Forces and community leaders in southern Lebanon in order to addre ss any
sensitivities without compromising mandated tasks.
19. The freedom of movement of UNIFIL was generally respected, except for those
occasions detailed in annex I. In some cases, members of local communities opposed
the use of heavy military vehicles on narrow roadways in populated areas.
20. During the month of May, three UNIFIL patrols and four patrols of Observer
Group Lebanon were stopped by individuals wearing green uniform-like attire at the
gates of a facility operated by the Lebanese non-governmental organization “Green
Without Borders” in the vicinity of Aytarun (Sector West) near the Blue Line. The
men claimed that UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon could only enter if
accompanied by the Lebanese Armed Forces. The Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL informed the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
General Joseph Aoun, that it was imperative for UNIFIL, including Observer Group
Lebanon, to independently access and patrol all areas within its area of operations
without hindrance. Following a joint visit on 19 June, the UNIFIL Head of Mission
and Force Commander and the South Litani Sector Commander of the Lebanese
Armed Forces agreed to resume patrols in close coordination along the road.
21. Among the seven identified “Green Without Borders” locations in the area of
operations, all close to the Blue Line, UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon are able
to visit the second site in Aytarun almost daily. The sites in Ayta al -Sha‘b and
Marwahin and the two sites in Labbunah, all in Sector West, as well as the site in
Udaysah in Sector East, are purportedly located on private property. UNIFIL is
following up with the Lebanese Armed Forces regarding access to these areas.
Meanwhile, UNIFIL conducts vehicular patrols along the surrounding roads and
regular air reconnaissance of these areas.
22. Further enhancing the use of air assets, UNIFIL conducted on average 54.2 day
and night reconnaissance flight hours per month, a 27 per cent increase compared to
the last reporting period. Air reconnaissance patrols were concentrated over areas
with limited access by UNIFIL ground patrols, such as private property, rugged terrain
or terrain contaminated by explosive remnants of war or anti -personnel mines.
Relations between UNIFIL and the local population remained largely positive.
UNIFIL implemented quick-impact projects to address the pressing needs of local
communities, to support the extension of State authority in the South and to contribute
to force acceptance in line with the priorities identified during the strategic review of
UNIFIL (see S/2017/202). A full update regarding the implementation of the
recommendations of the 2017 strategic review is provided in annex II.

4/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

23. UNIFIL conducted 7,271 activities in coordination with the Lebanese Armed
Forces, including permanent and temporary checkpoints and counter-rocketlaunching operations. UNIFIL conducted a daily average of 66 activities, in close
coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces (19 per cent of all activities).
Coordinated activities focused, in particular, on stepping up the number of foot patrols
along the Blue Line, which increased from 15 in February to 236 in March.
24. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force carried out maritime interdiction opera tions
on a 24-hour basis and capacity-building for the Lebanese Armed Forces-Navy. From
1 March to 19 June, the Maritime Task Force hailed 2,535 vessels, 643 of which were
inspected and cleared by the Lebanese authorities. The Lebanese Navy maintains a
current maritime picture of its waters through its eight coastal radar stations. UNIFIL
conducted 198 training sessions to improve common operational standards for
surveillance and hailing activities. This also included training for the participation of
a Lebanese naval vessel in maritime operations for an uninterrupted period of 48
hours alongside UNIFIL vessels. In addition, the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force
continues to play an important stabilizing role in controlling Lebanese territorial
waters.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
25. UNIFIL hosted two regular tripartite meetings, on 22 March and 28 May, during
which liaison, coordination and the violations of resolution 1701 (2006) were
discussed. The liaison and coordination arrangements established with the parties
enabled UNIFIL to de-escalate tensions over Israel Defense Forces construction
works south of the Blue Line and ensure that no construction activity was carried out
in locations that Lebanon considers “reservation” areas. UNIFIL also hosted six
dedicated tripartite meetings on Blue Line issues, during which both parties expressed
their commitment to finding practical solutions to contentious areas along the Blue
Line.
26. In addition to the increased engagement in the tripartite meetings, the Head of
Mission and Force Commander of UNIFIL continued to liaise with the parties
bilaterally to facilitate mutually acceptable solutions to contentious areas along the
Blue Line, emphasizing that the visible marking of the Blue Line remains an
important confidence-building activity. My Acting Special Coordinator reinforced
these messages in her engagements with both sides.
27. The establishment of a UNIFIL liaison office in Tel Aviv, Israel, continued to be
discussed with Israeli authorities. Their agreement to the UNIFIL proposal remains
pending since 2008.
28. UNIFIL continued to train its personnel to ensure preparedness to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence. UNIFIL organized on 17 April
a joint exercise on emergency team deployment at Naqoura (Sector West), with the
participation of 21 Lebanese civil defence officers from South Lebanon. On 19 April,
UNIFIL met representatives of the Lebanese Armed Forces, local municipal
authorities and Lebanese civil defence governmental and non-governmental
organizations to explore collaboration on civil defence and the protection of civilians,
including through joint exercises with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
29. In accordance with the Security Council women, peace and security agenda and
the policy on gender-responsive United Nations peacekeeping operations, UNIFIL
continued to train military and civilian personnel on gender mainstreaming and
conflict-related sexual violence.

18-11711

5/20

S/2018/703

C.

Disarming armed groups
30. No progress was achieved with respect to the disarmament of armed groups. The
maintenance of arms outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and other groups
continues to restrict the ability of the Government of Lebanon to exercise full
sovereignty and authority over its territory. Hizbullah continued to acknowledge
publicly that it maintains a military capacity. On 26 March, Hizbullah Member of
Parliament Nawaf Moussawi said that the “resistance” was “capable of striking deep
into Israeli territory”. On 21 April, Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah
warned that “the resistance now has the strength and capability and men and
technology and expertise and experience and missiles that can strike any target in the
enemy entity”. On 15 May, he further warned that “a new phase” in the Syria conflict
was opening and that “Israel proper could be the next target for retaliation”.
31. On 1 April, Israel Defense Forces Chief of General Staff Gadi Eisenkot
reportedly stated that the chances for war in 2018 were bigger than before, adding
that, if war broke out, “everything under Hizbullah’s use in Lebanon will be
destroyed, from Beirut to the last point in the south”. On 16 April, the Minister of
Defense of Israel, Avigdor Lieberman, reportedly said that the threat facing Israel ’s
northern border now included the Lebanese Armed Forces. On 7 May, the Minister of
Education of Israel, Naftali Bennett, said the Lebanese election results reaffirmed that
“Lebanon equals Hizbullah” and that Israel would “view Lebanon as responsible for
any action from within its territory”.
32. The Lebanese Armed Forces and security forces continued counter-terrorism
operations and arrests of individuals suspected of affiliation with or support for
extremist groups. From 1 March to 20 June, 40 terrorism-related arrests were
reported, including of suspected affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and Jabhat Fath al-Sham (formerly Nusrah Front), in particular elements
accused of involvement in the 2014 assaults on the Lebanese Army in Arsal and
Tripoli.
33. On 20 March, armed men blocked a road in Baalbek to protest raids conducted
by the Lebanese Armed Forces in the area. On 24 April, an alleged Hizbullah member
reportedly died in the explosion of a rocket-propelled grenade in Sidon. On 15 May,
two members of the Internal Security Forces were shot as they attempted to remove
illegal structures in Baalbek; similar incidents were reported in Beirut ’s southern
suburbs on 30 May. On 22 May, one Lebanese soldier was killed and eight injured in
armed clashes in Tripoli. Several personal disputes escalated into shooting. On
17 June, two persons were killed and five injured in a family dispute in Baalbek. In
the context of the parliamentary elections, there were several incidents involving
gunfire; one person was killed on 6 May and one on 8 May.
34. On 15 March, as a first step towards the creation of a National Committee for
Firearms, Prime Minister Hariri established a Human Securit y Unit under the
Presidency of the Council of Ministers to raise awareness of the risks of firearms.
35. On 9 May, the Lebanese Armed Forces declared that individuals violating the
nationwide ban on hunting from January to mid-September would be prosecuted. The
Army noted that, as obligated under resolution 1701 (2006), it would take additional
measures to ensure that the UNIFIL area of operations was free of weapons, including
hunting weapons.
36. The security situation in Palestine refugee camps in Lebanon remained
generally stable, with violent incidents and shootings most prevalent in the Ein El
Helweh camp near Sidon. Four people were killed and 11 injured during clashes in
March and April involving extremist groups and the Joint Palestinian Forces. In one

6/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

incident, armed elements entered two United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) schools. On 7 March, clashes between
Fatah al-Intifada and the Sa’iqa, both pro-Syrian Government Palestinian groups, in
the Shatila camp in southern Beirut resulted in one fatality and several injuries. On
9 March, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrested a high-ranking Fatah Movement officer
suspected of selling arms to extremist groups inside Palestine refugee camps in
Lebanon. On 17 March, unknown assailants killed a member of the Joint Palestinian
Forces in the Mieh Mieh camp near Sidon, causing the temporary closure of UNRWA
schools and shops. On 10 June, the installation by the Lebane se Armed Forces of
metal detectors at the entrances of the Ein El Helweh camp triggered peaceful protests
by residents; the metal detectors were subsequently removed on 25 June.
37. There was no progress in dismantling the military bases maintained by the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada,
which continue to compromise Lebanon’s sovereignty and impede the ability of the
State to monitor and effectively control parts of the border.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
38. Several alleged violations of Lebanese airspace were registered by the Lebanese
Government. In identical letters addressed to the Security Council and myself dated
6 April (A/72/831-S/2018/336), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations conveyed her Government’s message that “on 31 March 2018, Israel
violated Lebanese airspace, using an unmanned aerial vehicle armed with four
missiles. It followed that by sending a second aerial vehicle to bomb the first aerial
vehicle after it had crashed on the outskirts of the town of Bayt Yahun in the Bint
Jubayl district.” In identical letters addressed to the Security Council and myself
dated 10 April (A/72/832-S/2018/342), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
conveyed her Government’s message that “on 9 April 2018, four Israeli warplanes
violated Lebanese airspace… to conduct raids in the territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic,” warning that “the repeated violation of its airspace by Israel to conduct
raids in the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic poses a particular threat. ” On 9 May,
the Lebanese Armed Forces stated that debris from several missiles had landed in
southern and eastern Lebanon following an escalation in the Syrian Arab Republic.
39. In a letter addressed to the Security Council and myself on 29 May, the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon conveyed her Government ’s message that, “on
22 May 2018, an Israeli warplane violated Lebanese airspace and circled over the city
of Beirut.” The letter further states that the “Israeli Government flaunted that
violation by displaying photographs of the combat aircraft on 22 May 2018 at a
conference of air force commanders held in Israel.”
40. In identical letters addressed to the Security Council and myself dated 12 April
(S/2018/345) and 7 June, the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations
stated that “Lebanese violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) are daily
occurrences.” On 13 April, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations conveyed a response from the Minister of National Defence rejecting
allegations contained in the letter from Israel of 5 February ( S/2018/91). On 11 May,
the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed a letter to me that informed of “the
strengthening of ties between two internationally recognized terrorist organizations,
Hamas and Hezbollah” and that “Hamas has been building its own military force
covertly in Lebanon.”
41. Allegations of arms transfers to Hizbullah continued and are of serious concern.
While taking such allegations seriously, the United Nations is not in a position to
substantiate them independently.

18-11711

7/20

S/2018/703

42. Reports of Hizbullah’s engagement in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic
continued. On 6 June, Speaker Nabih Berri said that Hizbull ah would only withdraw
once “Syria is liberated and its territories are united”. On 8 June, Hizbullah SecretaryGeneral Nasrallah acknowledged that Hizbullah was “present in Syria where we
should be present and where the Syrian leadership asked us to be pr esent”. A number
of Lebanese nationals also allegedly continued to fight with non -State armed groups
in the Syrian Arab Republic.
43. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to deploy land border regiments and
construct watchtowers along the border with the Syrian Arab Republic. On 29 May,
the Central Training Centre for border security was inaugurated at Rayak Air Base,
Biqa‘, with European Union funding.
44. Cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon has decreased.
Lebanese authorities arrested several smugglers for transporting Syrians illegally into
Lebanon, as well as Syrians accused of entering Lebanon illegally.
45. On 5 and 23 April, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrested 15 Syrian nationals
suspected of terrorist group affiliation and seized weapons and ammunition during a
raid on an informal Syrian refugee settlement in Arsal. On 14 May, in Al -Hirmil,
Lebanese General Security arrested two Syrian nationals over affiliation with terrorist
groups. On 17 May, the Internal Security Forces arrested an alleged arms dealer in
Akkar, north Lebanon.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
46. In mine-related incidents, two persons were killed and one injured outside Arsal
on 6 March, a Syrian boy was injured outside Baalbek on 11 March and three peop le
were killed outside Arsal on 12 April. One landmine explosion incident was recorded
on 27 April in the UNIFIL area of operations in the vicinity of Yarun.
47. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued mine clearance operations along the
eastern border. In the UNIFIL area of operations, six UNIFIL mine clearance teams
cleared 5,436.5 m 2 of land and destroyed 581 anti-personnel mines and two
unexploded ordnances. The United Nations Mine Action Service conducted 57 quality
assurance monitoring visits and provided eight awareness briefings on
landmines/explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices to 174 United
Nations personnel. One mine risk education session was held in collaboration with
the Lebanon Mine Action Center, an active partner in demining activities, benefiting
35 children. Some 150 United Nations personnel and over 600 school children
attended two events organised by UNMAS on the International Day for Mine
Awareness and Assistance in Mine Action on 4 April.

F.

Delineation of borders
48. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Syrian Arab Republic and Israel
have yet to respond to the provisional definition of the Shabʻa Farms area proposed
in my report of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2007/641). In Shabʻa town on 13 April, Prime Minister Hariri asserted that
“recovering the Shabʻa Farms and the hills of Kfar Shuba is the responsibility of the
State”.
49. The dispute between Lebanon and Israel over their exclusive economic zones
remained unresolved. On 21 March, Hizbullah Secretary-General Nasrallah stated
that Hizbullah would continue “to protect Lebanon’s land, maritime territories”. On

8/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

19 April, Speaker Berri underlined that “all political forces are united [against] any
violation of Lebanon’s rights — especially on the oil and gas issue.
50. On 29 May, caretaker Minister of Energy and Water Cesar Abi Khalil approved
plans to explore maritime blocks four and nine. Part of block nine is situated in the
area disputed by Lebanon and Israel. Khalil also announced that preparations for a
second licensing round would proceed.

G.

Political and institutional stability
51. On 6 May, Lebanon held its first parliamentary elections since 2009. At the end
of the registration period on 27 March, 77 lists comprising a total of 597 candidates
were registered to compete in 26 districts for 128 parliamentary seats. Of the 597
candidates, 86 (14.4 per cent) were women, up from 12 in 2009. The overall voter
turnout for the elections was 49.2 per cent, down from 53.37 per cent in 2009.
52. Lebanon conducted its inaugural out-of-country voting on 27 and 29 April
across 39 locations. Of the approximately 82,000 expatriates registered to vote, the
turnout was reported as 59 per cent.
53. Official results allocate seats as follows: Future Movement, 21; Free Patriotic
Movement, 20; Amal, 17; Lebanese Forces, 15; Hizbullah, 12; Progressive Socialist
Party, 8; the “Determination (Azem)” movement of former Prime Minister Mikati, 4;
Marada, the Syrian Social Nationalist Party, Kataeb and Tashnaq, 3 seats each. For
the first time, a candidate representing civil society won one seat through the electoral
list, “Koulouna Watani”, in Beirut. The number of elected women in parliament
increased from four to six.
54. As of 20 June, five candidates have brought challenges through the established
electoral dispute resolution mechanism.
55. In my statement dated 8 May, I congratulated Lebanon on the holding of
parliamentary elections. I noted that “the elections represent a vital step in
strengthening Lebanon’s State institutions and consolidating its democratic tradition”
and that I was looking forward to the formation of the new Government. In a statement
on 10 May, the International Support Group for Lebanon congratulated “the Lebanese
people and authorities for the completion of parliamentary elections on 6 May … in
a generally calm and peaceful climate”, encouraged “the swift formation of a new
Government” and looked forward to “working with the new Government as it follows
up on its international commitments, including under resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006)” and to “the resumption of a Lebanese-led dialogue towards a national
defence strategy in the post-elections period”.
56. At its first session, on 23 May, the new Parliament re-elected Nabih Berri as
Speaker and elected Elie Ferzli as Deputy Speaker. In his acceptance speech, Speaker
Berri underscored that Parliament would act as “a shield on our sovereign land,
maritime and airspace borders in defending and in retaliating, using the power of the
state, the people, the army and the resistance against Israeli aggressions and her
constant violations of our borders, airspace, and regional waters ”. Berri emphasized
that Parliament would work on “completing the implementation of resolution 1701,
as well as the 13 border points on which the continuous Israeli presence poses a threat
to the demarcation formula” and would address corruption and reform.
57. On 24 May, President Michel Aoun nominated Saad Hariri as Prime Ministerdesignate and tasked him with forming a new Cabinet. In a statement that day, Saad
Hariri committed to working on the formation of a national unity Government as soon
as possible. He stressed the importance of a Government that would further political

18-11711

9/20

S/2018/703

stability, strengthen state institutions and reinforce the economy. Consultations on the
formation of the next Government continue.
58. On 14 June, President Aoun chaired a meeting with the International Support
Group for Lebanon led by my Acting Special Coordinator. The Group submitted a
joint aide-mémoire, laying out principles for consideration in the new Government ’s
ministerial statement and programme of work. The Group welcomed the President ’s
vision for an inclusive Government of national unity that could carry forward the
agendas of resolution 1701 and recent international conferences in support of
Lebanon.
59. Prior to the expiry of the mandate of the outgoing Government, on 21 May the
Cabinet appointed all 10 members of Lebanon’s National Human Rights Institution,
which had been pending since its establishment by Parliament in 2016.
60. On 15 March in Rome, under the auspices of the International Support Group, I
co-chaired with Prime Minister Gentiloni of Italy a ministerial-level meeting (the
Rome II conference) to endorse the respective strategic plans of, and bolster
international support for, the Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security Forces.
Lebanon renewed its commitments regarding the extension o f State authority and the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2373 (2017).
61. In his opening remarks, Prime Minister Hariri underscored the need to build
State security institutions as “the sole defenders of Lebanon’s sovereignty”. He
reiterated the Government of Lebanon’s commitments to the policy of disassociation
in order to shield Lebanon from regional conflicts and to acc elerate deployments to
south of the Litani, in line with resolution 2373 (2017).
62. The Government of Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL
promoted the deployment of a Lebanese Armed Forces model regiment, increased
maritime assets for the Lebanese Armed Forces and the establishment of a Lebanese
Armed Forces regional civil-military cooperation centre in the UNIFIL area of
operations.
63. In a joint statement, the 41 meeting participants endorsed the Lebanese
Government’s vision of the Lebanese Armed Forces as the sole defender of the
Lebanese state and protector of its borders. Noting ongoing efforts to fully implement
resolution 2373 (2017), participants called on the Government of Lebanon to
accelerate effective and durable deployments to the South. Participants also pledged
financial and materiel assistance in line with the updated capability development plan
of the Lebanese Armed Forces and the strategic plan of the Internal Security Forces.
64. Participants also welcomed the statement of President Aoun on 12 March, in
which he announced that the National Defence Strategy would be discussed by
Lebanese leaders following the parliamentary elections and the formation of a new
Government. On 8 May, President Aoun publicly reiterated his intention to call for
the parties to convene to discuss the implementation of the Taif Accords and a national
defence strategy.
65. Following the Rome II conference, UNIFIL, in close coordination with my
Acting Special Coordinator for Lebanon and potential donors, engaged with the
Lebanese Armed Forces to develop a funding proposal for the deployment of the
model regiment, including the establishment of an operational training centre, a
headquarters and accommodation for the regiment. On 18 May, the Lebanese Armed
Forces inaugurated its regional civil-military cooperation centre in Marjayoun.
66. The national strategy for the prevention of violent extremism, clos ely aligned
with the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (see
General Assembly resolution 70/254), was endorsed by the Council of Ministers on
10/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

27 March. An interministerial taskforce has been established to oversee
implementation. The Government of Lebanon has developed an 18-month pilot project
focused on building confidence among youth.
67. On 15 March, I participated in an extraordinary ministerial conference in Rome
co-chaired by Egypt, Jordan and Sweden in support of UNRWA. Subsequent
contributions have almost halved UNRWA’s overall budget shortfall of $446 million.
However, core services remain vulnerable, with no funding available to start the
2018-2019 school year.
68. On 29 March, Parliament approved the 2018 State budget, which cut all ministry
budgets by 20 per cent, resulting in a slightly reduced deficit of $4.8 billion.
69. On 6 April, France hosted the Conference Economique pour le Développement
et les Réformes Economiques (CEDRE), in support of the Lebanese economy. In line
with the $16 billion capital investment plan, which lays out infrastructure priorities,
the Government of Lebanon outlined sectoral and structural reforms necessary to
maximize investments by international partners and the private sector. Approximately
$10.2 billion in loans were pledged, including $9.9 billion in concessional terms, and
$860 million in grants were announced. The CEDRE communiqué called for the
establishment of a strong, transparent follow-up mechanism for the tracking of project
implementation.
70. As of 31 May, 986,012 Syrian refugees were registered with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). New registrations of
Syrian refugees by UNHCR remain suspended by the Government since 2015.
A decrease in the number of registered Syrian refugees was due mainly to deaths,
onward movements, resettlement and a small number of spontaneous returns to the
Syrian Arab Republic.
71. Localized returns of Syrian refugees continued. On 18 April, nearly 500 Syrian
refugees returned from Shab‘a, South Lebanon to Bayt Jinn, Syrian Arab Republic,
in a movement initiated by the Reconciliation Committee in Bayt Jinn and facilitated
by the Lebanese and Syrian authorities. While UNHCR was not involved in
organizing these returns, it counselled returning refugees on civil documentation and
other critical issues for their re-establishment in the Syrian Arab Republic.
72. As of 31 March, overall available humanitarian resources for Lebanon in 2018
amounted to $1.016 billion, including $269 million disbursed by donors and
$375 million committed funding for 2018, in addition to funds carried over from
2017. Reported figures show a lack of visibility regarding multi -year commitments
beyond 2018, restricting longer-term approaches and planning beyond essential
services, with $247 million reported as commitments for Lebanon beyond 2018.
73. The Lebanon Crisis Response Plan was 21 per cent funded as of 31 March, with
$560 million, including $308 million carried over from 2017. This low funding
impacted service delivery, especially in water and health sectors, to refugees and host
communities.
74. From 24 to 25 April, the European Union and the United Nations jointly
organized the “Brussels II” conference on the theme “Supporting the future of Syria
and the region”, which aimed to renew and strengthen the financial commitment of
the international community to support the Syrian people, neighbouring countries,
and communities most affected by the conflict. The Lebanon Partnership Paper,
agreed between the Government of Lebanon and the international community,
included commitments from the Government of Lebanon in support of the protection
of refugees and vulnerable Lebanese communities, education, health and a conducive
operating environment for international non-governmental organizations.

18-11711

11/20

S/2018/703

75. During May and June, caretaker Foreign Minister Bassil stated that UNHCR
was “discouraging refugees from returning to Syria”. On 11 June, UNHCR received
official notification from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Emigrants to “change
its approach”, ordering a freeze on the issuance and renewals of residence permits for
international UNHCR staff in Lebanon. UNHCR replied on 18 June. By a note verbale
dated 22 June, my Deputy Special Coordinator requested the Government of Lebanon
to continue to facilitate the work of all members of the United Nations country team
in Lebanon, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the 1946
Convention.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
76. UNIFIL continually reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measures,
particularly following security threat warnings, in close coordination with Lebanese
authorities. Security exercises were conducted to test the readiness of civilian
personnel and their eligible dependants in case of evacuation during a crisis. In the
Arqoub area (Sector East), strict security measures have remained in place, including
the use of armed escorts, for movements by United Nations personnel. The alleged
presence of extremist elements in Ein El Helweh Palestinian Refugee Camp, situated
in Sidon along the main supply route connecting the UNIFIL area of operations with
Beirut, continues to pose a security concern, potentially affecting UNIFIL movements
through Sidon. Lebanese security institutions maintain a strong presence in areas
surrounding the camp.
77. On 4 March, clashes involving the Ansar Allah movement in the Rashidieh camp
near Tyre (Sector West) resulted in two fatalities, five injuries, material damage and
the closure of UNRWA facilities for a day. UNIFIL staff were advised to avoid the
area.
78. Following the theft of 2,240 rounds of small arms ammunition from the United
Nations position near Haris (Sector West) on 29 December 2017, following which all
but 26 rounds were recovered, a UNIFIL Board of Inquiry submitted its report to
United Nations Headquarters in April. Following inspections of all UNIFIL units to
ensure that all measures were in place for the safety of staff and premises, as well as
for the secure storage of weapons and ammunitions, security measures have been
stepped up, including on deterrence, patrolling, monitoring, and access and departure
control. The Lebanese investigating judge concluded his investigation, indicting nine
persons, including seven minors, on 12 February. The case was transferred to the
Permanent Military Court for judgment; a hearing is scheduled for 5 October.
79. UNIFIL continued to monitor ongoing proceedings in Lebanese military courts
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against
UNIFIL. The Permanent Military Court held hearings on 10 April regarding the attack
against UNIFIL peacekeepers serving with the Spanish contingent in 2007 and in the
case of terror intent opened in January 2014. The next hearings for both cases are
scheduled for 17 December. In the case of attempted serious attack against UNIFIL
in 2008, in which one of the four sentenced perpetrators filed an appeal, the next
hearing is scheduled for 21 June. Three investigations launched into the serious
attacks perpetrated against UNIFIL on 27 May, 26 July and 9 December 2011
continue, pursuant to additional judicial instructions issued by the investigating
judge. In the case of the homicide committed in 1980, when two UNIFIL
peacekeepers from Ireland were shot dead and one injured, the Permanent Military
Court deferred the issuance date of the decision, respectively, from 27 March to
24 April then to 26 June.
12/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
80. As of 19 June, UNIFIL comprised 10,480 military personnel, including 500
women, from 41 troop-contributing countries; 239 international staff, including 78
women; and 583 national civilian staff, including 153 women. The UNIFIL Maritime
Task Force comprised four corvettes, two frigates, one helicopter and 764 of the
Force’s total military personnel, including 31 women. In addition, 58 military
observers, including 5 women, from the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization, serve with Observer Group Lebanon, under the operational control of
UNIFIL. In total, women accounted for 5 per cent of military personnel, 28 per cent
of civilian personnel and just over 6 per cent of all UNIFIL personnel.

V. Conduct and discipline
81. During the reporting period, neither UNIFIL nor the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon (UNSCOL) received allegations of sexual
exploitation or abuse. Both entities continued to implement and further enhance
measures to prevent sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. The United Nations country
team’s prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse network in Lebanon, along with
the sexual and gender-based violence working group, which includes international
and national non-governmental organizations, continued to inform local communities
of expected standards of conduct for United Nations personnel and how to report
misconduct. UNIFIL and UNSCOL continued to promote a productive, harmonious
and inclusive working environment, with special emphasis on protection against
sexual harassment and other forms of prohibited conduct.

VI. Observations
82. Adherence by all sides to resolution 1701 (2006) remains essential for the
stability of Lebanon and the region. I remain concerned over the lack of full
implementation of the resolution and the unfulfilled obligations of Lebanon and
Israel. Non-compliance increases the risk of tensions and possible escalation into
hostilities. I call upon both parties to redouble their efforts towards the full adherence
to resolution 1701 (2006) to sustain and consolidate the decade of calm that has
prevailed.
83. The 6 May elections were key for the renewal of the Parliament ’s democratic
mandate and a milestone for continued institutional reactivation. I congratulate the
Lebanese people on the conduct of the elections and encourage them to remain
engaged in the democratic process. I encourage Lebanon’s political leadership and all
political parties to work in the spirit of national unity to speedily form an inclusive
Government, reflective of the voters’ will. Important responsibilities await the new
Government as part of the ambitious agenda laid out by Lebanon and the international
community at the international support conferences in Rome, Paris and Brussels.
I call upon all political actors to adopt measures to increase women’s meaningful
participation and representation at all decision-making levels.
84. I welcome the continued relative calm along the Blue Line, although risks of
miscalculation remain. The events on the Golan on 10 May are a stark reminder that
the security and stability in the UNIFIL area of operations, as well as in Lebanon in
general, remain affected by wider regional dynamics. The incident of 12 April, during
which the Israel Defense Forces and Lebanese Armed Forces deployed and pointed
weapons, is of concern and demonstrates the fragility of the situation along the Blue
18-11711

13/20

S/2018/703

Line and the importance of UNIFIL’s liaison. I call on all stakeholders in Lebanon
and Israel to exercise restraint at all times and work towards moving from the current
cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire.
85. I commend the parties for their constructive engagement within the UNIFIL
liaison and coordination arrangements, including on efforts to prevent tensions
around sensitive areas along the Blue Line. I welcome the restated commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006) of both parties in bilateral engagements with the United
Nations and at the tripartite forum. I encourage all to build upon this commitment.
My Acting Special Coordinator for Lebanon will continue to deploy good offices and,
with the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander, will explore opportunities
with the parties for confidence-building measures.
86. In addition, resolving the dispute over maritime oil and gas resources in the
exclusive economic zones of Lebanon and Israel could offer mutual economic
benefits. I encourage both parties to continue to explore entry points to that end, in
support of which my Acting Special Coordinator will conti nue to offer my good
offices.
87. I condemn the presence of unauthorized weapons outside state control. Together
with threatening rhetoric, it heightens risks of miscalculation and escalation into
conflict. Pursuant to resolution 1701 (2006), I call upon the Government of Lebanon
to take all actions necessary to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of the Taif Accords and of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), which
require the disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon so that there will be no
weapons or authority in Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State, in line with
the Lebanese Cabinet decision of 27 July 2006.
88. I welcome President Aoun’s statements on 12 March and 8 May, expressing his
intention to convene a national dialogue towards a national defence strategy following
elections and the formation of a Government. Such a strategy can only succeed if it
is Lebanese-owned and Lebanese-led, comprehensive and sustainable, in recognition
of the Lebanese Armed Forces as the only legitimate defender of Lebanon. Earlier
decisions of the national dialogue should be imple mented, specifically those relating
to the disarmament of non-Lebanese groups and the dismantling of the military bases
of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada.
89. I remain concerned about the continued violations by Israeli aircraft of Lebanese
airspace. They constitute a danger for the Lebanese population and fuel bellicose
rhetoric and sentiments against Israel. In this regard, I note with concern the Israeli
armed unmanned aerial vehicle which crashed in the UNIFIL area of operations on
31 March. The Israel Defense Forces also continue to occupy northern Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). I reiterate
my condemnation of all violations of Lebanese sovereignty and reiterate my call for
Israel to cease its violations of Lebanese airspace and to withdraw its forces from
northern Ghajar and the adjacent area north of the Blue Line.
90. I am concerned about Blue Line violations by Lebanese civilians, particularly
in the Shab‘a area, which led to several incidents with the Israel Defense Forces.
I urge the Lebanese Armed Forces to address the issue of Blue Line ground violations
by civilians.
91. The freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its entire area of operations and along
the full length of the Blue Line is critical. I call on the Lebanese authorities to fulfil
their responsibility to ensure unimpeded freedom of movement of UNIFIL.
92. As tensions have persisted in the region, Lebanon’s policy of disassociation is
more important than ever. I reiterate my call for Lebanon ’s adherence to the policy of
14/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

disassociation, consistent with the Baabda Declaration (2012), and for all Lebanese
parties and nationals to cease their involvement in the Syrian conflict
93. I am encouraged by the steps the Government of Lebanon has taken to improve
security along its eastern border as part of extending its authority throughout its
territory. I continue, however, to condemn the movement of fighters and war materiel
across the Lebanese-Syrian border in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). The lack of
a delineated, demarcated Lebanese-Syrian border does not justify violations of
Lebanese sovereignty by any party. I call upon all concerned to cease violations of
the border and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
94. I welcome the reaffirmation at the Rome II conference by the Government of
Lebanon to its commitments under resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2373 (2017).
I welcome the joint statement of the participants in the Rome II conference as a clear
signal that international support for the Lebanese Armed Forces and State security
institutions will continue.
95. Deepened cooperation between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces
remains essential in furthering the strategic dialogue and implementation of
resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2373 (2017). I am encouraged by the steady progress of
UNIFIL in implementing the strategic review recommendations and by p rogress
regarding the model regiment. I encourage the Lebanese Armed Forces, with
continued support from UNIFIL and the international community, to step up efforts
in operationalizing the regiment. I welcome the inauguration of the Lebanese Armed
Forces regional civil-military cooperation centre in the South. Such steps illustrate
the Government’s continued commitment to reinforcing the Lebanese Armed Forces
and extending State authority south of the Litani River. I look forward to progress
regarding the acquisition of an additional vessel for the Lebanese Armed Forces.
96. UNIFIL continues to take proactive steps to implement resolution 2373 (2017),
including through the enhanced tempo, visibility and effectiveness of its operations
and its support to the Lebanese authorities in establishing an area between the Litani
River and the Blue Line free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons other than
those of the Government of Lebanon and UNIFIL. I welcome the measures taken by
UNIFIL to increase the focus on inspections across the area of operations, including
through permanent and temporary checkpoints and counter-rocket-launching
operations, in coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
97. I welcome the activation of the National Human Rights Institution. I call upon
Lebanon’s next Government to ensure that this body is adequately resourced to carry
out its mandate in an independent and impartial manner, in accordance with
international human rights standards. The United Nations in Lebanon stands ready to
provide its support.
98. Delivering upon the structural, sectoral and fiscal reforms agreed at CEDRE is
instrumental to safeguarding Lebanon’s stability. The capital investment plan and
accompanying economic vision provides an unparalleled opportunity. I encourage
Lebanon’s political leadership to implement urgent reforms that combat corruption,
enhance transparency and streamline expenditures, and to establish a follow -up
mechanism to track progress and ensure mutual accountability.
99. I thank the Government of Lebanon as it continues to exercise generosity and
hospitality in temporarily hosting Syrian refugees. Noting the importance of
continued international assistance to refugees and host communiti es, I thank
participants in the Brussels II conference for their generous pledges. As needs
continue to outpace available resources, I appeal to donors to increase their flexible,
predictable, timely and multi-year support to Lebanon.

18-11711

15/20

S/2018/703

100. I am concerned by the discourse concerning refugee returns. I call on all to work
in a spirit of partnership in line with international standards, including the principle
of non-refoulement, until conditions are met for a safe, dignified and voluntary return.
I reiterate the importance of redoubling the efforts of international partners to create
a hospitable protection environment in the Syrian Arab Republic.
101. I also remain concerned by the continued plight of the Palestine refugees. I thank
Member States for their support at the 15 March extraordinary meeting in support of
UNRWA. I note with concern, however, that a shortfall remains, imperilling critical
services. Continued insecurity in the Palestine refugee camps is of serious concern
and points to the potential risks to stability should UNRWA services and operations
be interrupted.
102. I extend my appreciation to all countries contributing military personnel and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon. I commend Acting Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, Pernille Dahler Kardel, and the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Michael Beary, for their leadership, and I
commend the civilian and military personnel of UNIFIL, as well as the staff of
UNSCOL, for their continued efforts.

16/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

Annex I
Restrictions on the freedom of movement of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon from 1 March to 20 June 2018
1.
On 6 March, about 30 individuals, using two vehicles, blocked a UNIFIL patrol
in Jumayjimah (Sector West), accusing the patrol of having taken unauthorized
pictures. Following the arrival of the Lebanese Armed Forces at the scene, the patrol
was able to leave the area. UNIFIL has since patrolled the area without incident.
2.
On 12 March, an Observer Group Lebanon patrol encountered a chain across a
new tertiary road in Dayr Siryan (Sector East), where two individuals signalled the
patrol to leave the area. One of them, claiming to be a government official, insisted
that UNIFIL was not allowed to enter the area. The Lebanese Armed Forces informed
UNIFIL that the location was private property. UNIFIL has increased its ground and
air patrols in the area. UNIFIL has also used an alternative road to monitor the area
and increased the number of counter-rocket-launching operations in the area.
Observer Group Lebanon is also patrolling in Dayr Siryan, focusing on areas close to
the Blue Line.
3.
On 21 March, an individual in a vehicle stopped a UNIFIL patrol that was
following-up on gunshots heard earlier on a secondary road in Hanin (Sector West)
and asked the patrol to leave. Two other individuals on motorbikes arrived at the
location, gesturing to UNIFIL to follow them back to the main road. As the UNIFIL
vehicle had difficulties turning around, they hit it, causing minor damage. UN IFIL
returned to the main road and resumed its patrol as planned. UNIFIL informed the
Lebanese Armed Forces. Since the incident, UNIFIL has continued patrolling in
Hanin without hindrance.
4.
On 23 March, 10 individuals, including women, requested a UNIFI L patrol not
to enter a road in Blida (Sector East) owing to the disturbance caused by the armoured
vehicles. After bypassing the road, the patrol resumed its scheduled route.
Subsequently, the mayor of Blida insisted that armoured vehicles could not enter the
village owing to safety concerns. UNIFIL is following up with the authorities to find
a solution. Since the incident, UNIFIL has continued patrolling in Blida using light
vehicles only.
5.
On 26 March, a UNIFIL patrol accompanied by the Lebanese Armed Forces was
stopped on a narrow secondary road by several villagers in Jibal al -Butm (Sector
West), after deviating, inadvertently, from the main road. The patrol left the area and
continued its assignment. UNIFIL has since continued patrolling in Jibal a l-Butm
without incidents.
6.
On 3 April, a UNIFIL patrol had to change its scheduled route after encountering
a soil berm on a road south-west of Arab al-Wazzani (Sector East). The local
authorities indicated to UNIFIL that the berm was placed by the land owner to prevent
trespassing.
7.
On 16 April, a UNIFIL patrol, in coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces,
inadvertently entered a narrow road in Blida (Sector East). While attempting to exit
the area, two men in civilian clothes blocked the UNIFIL pa trol using a vehicle and a
scooter. After the intervention by the Lebanese Armed Forces, the UNIFIL patrol was
able to resume its activities.
8.
On 19 April, seven individuals in civilian clothes blocked and surrounded an
Observer Group Lebanon vehicle north of Hula (Sector East), using a vehicle and
scooters. Before a second Observer Group Lebanon patrol and a quick reaction team
dispatched by UNIFIL arrived at the scene, two intelligence personnel of the
18-11711

17/20

S/2018/703

Lebanese Armed Forces intervened, removed the civilians’ vehicles and requested the
Observer Group Lebanon patrol to leave the area. Observer Group Lebanon had
conducted daily patrols to Hula in the past without any incidents. On 20 April, the
mayor of Hula told UNIFIL that Observer Group Lebanon should be monitoring the
Blue Line that is east of the village, but the patrol on 19 April was on the extreme
western edge of the village. Observer Group Lebanon resumed patrolling the
following day.
9.
On 1, 2 and 3 May, individuals wearing uniform-like green attire stopped a
UNIFIL foot patrol and four Observer Group Lebanon patrols at the gate of a facility
of the non-governmental organization “Green Without Borders” along a secondary
road in the vicinity of Aytarun (Sector West). The individuals informed the patrol that,
in accordance with a decision by the Bint Jubayl municipality (Sector West), UNIFIL
was not allowed to patrol the area. On 2 May, Bint Jubayl municipal authorities
confirmed that the area had been designated as a natural reserve, with limited pub lic
access, to preserve the forest in that area, and that the gates were not meant to restrict
the movement of UNIFIL. On 3 May, the Bint Jubayl union of municipalities
informed UNIFIL that the Lebanese Armed Forces would provide UNIFIL with a
detailed plan of “Green Without Borders” activities in Aytarun and propose an
alternative route for UNIFIL to patrol the area. Patrols resumed, however, and on
11 May, two UNIFIL patrols, one in close coordination with Lebanese Armed Forces,
were again stopped at the gate of the “Green Without Borders” facility. Both patrols
completed their task using an alternative route. On 14 May, the Head of Mission and
Force Commander of UNIFIL briefed the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
General Joseph Aoun, about the series of incidents impairing UNIFIL’s freedom of
movement close to this facility. General Aoun assured him that the Lebanese Armed
Forces Intelligence in Saida would address the issue and guarantee UNIFIL ’s full
freedom of movement. Following multiple démarches by the Mission, on 19 June,
UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander and the South Litani Sector
Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces jointly visited the area and agreed to
resume patrols in close coordination along the road, resulting in one patrol in close
coordination through the area. The Head of Mission and Force Commander raised the
issue again with the South Litani Sector Commander on 25 June.
10. On 9 May, four individuals in civilian clothes and a local police officer stopped
a UNIFIL foot patrol, conducted in coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, in
Yatar (Sector West). Following a discussion with the individuals, the Lebanese Armed
Forces informed UNIFIL that they would not patrol this particular area. The patrol
returned to the base without completing its task. Also on 10 May, the municipal police
in Yatar (Sector West) argued that UNIFIL should coordinate its patrols with the
municipal police. Patrols resumed in the area without further incidents.

18/20

18-11711

S/2018/703

Annex II
Update on the implementation of the recommendations of the 2017
strategic review of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
1.
Further to the letter dated 8 March 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/202) communicating the strategic
priorities and key recommendations of the strategic review of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the present overview provides an update on the
progress in the implementation of these recommendations.
Protection of civilians
2.
UNIFIL continued its liaison with interlocutors from the Government of
Lebanon on the protection of civilians and continued its close coordination with the
Office of the Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Lebanon.
3.
As part of ensuring ongoing mission-wide preparedness, UNIFIL continued with
the protection of civilians training. In April, UNIFIL organized a seminar with
representatives of the civilian authorities and non-governmental organizations in
charge of civil defence and the Lebanese Armed Forces to promote a better
understanding of the UNIFIL mandate and the responsibilities of the Lebanese
authorities regarding the protection of civilians. Participants explored ways to
enhance the protection of civilians capabilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces and
Lebanese authorities in the UNIFIL area of operations through future exercises and
joint training to ensure preparedness.
Strategic dialogue mechanism
4.
UNIFIL continued its consultations with the Government of Lebanon and the
Lebanese Armed Forces on the deployment of the model regiment in the UNIFIL area
of operations. The concept of operations for the model regiment was presen ted to
potential donor countries at the Rome II conference held on 15 March. The Lebanese
Armed Forces have appointed a commander and identified an area of responsibility
for the model regiment within the UNIFIL area of operations. At present, the model
regiment deployment process, which consists of eight phases, is in its second phase,
which envisages the establishment of an operational training centre and the necessary
accommodation infrastructure. UNIFIL continues to engage with the Lebanese Armed
Forces and international partners to secure the required donor support.
5.
With financial support from the Government of Spain and UNIFIL, the
construction of the Lebanese Armed Forces regional civil-military cooperation centre
was completed in Marjayoun. The centre was inaugurated on 18 May.
6.
The Maritime Task Force continues to provide onshore and offshore training to
the Lebanese Armed Forces-Navy. On 18 May, the Maritime Task Force certified the
Lebanese patrol boat Tabarja and its crew to participate in ma ritime operations
uninterrupted for 48 hours, in good weather conditions, alongside UNIFIL vessels.
UNIFIL also conducted an internal study considering possible options for the
deployment of an appropriate ship in Lebanese territorial waters.
Liaison and coordination with the parties
7.
UNIFIL continues to advocate with the Israeli authorities for the establishment
of a liaison office in Tel Aviv.

18-11711

19/20

S/2018/703

Structure of the uniformed and civilian components of UNIFIL
Land forces
8.
In accordance with the recommendation of the strategic review, UNIFIL
continued to enhance the coverage and effectiveness of coordinated operations
between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces, in the implementation of mandated
tasks under Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
Maritime Task Force
9.
The recommended reconfiguration of the Maritime Task Force has been
implemented since 1 January 2018 as indicated in the previous report ( S/2018/210).
Community outreach activities
10. The Community Outreach Board continues to convene on a quarterly basis to
coordinate mission-wide outreach activities.
11. Following the inauguration of the Lebanese Armed Forces regional civilmilitary cooperation centre in Marjayoun, UNIFIL has stepped up its engagement
with the centre by identifying areas for joint activities and a coordinated approach to
community support in the UNIFIL area of operations. Officials of t he centre also
participated in UNIFIL civil-military cooperation coordination meetings.
Liaison in Beirut
12. UNIFIL and UNSCOL continued to meet with representatives of the
Government of Lebanon, the Security Council and troop -contributing countries,
including in relation to the Lebanese Armed Forces model regiment initiative.
UNIFIL continued to advocate for the strengthening of the Lebanese Armed Forces
presence in the south and to liaise with relevant United Nations agencies at country
team coordination meetings.

20/20

18-11711
