General A.s:embly--7th Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

Page

683 (VII). Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
fourth session (6 November 1952) (item 51) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

61

684 (VII). Methods and procedures of the General Assembly for dealing with
legal and drafting questions ( 6 November 1952) ( item 53) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

61

685 (VII). Request to the International Law Commission to give priority to
the codification of the topic "Diplomatic intercourse and immunities" ( 5 December 1952) (item 58) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

686 (VII). Ways and means for making the evidence of customary international law more readily available (5 December 1952) (item 55) . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

687 (VII).

International criminal jurisdiction (5 December 1952) (item 52) . . .

62

688 (VII).

Question of defining aggression (20 December 1952) ( item 54) . . .

63

689 (VII). Measures to limit the duration of regular sessions of the General
Assembly (21 December 1952) (item 50) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

690 (VII). Status of claims for injuri~s incurred in the service of the United
Nations (21 December 1952) (item 57) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

691 (VII). Correction of the Chinese text of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (21 December 1952) (item 56)...

64

683 (VII). Report of the International Law Com-

Committees sufficient latitude for conducting their
proceedings concerning matters within their competence,
Taking note of the report 2 and recommendations
of the Special Committee established under resolution
597 (VI) of 20 December 1951 1
1. Recommends :
(a) That, whenever :my Committee contemplates
making a recommendation to the General Assembly to
request an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice, the matter may, at some appropriate
stage of its consideration by that Committee, be referred to the Sixth Committee for advice on the legal
aspects and on the drafting of the request, or the
Committee concerned may propose that the matter
should be considered by a joint Committee of itself and
the Sixth Committee;
( b) That, whenever any Committee contemplates
making a recommendation to the General Assembly tc
refer a matter to the International Law Commission,
the Committee may, at some appropriate stage of its
consideration, consult the Sixth Committee as to the
advisability of such a reference and on its drafting;

mi11ion on the work of it11 fourth ae1111ion

The General Assembly,
Pending its consideration in due course of the
questions dealt with in the report 1 of the International
Law Commission covering the work of its fourth
session,
Takes note of the report.
391st plenary meeting,
6 November 1952.

684 (VII). Method11 and proeedurea of the General As11embly for dealing with legal and
drafting que11tiona
The General Assembly,
Considering that it is desirable to introduce adequate
methods and procedures for dealing with the legal
questions with which it is concerned, while leaving its
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh
Session. Su:plemmt No. 9.

2

61

See document A/2174.

62

General A1eembly-Seventh Session

( c) That, whenever any Committee contemplates
making a recommendation for the adoption by the
General :Assembly of any amendment to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, the matter shall,
at some appropriate stage of its consideration by that
Committee, be referred to the Sixth Committee for
advice on the drafting of such amendment and of any
consequential 3:mendment ;
( d) That, when a Committee considers the legal
aspects of a question important, the Committee should
refer it for legal advice to the Sixth Committee or propose that the question should oe considered by a joint
Committee of itself and the Sixth Committee;
2. Directs:
(a) That the terms of the foregoing recommendations shall be embodied as an annex to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly;
·( b) That the said annex shall also set out, verbatim, paragraphs 19, 20, 29, 30, 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39
of the report of the Special Committee.
391st plenary meeting,
6 November 1952.
685 (VII). Request to the International Law Commission to give priority to the eodification of
the topic "Diplomatic intercourse and immunities"
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes of the United Nations and
the provision of the Preamble of the Charter according
to which the "peoples of the United Nations" are, determined "to practice tolerance and live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours",
Expressing its desire for the common observance by
all governments of existing principles and rules and
recognized practice concerning diplomatic intercourse
and immunities, particularly in regard to the treatment
of diplomatic representatives of foreign States,
Considering that early codification of international
law on diplomatic intercourse and immunities is necessary and desirable as a contribution to the improvement of relations between States,
Noting that the International Law Commission has
included the topic "Diplomatic intercourse and immuniues" in its provisional list 8 of topics of international law selected for codification,
Requests the International Law Commission, as soon
as ii considers it possible, to undertake the codification
of the topic "Diplomatic intercourse and immunities",
and to treat it as a priority topic.
400th plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.
686 (VII). WaylJ and mean1 for making the J!Vi•
denee of customary international law mol'e
1-eadily available
The Gen.eral Assembly,
Considering the report• of the Secretary-General on
3

See Official Records of the General As.sembly, Fourth Ses-

sion, S11.pplement No. 10, para. 16.
4 See document A/2170.

ways and means for making the evidence of customary
international law more readily available submitted in
pursuance of General Assembly resolution 602 (VI)
of 1 February 1952,
Having regard to the detailed plans in the report
as to the form, contents and budgetary implications of
certain publications referred to in the aforesaid resolution and to the conclusions of the Secretary-General
stated in the report,
1. AHthorizes the Secretary-Gen~ral to undertake,
as soon as feasible, the publication ot :
(a) A list of treaty collections, to be compiled
taking into account the suggestions made during the
debate in the Sixth Committee ;
( b) A repertoire of the practice of the Security
Council;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
circulate to the governments of Member States a comparative study of the extent to which developments in
the field of customary international law and selected
legal activities of the United Nations can usefully be
covered by an expansion of existing United Nations
publications, by the launching of new special publications of limited scope and by a United Nations juridical yearbook; such study shall cover form, contents
and budgetary implications.
400th plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.
687 (VII). International criminal jurisdiction
The General Assembly,
B,a,-ing in mind that, by resolution 489 (V) of 12
December 1950, the General Assembly established a
Committee on International Criminal Jurisdiction, consisting of representatives of seventeen Member States,
charged with the task of preparing one or more preliminary draft conventions and proposals relating to
the establishment of an international criminal court,
Recalling that, by the same resolution, the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to communi<:ate the report of the Committee to the governments of Member States so that their observations
could be submitted not later than 1 June 1952, and
to place the question on the agenda of the seventh session of the General Assembly,
Noting that the Committee, meeting in August 1951,
has prepared a report 5 containing a draft statute
for an international criminal court and that the Secretary-General, by a letter of 13 November 1951, has
transmitted the Committee's report to the governments
of Member States requesting their observations
thereon,
Considering, however, that the number of States
which have given their comments and suggestions is
very small,
Considering that there is need for further study of
problems relating to an international criminal juris•
diction,
5

See document A/ AC.48/4. annex I.
