S/2007/558*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 August 2008
English
Original: French

Letter dated 20 September 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the text of a communication dated
19 September 2007, which I have received from the Secretary General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (see annex).
I would be grateful if you would bring this communication to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

* Reissued for technical reasons.

07-51389* (E) 040808

*0751389*

S/2007/558

Annex
Letter dated 19 September 2007 from the Secretary General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from May to July 2007. I would appreciate your making this
report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

07-51389

S/2007/558

Enclosure
Quarterly report on the activities of the International Security
Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
By resolution 1510 (2003) the Security Council requested the leadership of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to provide reports on the
implementation of its mandate. This is the fourteenth such report by NATO and it
covers the period from May to July 2007.
2.
As at 29 July 2007, ISAF had 37,885 personnel from 26 NATO countries and
1,588 from 11 non-NATO countries.
Overall assessment
3.
In the reporting period, ISAF continued to execute its mission in accordance
with resolution 1386 (2001) to assist the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan in establishing security in the country, setting conditions to allow the
Government to expand its influence and facilitate reconstruction and development
projects. ISAF has continued to act to support the Afghan National Security Forces,
which are increasingly capable, as exemplified by the Afghan National Army taking
the lead role in a highly successful counter-insurgency operation. Opposing militant
forces have continued to try to disrupt this process. From 1 May to 31 July ISAF
suffered 358 casualties (56 killed in action, 268 wounded in action, 2 non-battle
deaths and 32 non-battle injuries).
4.
ISAF planning for operations to be conducted over the winter period in 2007
and 2008 is already under way and has included consultations with the Government
as well as the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. Capacity-building
for both the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police will remain a
major priority.
Security situation
5.
Opposing militant force activity throughout Afghanistan continues. Reported
insurgent attacks have increased, partly in response to ISAF and Afghan National
Security Force operations in the south and east of the country. ISAF and Afghan
National Security Forces successes have caused the opposing militant force to
change tactics, moving away from direct engagement to asymmetric attacks such as
improvised explosive devices and suicide attacks with disregard for civilian
casualties and the rules of war, often deliberately attacking ISAF forces in the
presence of civilians during civil outreach activities. “Soft” targets, such as Afghan
civilians, Government officials and international community aid workers (including
non-governmental organizations), are under increasing attack from terrorist tactics
such as beheadings, including attacks against minors. The opposing militant forces
have increasingly favoured kidnapping as a means of terror and propaganda. Over
the reporting period, they have demonstrated increasing tactical and deliberate use
of Afghan civilians as human shields in military operations targeting ISAF forces,
and have shown sophisticated use of propaganda techniques such as disinformation
to disseminate false civilian casualty information to the media. ISAF commanders
continued to take all possible steps to avoid civilian casualties and took action over
the course of the reporting period to counter such Taliban tactics.

07-51389

3

S/2007/558

Regional security assessment
6.
In Regional Command Capital, there has been increased insurgent activity
following a relatively quiet period. Opposing militant force interest in attacking
high-profile targets is expected to continue, particularly in Kabul itself.
7.
In Regional Command North, the situation has remained mostly calm, though
not stable. In addition to attacks by insurgents, criminally motivated attacks were
noted. The intensified opposition by regional power brokers to the Government’s
authority undermines security in the region.
8.
In Regional Command West, there has been an increase in instability. Farah
Province continues to be the focus of insurgent activity aimed at disrupting lines of
communication. Additional incidents were reported in Baghdis Province as well as
in southern Herat Province.
9.
Regional Command South has witnessed high levels of opposing militant force
activity over the reporting period. Insurgents continued to retreat to safe havens in
northern Helmand and across into Uruzgan Province. In Kandahar Province,
insurgent activity focused on expanding opposing militant force influence around
Kandahar city.
10. Insurgent operations in Regional Command East increased as the weather
improved. Insurgents continued to seek to exploit cross-border movements into and
out of Pakistan and the main tactical effort of ISAF has shifted from Regional
Command South to Regional Command East. Opposing militant force tactics in
Regional Command East included small-scale conventional attacks on ISAF-Afghan
National Security Force border positions and lines of communication, Afghan
authorities, non-governmental organizations and reconstruction and development
contractors.
Disbandment of illegal armed groups
11. The Government has attempted to revitalize this programme. Key actions to be
taken include disbandment rather than disarmament, weapons registration,
clarification of private security companies policy and the development of an
enforcement unit for the disbandment of illegal armed groups.
12. ISAF favours informing Afghans about the process of disbandment of illegal
armed groups and the rights of individuals in terms of firearm laws. ISAF continues
to assist the Government in implementing the mandate for this process within means
and capabilities, with focused support on participation in policy development,
planning, intelligence and coordination, messaging and in extremis support.
Counter-narcotics
13. The narcotics trade remains a major cause of instability that threatens all levels
of governance, including police authority and the rule of law. The total number of
verified hectares mechanically eradicated is well over the 2006 figures. However,
this represents only 10 per cent of overall cultivation figures for 2007, which will
reach record levels. It is essential that the campaign retains momentum. ISAF
continues to support Government counter-narcotics programmes in accordance with
the provisions of the ISAF operation plan.

4

07-51389

S/2007/558

Afghan National Army
14. The Afghan National Army continues to develop into a professional fighting
force while simultaneously rebuilding and reorganizing. It has shown increased selfreliance in planning operations and continues to make gains in its ability to execute
operations.
15. More than half of the army combat units have been assessed as manoeuvre
forces that have some capability in conducting operations with external support.
Collective combat skills are also assessed as improving.
16. The current manning strength of the Afghan National Army is approximately
38,000 (of which approximately 20,000 are available for operations) out of a total
authorized strength of 70,000. Manpower policy concentrates on manning the
established units prior to fielding additional units. The overall equipment situation
continues to improve although there remains a need to sustain the improvement. In
terms of training, a range of options is being examined by NATO to generate the
required number of operational mentoring and liaison teams to accelerate the
training of the Afghan National Army. Generating these teams is critical, as training
and equipping the Army is a cornerstone of NATO activities in Afghanistan.
Afghan National Police
17. The development of the Afghan National Police continues to lag behind the
targets presented to the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board. Training and
equipping of the Afghan National Police remains of critical importance. One of the
main factors hampering development is the lack of police mentors and trainers
below the provincial level. Police mentor teams are an essential element in
achieving success.
18. Since its establishment in June by the European Union, the European Police
Mission has started to conclude technical arrangements with lead nations in the
provincial reconstruction teams.
Judicial reform and the rule of law
19. Development in these two crucial areas has been hampered by the lack of
coordination of international efforts. This lack of coordination was addressed by the
international community at the Rome Conference on 2 and 3 July 2007. Surveys
instigated by ISAF reveal a disparate level of infrastructure and equipment across
provinces and districts. The level of training of the judicial personnel often varies
from a reasonable standard to illiteracy. Progress by the Government and the
international community in these sectors is crucial in order to capitalize on the
security provided by ISAF.
Neighbouring countries
20. The breakdown of the truce between the Government of Pakistan and local
militant leaders in northern Waziristan and the security operations launched by the
Pakistani authorities are likely to result in some of the militants leaving the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas and North-West Frontier Province to move to
the eastern border provinces in Afghanistan.
21. The first meeting of the Joint Working Group established to monitor progress
on the conclusions of the Ankara Declaration of 30 April 2007 — which was signed
by the Presidents of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey — was held in Ankara on

07-51389

5

S/2007/558

6 July 2007. At the meeting, Afghanistan and Pakistan agreed on a number of
cooperation programmes and a further set of confidence-building measures in
addition to those agreed upon at the Ankara summit.
22. ISAF coordination with Pakistan continues to be taken forward through the
Tripartite Commission, to assist the Government in improving military-to-military
coordination issues. ISAF objectives are to improve trust in military cooperation on
border security, intelligence-sharing and counter-improvised explosive device work.
The Afghanistan-Pakistan Peace Jirga, held in Kabul from 9 to 12 August, was a
major step forward.
Programme Takhim-e-Sol/strengthening peace
23. As at July 2007, it was reported that the Programme Takhim-e-Sol had
succeeded in bringing in 3,800 individuals from insurgent ranks and reuniting them
with their families. Additional measures to improve procedures have been made and
the programme is being run under new management. ISAF continues to support the
initiative within means and capabilities.
Governance
24. Public dissatisfaction with the Government’s effectiveness and the slow pace
of economic reform, coupled with the deteriorating security situation, is putting
pressure on President Karzai and his ministers. The implementation of central
government initiatives still depends heavily on the will of local political figures,
some of whom are corrupt and unwilling to cooperate. Demonstrable progress by
the Government and enhanced support by the international community in the field of
governance is essential in meeting the public’s expectations of its government and
meeting the goals ISAF aims to achieve in assisting the Government in providing
security.
Development
25. Provincial reconstruction teams remain the key mechanism for delivering
development and extending the reach of the Government to the provinces. Support
is also being provided by the provincial reconstruction teams in a mentoring
capacity to offer logistics, transport and security for the subnational consultations as
part of the Afghan National Development Strategy and in providing technical
expertise in the production of provincial development plans.
26. Strengthening popular support for the Government is essential to the long-term
strategy for development. Sustained and intensified cooperation between the
international community and the Government is needed to convince the rural
population that both the Government and the international community are
committed to improving services at the local level.
27. ISAF manages the Afghan Country Stability Picture. This is a tool to outline
the status of ongoing development projects in the country, which coordinates and
shares this information with the Government and the international community,
allowing all involved actors an overview of the projects which cover military and
civilian development cooperation. In order to solidify the Afghan Country Stability
Picture as the primary vehicle for collection and analysis in theatre, ISAF intends to
establish an Internet interface, to be launched by the end of the summer in 2007.

6

07-51389
