General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

222

tions of 1961 has increased since the adoption by the
General Assembly of the above-mentioned resolutions,
Convinced of the desirability of the widespread
acceptance of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 and the necessity for strict observance and implementation by States of the provisions consolidated in that Convention in the interest
of maintaining normal relations among them and developing international co-operation,
Concerned both at continuing instances of violations of the generally recognized rules of diplomatic
law and at instances of violations of security of
diplomatic missions and safety of their personnel,
Noting with appreciation the study by the International Law Commission of the proposals on the
elaboration of a protocol concerning the status of the
diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier, which could constitute
a further development of international diplomatic law,
1. Requests those States which have not yet become parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 to give urgent consideration to
acceding to that Convention;
2. Calls upon all States to observe and strictly implement the provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961, especially to ensure
better security of diplomatic missions and safety of
their personnel, provided for in that Convention;
3. Notes the invitation in General Assembly resolution 33/139 of 19 December 1978 to States to
submit written comments on the preliminary study
carried out by the International Law Commission concerning the status of the diplomatic courier and the
diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
and observes that, in replying to such a request, States
may also include comments and observations on the
implementation of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 to be submitted to the Assembly at a future session;
4. Reaffirms the continuing interest of the General
Assembly in the implementation by States of the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 ;
5. Decides that the General Assembly will give
further consideration to this question and expresses
the view that, unless Member States indicate the
desirability of an earlier consideration, it would be
appropriate to do so when the International Law
Commission submits to the Assembly the results of
its work on the possible elaboration of an appropriate
legal instrument on the status of the diplomatic courier
and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic
courier.
89th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
33/141.

Registration and publication of treaties
and international agreements pursuant
to Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations

A

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the obligations resulting from Article
102 of the Charter of the United Nations,

Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on that question, 22
Noting the considerable increase in the number of
international agreements in the past ten years,
Also noting that the delays in registration and publication have at the same time increased to the point
where the implementation of Article 102 of the Charter
may be seriously jeopardized,
Convinced that, taking into account the means
available to the United Nations, the situation cannot
be remedied without reforming the publication procedure currently providcd for by the General Assembly
regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations 23 in order to adapt it to the
evolution of international treaty activities, with due
rcspect for the spirit and intent of the Charter,
Recalling that, by its resolution 32/144 of 16 December 1977, it has already approved, as a temporary
measure, the establishment of a priority system for the
publication of treaties and other international agreements in the United Nations Treaty Series,
Amends article 12 of the General Assembly regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter of
the United Nations to read as follows:
"Article 12
"1. The Secretariat shall publish as soon as possible in a single series every treaty or international
agreement which is registered or filed and recorded,
in the original language or languages, followed by
a translation in English and in French. Toe certified
statements referred to in article 2 of these regulations shall be published in the same manner.
"2. The Secretariat will, however, have the option not to publish in extenso a bilateral treaty or
international agreement belonging to one of the
following categories:
"(a) Assistance and co-operation agreements of
limited scope concerning :financial, commercial, administrative or technical matters;
" ( b) Agreements relating to the organization
of conferences, seminars or meetings;
" (e) Agreements that are to be published otherwise than in the series mentioned in paragraph 1 of
this article by the United Nations Secretariat or by
a specialized or related agency.
"3. In deciding whether or not to publish in
extenso a treaty or international agreement belonging
to one of the categories mentioned in paragraph 2
of this article, the Secretariat shall duly take into
account, ínter alia, the practica! value that might
accrue from in extenso publication. Treaties and
international agreements that the Secretariat intends
not to publish in extenso shall be identified as such
in the monthly statements of treaties and international agreements provided for in article 13 of these
regulations, it being understood that a decision not
to publish in extenso may be reversed at any time.
"4. Any State or intergovernmental organization
may obtain from the Secretary-General a copy of the
22 A/33/258.
23 Adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 97 (1).
For the text of the regulations as modified by resolutions 364 B
(IV) and 482 (V), see United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 76,
p. XVIII.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

text of any treaty or international agreement which it
has been decided, pursuant to paragraph 2 of this
article, not to publish in extenso. The Secretariat
shall likewise make a copy of any such treaty or
agreement available to prívate persons against
payment.
"5. In respect of each treaty or international
agreement registered or filed and recorded, the series
referred to in paragraph 1 of this article shall inelude at least the following information: the registration or recording number, the names of the parties,
the title, the date and place of conclusion, the date
and method of entry into force, the duration (where
appropriate), the languages of conclusion, the name
of the State or organization that has registered it
or transmitted it for filing and recording, and, if
appropriate, references to publications in which the
complete text of the treaty or international agreement is reproduced."
89th plenary meeting
19 Deccmber 1978

B

The General Assembly,
Persuaded that the new publication procedure it has
introduced by amending its regulations to give effect
to Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations 24
should make it possible to rectify the current situation
in the matter of the registration and publication of
treaties and other international agreements,
24 /bid.

223

1. 1nvites the Secretary-General to implement this
procedure as soon as possible;
2. A lso invites the Secretary-General to initiate
measures, starting in 1979, to eliminate the backlog
in registration and publication within the existing
budgetary appropriations, taking into account paragraphs 21 and 22 of his report 2 " and the savings that
will rcsult from the implementation of the new publication procedure;
3. Takes note of thc consultations initiated with
certain international organizations in accordance with
General Asscmbly res~lution 32/144 of 16 December 1977;
4. Rcquests the Secretary-General to continue
these consultations;
5. Furthcr rcquests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on
the implemcntation of the present resolution and to
submit to that session, if he deems it opportune, additional proposals concerning the updating of the
regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations in the light of the evolution of
practice and thc results of computerization;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Registration and publication of treaties and international
agreements pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of
thc United Nations".

89th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
~~ A/33/258.
