United Nations

A/RES/59/200

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 105 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/503/Add.2)]

59/200. Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International Covenants
on Human Rights 2 and the other relevant international human rights instruments,
Recalling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978 concerning disappeared
persons and its resolutions on the question of enforced or involuntary
disappearances, in particular resolution 57/215 of 18 December 2002,
Recalling also its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992 proclaiming the
Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a
body of principles for all States,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 2004/40 of 19 April
2004, 3
Deeply concerned, in particular, by the intensification of enforced
disappearances, including arrest, detention and abduction, where these are part of or
amount to enforced disappearances, in various regions of the world and by the
growing number of reports concerning the harassment, ill-treatment and
intimidation of witnesses of disappearances or relatives of persons who have
disappeared,
Taking note with interest of the initiatives taken at the national and
international levels in order to end impunity,
Acknowledging the fact that acts of enforced disappearance, as defined in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 4 come within the jurisdiction of
the Court as crimes against humanity,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
4
Official Records of the United Nations Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment
of an International Criminal Court, Rome, 15 June–17 July 1998, vol. I: Final documents (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.I.5), sect. A.
2

04-48826

A/RES/59/200

Convinced that further efforts are needed to promote wider awareness of and
respect for the Declaration, and taking note in this regard of the report of the
Secretary-General, 5
Taking note of the report of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary
Disappearances of the Commission on Human Rights, 6
1.
Reaffirms that any act of enforced disappearance is an offence to human
dignity and a grave and flagrant violation of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 and reaffirmed
and developed in other international instruments in this field, as well as a violation
of the rules of international law; and that no State shall practise, permit or tolerate
enforced disappearances as proclaimed in the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance;
Urges all Governments to take appropriate legislative or other steps to
2.
prevent and suppress the practice of enforced disappearances, in keeping with the
Declaration, and to take action to that end at the national and regional levels and in
cooperation with the United Nations, including through the provision of technical
assistance;
Calls upon Governments to take steps to ensure that, when a state of
3.
emergency is introduced, the protection of human rights is ensured, in particular
with regard to the prevention of enforced disappearances;
Reminds Governments that impunity with regard to enforced
4.
disappearances contributes to the perpetuation of this phenomenon and constitutes
one of the obstacles to the elucidation of its manifestations, and in this respect also
reminds them of the need to ensure that their competent authorities conduct prompt
and impartial inquiries in all circumstances in which there is a reason to believe that
an enforced disappearance has occurred in territory under their jurisdiction, and
that, if allegations are confirmed, perpetrators should be prosecuted;
Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that are investigating,
5.
are cooperating at the international and bilateral levels, have developed or are
developing appropriate mechanisms to investigate any cases of enforced
disappearances that are brought to their attention and to prevent any such
occurrences, and urges all the Governments concerned to expand their efforts in this
area;
6.

Once again urges the Governments concerned:

(a) To take steps to protect witnesses of enforced disappearances, human
rights defenders acting against enforced disappearances, and the lawyers and
families of disappeared persons against any intimidation or ill-treatment to which
they may be subjected;
(b)

To continue their efforts to elucidate the fate of disappeared persons;

(c) To make provision in their legal systems for machinery for victims of
enforced or involuntary disappearances or their families to seek fair and adequate
reparation;

_______________
5
6

2

A/59/341.
E/CN.4/2004/58.

A/RES/59/200

7.
Reaffirms that all persons deprived of liberty must be released in a
manner permitting reliable verification that they have actually been released and,
further, have been released in conditions in which their physical integrity and ability
to exercise their rights are assured;
Encourages States, as some have already done, to provide concrete
8.
information on measures taken to give effect to the Declaration, as well as obstacles
encountered;
Requests all States to consider the possibility of disseminating the text of
9.
the Declaration in their respective national languages and to facilitate its
dissemination in local languages;
10. Notes the action taken by non-governmental organizations to encourage
implementation of the Declaration, and invites them to continue to facilitate its
dissemination;
11. Stresses the importance of the work of the Working Group on Enforced
or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission on Human Rights, and
encourages it in the execution of its mandate to continue to promote communication
between the families of disappeared persons and the Governments concerned, in
particular when ordinary channels have failed, with a view to ensuring that
sufficiently documented and clearly identified individual cases are investigated and
to ascertaining whether such information falls under its mandate and contains the
required elements;
12. Invites the Working Group to continue to seek the views and comments
of all concerned, including Member States, in preparing its reports;
13. Also invites the Working Group to identify obstacles to the realization of
the provisions of the Declaration, to recommend ways of overcoming those
obstacles and, in this regard, to continue a dialogue with Governments and relevant
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
14. Encourages the Working Group to continue to consider the question of
impunity, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Declaration;
15. Requests the Working Group to pay the utmost attention to cases of
children subjected to enforced disappearance and children of disappeared persons
and to cooperate closely with the Governments concerned to search for and identify
those children;
16. Appeals to the Governments concerned, in particular those that have not
yet replied to the communications transmitted by the Working Group, to cooperate
fully with it and, in particular, to reply promptly to its requests for information so
that, while respecting its working methods based on discretion, it may perform its
strictly humanitarian role;
17. Encourages the Governments concerned to give serious consideration to
requests for visits to their countries by the Working Group so as to enable the Group
to fulfil its mandate even more effectively;
18. Expresses its profound thanks to the many Governments that have
cooperated with the Working Group and replied to its requests for information and
to the Governments that have invited the Group to visit their countries, requests
them to give all necessary attention to the recommendations of the Group, and
invites them to inform the Group of any action they take on those recommendations;

3

A/RES/59/200

19. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to continue to study this
question as a matter of priority and to take any steps it may deem necessary to the
pursuit of the task of the Working Group and to the follow-up to its
recommendations when it considers the report to be submitted by the Group to the
Commission at its sixty-first session;
20. Renews its requests to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the
Working Group with all of the facilities it requires to perform its functions,
especially for carrying out missions and following them up;
21. Recalls Economic and Social Council decision 2001/221 of 4 June 2001,
in which the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights to
create an intersessional open-ended working group, with the mandate to prepare a
draft legally binding normative instrument for the protection of all persons from
enforced disappearance;
22. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on Human Rights to convene
the intersessional working group before its sixty-first session, with a view to the
prompt completion of its work and the submission of its report to the Commission at
its sixty-first session;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed of the steps he takes
to secure the widespread dissemination and promotion of the Declaration;
24. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at its sixty-first
session a report on the steps taken to implement the present resolution;
25. Decides to consider the question of enforced disappearances, in
particular the implementation of the Declaration, at its sixtieth session, under the
sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

4
