A /77/PV.42

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

42nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 30 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ousman
(Niger), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report on the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(A/77/35)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/77/295)
Draft resolutions (A/77/L.23, A/77/L.24,
A/77/L.25, A/77/L.26)
Mr. Weinstein (United States of America): The
United States is deeply committed to a two-State
solution and firmly believes that the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples deserve equal measures of freedom
and dignity. Our main focus is on supporting the parties
on the ground and channelling our energy to initiatives
that can lead us to that goal. We will work to improve
the livelihoods of the Palestinian people, support
ongoing efforts that bring the peoples of the region
closer together and build confidence that can enable
constructive negotiations.
The West Bank is mired in a worrying period of
heightened tensions, mistrust and violence. We are
nearing the end of the deadliest year in the territory
since 2004. Approximately 150 Palestinians and 30
Israelis have already been killed so far this year. At
this moment the achievement of sustainable peace

feels impossible, and yet we must exert ourselves to
identify steps to stabilize the situation and explore
serious initiatives to end the conflict. However, rather
than working to identify those initiatives, we are at this
moment engaged in the annual United Nations ritual of
rubber-stamping outdated and ineffective resolutions
that purport to advance the cause of the Palestinian
people but instead reveal a profound anti-Israel bias.
Those resolutions are no substitute for what
is necessary for peace, which is direct, good-faith
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians.
Continuing to adopt one-sided resolutions will bring
us no closer to negotiations or to a two-State solution.
Instead of working together to create the conditions
that would foster such negotiations, we are squandering
more time grandstanding in this Hall. Many of those
resolutions task the United Nations with continuing
the work of anachronistic and problematic committees,
programmes and divisions. Those entities are one-sided
and do not serve the cause of peace. In fact, they give
a diplomatic veneer to what are in essence anti-Israel
processes and programmes.
Rather than merely rubber-stamping those
resolutions, we should be debating the ways in which
we, as Member States in the United Nations, can
support the parties and the broader shifts under way in
the region. Trying to insulate those bodies by creating
open-ended mandates is irresponsible, and worse, those
resolutions set us back by perpetuating the false hope
that there is a shortcut to Palestinian statehood. In
view of that, the United States will continue to refuse
to engage on and will oppose any and all one-sided or

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-71684 (E)

*2271684*

A/77/PV.42

biased resolutions that denigrate Israel. We encourage
others to join us both in that principled position and in
working towards practical solutions to the conflict.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to express our deepest
appreciation for the tireless and continuing efforts
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, as well as the Division
for Palestinian Rights, in supporting our brother people
of Palestine in achieving their legitimate aspirations.
The United Arab Emirates will continue to reiterate
its historical position on the Palestinian question, which
was emphasized by His Highness Sheikh Mohamed
bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the United Arab
Emirates, in his message marking the International Day
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People (see A/AC.183/
PV.409). He said,
“I affirm the unwavering solidarity of the
Government and the people of the United Arab
Emirates with our brotherly Palestinian people
and our support for their legitimate aspirations
to their inalienable rights, including the right to
self-determination and the establishment of an
independent State on the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with internationally agreed parameters, including
the Arab Peace Initiative”.
On that basis, the United Arab Emirates is keen
to support regional and international efforts and
endeavours aimed at breaking the current stalemate in
the Middle East peace process. We also support building
confidence between the parties to return to serious
negotiations that would lead to a two-State solution,
with a Palestinian State living side by side with Israel
in peace, security and mutual recognition. We also
stress that diplomacy and peaceful dialogue remain the
only options for ending the conflict and consolidating
peace and stability in the region. In that context, we
are concerned about the continued violence and attacks
in the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly the
West Bank. The United Arab Emirates stresses the
importance of calming the situation and protecting
civilians, especially children. Israel should live up to
its responsibilities in accordance with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. All
the illegitimate practices in the occupied territory
must stop, first and foremost the demolition and
confiscation of Palestinian land and property, as well
as the construction and expansion of settlements, which
2/21

30/11/2022

violate international law and undermine the prospects
for a two-State solution and for peace. We also stress
the need to preserve the legal and historical status quo
in Jerusalem and to respect the custodianship of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan over its holy sites.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its continued support for our brother people of Palestine
with a view to easing their difficult and deteriorating
humanitarian and economic conditions. In that context,
last month my country signed a cooperation agreement
with the World Health Organization to support Al
Makassed Hospital in East Jerusalem in the amount of
$25 million, to be used to provide medicine and medical
equipment. We would also like to take this opportunity
to commend the efforts of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which continues to play a key role in alleviating
the suffering of the more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees in the region.
We stress the need for the international
community and the Organization to continue providing
humanitarian and development support in order to
enable Palestinians to build their national institutions
and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, with
a view to realizing security, stability and prosperity in
the region as a whole.
Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I am grateful
for today’s meeting, at which we will adopt important
draft resolutions in support of the courageous
Palestinian people.
Bolivia is historically committed to this cause and
would like to reiterate its deepest solidarity with the
Palestinian people as we once again bear witness to
regrettable incidents that include the loss of innocent
lives, in addition to the deaths of more than 200 women
and children that have occurred so far this year in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. Like previous speakers, I too want to make
special mention of one of the many who died — the
Palestinian journalist Shireen Abu Akleh, who was
killed while doing her job as a journalist and reporting
on an operation being conducted by Israeli forces
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We hope that a
comprehensive international independent investigation
will be carried out to bring those responsible to justice.
We firmly condemn such acts of aggression, as well
as attacks on civilian infrastructure. We call on Israel,
as the occupying Power, to be held accountable for its
22-71684

30/11/2022

constant violations of international law, human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
We deplore the fact that Israel, as the occupying
Power, has continued consolidating its annexation
policy and increasing its illegal colonization practices
and methods, including settlement building and
expansion, in the occupied Palestinian territory. We
regret the ongoing punitive demolitions and seizures
of Palestinian resources and institutions, as well as the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has led to the forced
displacement of hundreds of civilians. Despite the fact
that the situation has been criticized for many years
without result, the scale of the human rights violations
and crimes committed by Israel recently must not go
unpunished. For that reason, I appreciate the presentation
of the report (see A/77/295) on the “Economic costs of
the Israeli occupation for the Palestinian people: the toll
of the additional restrictions in Area C, 2000–2020”.
The report shows the inhumane economic harm that
has been done to the Palestinian people through the
various controls and economic restrictions that every
day make their economic development increasingly
difficult. The deplorable, even shameful, annual cost of
those restrictions is estimated at 25.3 per cent of gross
domestic product (GDP) of the West Bank. That means
that from 2000 to 2020, there was a cumulative decline
in GDP estimated at $50 billion. Worse still, the report
states that the cumulative contribution of settlements
to the economy of Israel during the same period is
estimated at $628 billion. In line with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009), we therefore again underscore
the importance of lifting all air, land and maritime
restrictions imposed on Gaza by the occupying Power.
We believe that the question of Palestine can be
resolved through effective, transparent and good-faith
dialogue. However, we are surprised to see that there are
States in the General Assembly that continue to employ
double standards. While they demand compliance with
international law, human rights law and international
humanitarian law, they point fingers at other States.
Although the question of Palestine concerns a conflict
that has lasted for more than 40 years and has left
hundreds of thousands of civilians dead, they simply
fan the flames, which causes more innocent lives to be
lost. Instead of seeking a peaceful solution, they take
unilateral measures, such as relocating their embassies
to Jerusalem and undermining the possibility of a twoState solution.

A/77/PV.42

Before concluding my statement, I would like to
take this opportunity to commend the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its important work and invaluable support on
an issue that is so controversial within the international
community, and in defence of the human rights of
Palestinian women and men. We underscore that despite
the financial shortfall and unforeseen events such as
the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Committee has
continued its work, including training with new kinds
of media platforms that technology now makes available
to us. Lastly, I want to reiterate our unconditional
support for achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, so as to enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination and establish
an independent and sovereign State, in line with the
previously recognized pre-1967 international borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mrs. Fernández Palacios (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Permanent Representative of
Senegal, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, for his
report (A/77/35) to the General Assembly today.
Cuba is deeply concerned about the situation in the
Middle East, which is plagued by violence, interference
in countries’ internal affairs, foreign aggression and
long-standing conflicts such as the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict — which lies at the core of the Arab-Israeli
conflict generally. It is now time to settle the historical
debt owed to the Palestinian State and restore its people’s
inalienable rights, which have been violated by Israel
for half a century through its occupation, repression,
collective punishment, destruction and confiscation
of Palestinian land and property, forced displacement,
colonizing settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory and many other violations of international law,
particularly international humanitarian law and human
rights norms. Those violations have been committed by
Israel, the occupying Power, in the context of a foreign
military occupation of Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan, since 1967. They
continue today and have even increased in recent times.
The Security Council should take concrete steps to
eliminate this historic injustice and bring to an end as
quickly as possible Israel’s occupation of Palestinian
territory, as well as the other Arab territories under
occupation since 1967. The blockade of the Gaza

22-716843/21

A/77/PV.42

Strip should be lifted immediately. The critical
situation created by the blockade has resulted in the
almost total isolation of the millions of Palestinian
civilians in the area and immense deprivation. The
serious humanitarian crisis in Gaza continues. The
socioeconomic conditions have deteriorated and are
the most unstable they have been since the start of
the occupation, leading to an extremely difficult
and untenable situation that demands an immediate
solution. It will not be possible to achieve a two-State
solution or to find a comprehensive, just, peaceful and
lasting settlement of the question of Palestine as long as
Israel continues to violate its obligations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, under
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Cuba also calls for an end to the occupation of the
Syrian Golan. We reiterate that all measures or actions
that have been taken or may be taken in future to
change the legal, physical, demographic or institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as all
measures taken by Israel to exercise its jurisdiction and
administration in that territory, constitute violations of
international law, international agreements, the Charter
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
including Security Council resolution 497 (1981)
and the Fourth Geneva Convention. They also pose a
challenge to the international community.
In the light of this complex situation, we cannot
forget that we must also seek solutions to other
situations that arise within the same geographic area
that can affect the prospects for peace. We need a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
of the city of Jerusalem that takes into account the
legitimate concerns of both Palestinians and Israelis, as
well as the fact that any imposition of Israeli legislation,
jurisdiction and administration on Jerusalem or the
occupied Syrian Golan is not only useless but also
hinders the peace process.
In his message of solidarity with the Palestinian
people yesterday (see A/AC.183/PV.409), our Minister
for Foreign Affairs said that the abuses and violations
committed against the Palestinian people cannot
go unpunished. The international community must
demand and support the start of a political process of
negotiations that will ensure the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people and just and lasting peace for
all people in the region. He also said that we condemn
the illegal construction and expansion of Israeli
4/21

30/11/2022

settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and
the demolition and confiscation of Palestinian property.
That situation requires urgent measures that will ensure
full respect for international law, especially the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
In November 2012 the General Assembly took
the historic decision to accord Palestine non-member
observer State status in the United Nations (resolution
67/19). We supported the decision at the time. Along
with an overwhelming majority of Member States,
Cuba will continue to support Palestine’s admission
to full membership in the Organization. The historical
debt owed to the Palestinian people is immense and
must be settled.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Cuba’s
unwavering solidarity with the Palestinian people,
underpinned by our principled, clear and unequivocal
position in support of self-determination and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State.
We will continue to defend the right of the Palestinian
people to a free, independent and sovereign State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the
pre-1967 borders, as well as the right of return for all
Palestinian refugees.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Secretariat,
including the Division for Palestinian Rights and the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, for its efforts in support of the
question concerning our brother people of Palestine.
The recent international and regional developments
demand that the international community scale up the
efforts that it has made for decades to reach a peaceful,
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
of Palestine. They also demand that we support the
Palestinian people in their plight with a view to
fulfilling their aspirations and hopes and restoring their
legitimate right to establish an independent State, like
the other peoples of the world.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has accepted a path of peace
as a strategic approach to lasting and comprehensive
peace in the region, and calls for entrenching a culture
of tolerance and peaceful coexistence there for the good
of the peoples of the region and the world. We reaffirm
our firm and established position of unwavering support
for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
particularly their right to freedom, self-determination,
return, compensation for Palestinian refugees and
22-71684

30/11/2022

to an independent sovereign Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital, along the borders of
4 June 1967, based on the principle of a two-State
solution, the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant
international resolutions.
Bahrain continues to be a supporter of the
Palestinian people and their legitimate rights and
to support the Palestinian economy at bilateral and
multilateral levels. We have always participated in the
essential programmes of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) through our Royal Humanitarian
Foundation. We believe in the importance of supporting
UNRWA in its pivotal role in easing the suffering of the
Palestinian people and ensuring stability in the region.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain will
continue to support this just cause, which is the
primary and central cause of the Islamic and Arab
world. We will continue to support the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people. We call on the international
community to scale up efforts to revive the peace
process between the Palestinian and Israeli sides and
to establish an independent Palestinian State as the
strategic path to achieving a just and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East and ensuring the right of all
its peoples to security, peace and prosperity.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): We
continue to see developments and events occur one
after the other. Yesterday the international community
marked the International Day of Solidarity with our
brother Palestinian people (see A/AC.183/PV.409), who
regrettably continue to suffer under an occupation that
has usurped their land, spilled their blood and targeted
their holy sites through flagrant and systematic
violations of all norms and international law. They
are still being met with a shocking silence from the
international community, 75 years after the adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 181 (II), which
affirmed the right of Palestinians to establish their
independent State. However, that resolution, like other
international resolutions on the subject, has not yet
been implemented.
As I said, the international community is incapable
of implementing its own resolutions, at a time when
the question of Palestine is being erased through the
occupying authorities’ continuing settlement policies,
in addition to the systematic and large-scale crimes
being perpetrated against defenceless Palestinian
civilians, the plans for Judaizing Jerusalem and the

A/77/PV.42

actions aimed at imposing a fait accompli, in flagrant
violation of international law. Unfortunately, there has
been no accountability for the crimes that Israel has
committed and continues to commit against our brother
Palestinian people. The international community must
therefore redouble its collective efforts to mobilize
more political and material support to strengthen the
Palestinian people’s resilience in the face of the crimes
and violations they are constantly confronting.
From this rostrum, I want to emphasize Algeria’s
full support for the State of Palestine’s request for
full membership status in the United Nations. We
also support its efforts to hold the Israeli occupation
accountable for its crimes, especially its repressive
policies and attempts to change the demographic,
legal and historical status of the occupied city of
Jerusalem, as well as its continuing settlement plans.
We call on the international community, especially
the Security Council, to take on the historical and
legal responsibilities entrusted to it in order to stop
the aggression and criminal violations and provide the
brotherly Palestinian people and their holy places with
the necessary protection, revive a path to a peaceful
settlement and return to a serious political process that
guarantees a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian
question, in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, in order to enable the Palestinian people
to establish their independent State, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
Based on its belief that a peaceful political path is
the only way to resolve the Palestinian question, my
country, Algeria, has worked to unite the Palestinian
ranks. With the direct personal sponsorship of our
President, Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, we hosted
rounds of dialogue on reconciliation among the
Palestinian factions, which paved the way for achieving
consensus and ending the Palestinian divisions and
resulted in the signing of the Algiers declaration. The
aim was to achieve Palestinian national unity by uniting
Palestinians around known parameters and rallying
them to a united position conducive to realizing the
legitimate demands of our brother Palestinian people.
All the sister Arab States fully support that important
initiative, particularly within the framework of the
League of Arab States, which established a high-level
committee, headed by Algeria, to follow up on the
declaration’s implementation.
To those who are counting on the passage of time to
legitimize the occupation and normalize the abnormal,

22-716845/21

A/77/PV.42

I want to say to them that they are delusional. History
has shown that people who have rights do not give up
on them and that the right of people to their lands is not
subject to statutes of limitations. The Arab region will
not know stability or prosperity until there is an end to
the occupation of all Arab lands. We therefore reaffirm
the Arab position at the Arab Summit held in Algiers on
1 and 2 November, which stressed the Arab countries’
adherence to the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, with
all of its elements and priorities, as the agreed Arab
parameter and the main pillar for reviving the peace
process in the Middle East. That is also the only way to
establish a just and comprehensive peace that ensures
that the Palestinian people can realize their legitimate
aspirations to establish their independent State, with an
end to the occupation of all Arab lands.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my thanks and gratitude
to the President for his sincere efforts to ensure the
successful conduct of the work of the General Assembly
at its seventy-seventh session amid the exceptional
circumstances that we are living through today. I am
also pleased to reiterate our support to the Chair and
the members of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for their
tireless efforts in defending the rights of the brotherly
people of Palestine, foremost of which is their right
to self-determination, and realizing their legitimate
aspiration to establish their sovereign independent
State based on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. The work of the Committee is
vital because it keeps the question of Palestine active in
the international arena and draws the world’s attention
to the suffering of our brotherly people, whose difficult
situation goes against the basic values of justice, dignity
and human rights.
In his message on the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People (see A/AC.183/PV.409), His
Majesty King Abdullah II stressed that the Palestinian
question was, is and will remain the central question
in the Middle East and the Arab world. Jordan will
continue to make every effort to urge everyone to keep it
a priority, especially in the light of the ongoing multiple
international crises and their political, economic and
social effects. We also underscore that resolving the
Palestinian question is the key to peace and stability
in the Middle East. Jordan will continue to draw the
world’s attention to the plight of the Palestinian people,
a situation that is inconsistent with the values of justice,
dignity and human rights. The right of the Palestinian
6/21

30/11/2022

people to self-determination is an inalienable right that
has been recognized by the international community
and the United Nations for decades. It is also an
international responsibility that all of us must shoulder.
We must work together to uphold justice and ensure
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
based on a two-State solution, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security.
Jordan also reaffirms that the Hashemite
custodianship of the Muslim and Christian holy sites
in Jerusalem is a duty and historic responsibility that
Jordan is proud of and honoured to bear. Under the
leadership of King Abdullah, Jordan will continue
to shoulder that responsibility and strengthen the
resilience of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. We will block
any attempt to impose a new reality or change the legal
and historic status in the holy city, particularly with
regard to the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
In conclusion, silence is not an option. Effective
practical action must be taken in order to save whatever
prospects and hopes for peace remain. The alternative
to a clear stance in support of international legitimacy
and the right of the Palestinians to freedom and a
State, as well as the right of the peoples of the region
to live in security, peace and stability, would be deeprooted despair and the eruption of a conflict that would
threaten regional and international peace and security.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me begin by thanking the President for his
efforts to ensure a successful seventy-seventh session
and for convening today’s meeting. My statement will
be brief, because frankly we are bored by hearing the
same statements, data and appeals being made. The
people of the world are tired of the policy of double
standards we have all witnessed on several different
international occasions and events — especially in
recent days — the common denominator of which is the
double standard on human rights and the application of
international law.
The Palestinian question is the primary concern of
my country, Libya. Our people’s solidarity concerning
that issue did not happen overnight and cannot be
reduced to a single day or occasion in itself; rather,
it is a continuous effort with everyone who stands in
solidarity with the just cause of the Palestinian people,
who have suffered and continue to suffer the horrors of
the occupation. We must therefore all work to achieve
justice and support the resolutions of the United Nations
to restore the usurped rights of the Palestinian people,
22-71684

30/11/2022

including their right to establish their independent
State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
Despite the many international resolutions adopted
on the question of Palestine, they have not yet delivered
justice to the Palestinian people. Those resolutions did
not restore their usurped rights, and their suffering
continues. We must therefore ask ourselves: how long
will the injustice continue? We all know that peace will
not be achieved as long as the occupation authority
continues its aggression, building settlements, annexing
lands and residential neighbourhoods, constructing
fences and imposing its unjust blockade, which is
unprecedented in modern times.
We consider it our duty to support a settlement of
the Palestinian question, and we call on all countries
to join us in supporting Palestinians in their struggle
to build an independent State. It is time for the world’s
conscience to lead it to take action to end that tragedy,
establish the principle of a just peace and restore the
long-awaited rights of the Palestinian people.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ambassador Cheikh Niang of Senegal, Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, for his introduction
of the Committee’s report (A/77/35) this morning (see
A/77/PV.41).
On the occasion of the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, Viet Nam
extended its warmest solidarity to the State and the
people of Palestine and reiterated the strong support
of the State and people of Viet Nam to the Palestinian
people’s righteous struggle for independence
and freedom.
The Palestinian question has been on the agenda
of the General Assembly and the United Nations as a
whole for more than seven decades and has become one
of the longest-standing issues in modern history. Year
after year, Member States have come here to discuss
and express their strong support for the resolutions
tabled on the issue. However, the hopes for a just
and comprehensive solution have yet to materialize.
Despite the many initiatives and plans that have been
introduced, little progress has been made.
On the contrary, the recent developments continue
to dash our hopes for a future solution. We remain
seriously concerned about the continued violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which has taken a
severe toll on civilians, especially Palestinian people.

A/77/PV.42

The latest tensions in Gaza and the endless violence in
the West Bank only highlight the continued volatility of
the situation. This year has become the deadliest for the
West Bank since 2005. Against that backdrop, it is all
the more concerning to note the inflammatory rhetoric
and continued plans for further Israeli settlements
and evictions of Palestinian people from their homes.
Without an early solution, it is only a matter of time
until the next cycle of violence occurs.
Viet Nam has consistently been of the view that
the Palestine question must be addressed on the basis
of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, ensuring the legitimate interest of the
relevant parties, particularly the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. There is no alternative to a twoState solution that includes the establishment of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as the capital, peacefully coexisting alongside
the State of Israel, with secure and internationally
recognized borders based on the pre-1967 lines, and a
negotiated settlement, in accordance with international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Organization. In order to turn that
vision into reality, it is of utmost importance to create
an environment conducive to negotiations or any paths
to peace. Violence, settlement activities, property
demolitions and evictions must stop. The rights to
life, freedom and happiness of every person must
be respected.
We have stressed on many occasions that all of the
Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including
in East Jerusalem, have no legal validity, constitute
a violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions and systematically erode the possibility of
establishing a viable and contiguous Palestinian State.
The international community, particularly the
relevant partners in the peace process, must be
committed to working toward a long-lasting solution.
We believe that all channels of diplomacy should be
utilized, including the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Middle East Quartet. We also support all initiatives
in that direction proposed by members of the
international community.
Last but not least, assistance to Palestinians
should remain high on the agenda of the international
humanitarian community, even in the face of global
economic instability and funding scarcity. In that
regard, we highly commend the continued efforts
of various donors and the United Nations Relief and

22-716847/21

A/77/PV.42

Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
to bring much-needed relief to the Palestinian people.
Mr. Al-Tememy (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country’s delegation would like to thank the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People for its efforts to enable the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable rights,
as illustrated in the Committee’s report before us today
(A/77/35).
Israel’s continuing aggression as the occupying
Power against the Palestinian people clearly
demonstrates its disregard for international legitimacy
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations. In
response, the international community must firmly
address the issue and shoulder its full responsibilities
in order to end Israel’s illegal policies and practices and
completely stop its violations, with a view to ending
the occupation, achieving justice and preserving the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their right to freedom and independence. We also
reiterate our rejection of all the racist laws and
military behaviour adopted by the occupying Power
in its attempt to create a new reality in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The ongoing and worsening Israeli acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people reflect an
unsustainable situation. They are also an illustration of
the failure to implement the basic solution, namely, an
ending of the occupation and the achievement of the
two-State solution whereby an independent, sovereign
and contiguous Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital along 4 June 1967 borders is created. That is
the only way for settling the conflict and achieving just
and lasting peace. An immediate international move
towards ending the Israeli escalation is necessary;
otherwise, it will have catastrophic consequences
for all.
We must preserve genuine prospects for a just and
lasting peace. Accordingly, my delegation condemns all
arbitrary practices against unarmed civilians, including
systematic arrest campaigns against the brotherly
Palestinian people, the continued unjust blockade
against the Gaza Strip, repeated acts of aggression
against Palestinian civilians, deliberate attacks against
women, children and elderly through air strikes,
targeting of schools, hospitals, places of worship and
other infrastructure, and the banning of humanitarian
aid and medical supplies and services.
8/21

30/11/2022

We call on the international community and the
United Nations, and especially the Security Council,
which is responsible for maintaining international peace
and security, to live up to their responsibilities and
implement all United Nations resolutions on protecting
the brotherly Palestinian people and defending their
inalienable rights until a final settlement of the question
of Palestine is reached.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
Iraq’s firm position in fully supporting the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, namely, their right to
establish an independent State on Palestinian territories
along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. Israel also needs to cease its settlement activity
on Palestinian territories immediately and comply with
all relevant resolutions of the United Nations. The State
of Palestine should also become a full member of the
United Nations without any further conditions. We call
on the States that have not yet recognized the State of
Palestine to do so.
Mr. Jardali (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation for
convening this meeting in the context of discussing
agenda item 33, “Question of Palestine” and the relevant
and important draft resolutions introduced thereunder
(A/77/L.23, A/77/L.24, A/77/L.25 and A/77/L.26. We
also appreciate the important roles undertaken by the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People and the Division of Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat, in increasing international
awareness about the question of Palestine and the
urgent need to reach a peaceful settlement for it on
the basis of international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Yesterday, we celebrated the International Day
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, wherein the
international community reiterated at the highest level
its support for the legitimate and inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. The Prime Minister of Lebanon, His
Excellency Mr. Mohammad Najib Azmi Mikati, noted
in his letter for that occasion that while decades have
passed, the tragedy of the Palestinian people has been
ongoing in successive generations, despite numerous
promises, resolutions and initiatives. He also said that
is lacking in that regard is Israeli willingness, in word
and deed, to establish an honourable and sustainable
peace. He further noted that the neighbouring countries
remain in solidarity with the Palestinian people as they
defend the rights of their oppressed brothers against the
22-71684

30/11/2022

occupier. The question of Palestine will continue to set
the path towards a more stable Middle East, which, in
alleviating injustice and tragic sorrow that results from
it, sparing no one, serves the interests of all. Indeed,
without justice, there cannot be peace in our region.
The year 2022 was the bloodiest year since 2005
for Palestinians in the West Bank and other Palestinian
territories, 2005 being the year in which the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs began to
systematically record the number of Palestinian victims
killed. In addition, a significant increase in Israeli acts
of violence against Palestinians, with the consent,
support and participation of Israeli occupation forces,
has also been recorded.
Settlement activity remains ongoing in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, where 9,200 settlement units
are planned to be constructed. Since 1967, Israel has
built or given permission to build 279 settlements in
the West Bank, providing residences for approximately
700,000 settlers. In contrast, Israel counters most
Palestinian attempts to develop infrastructure by
making it almost impossible to obtain construction
permits, as we are reminded every month by the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
in his briefings to the Security Council. Against that
bitter reality, the international community should be
committed to breaking this ongoing vicious circle
and move from merely observing and documenting
violations to effectively addressing the situation
by implementing international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, so that there is
accountability for those violations.
Since its creation in 1949, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) has been undertaking extremely
important humanitarian work by providing millions
of Palestinian refugees with basic educational, health
and daily living services. It has provided a safety net
for generations of refugees in Palestine and hosting
neighbouring States. It has also contributed to keeping
the right to return alive for as long as it takes for
a radical solution to the Palestinian question to be
reached. Guaranteeing UNRWA’s services is essential
for the provision of a life of dignity for those who
receive those services, making the Agency a pillar of
stabilization pillar across the region. We therefore call
on all peace-loving countries to guarantee sustainable
and predictable financing for UNRWA by providing
regular multi-year contributions and through supporting

A/77/PV.42

the proposal to have the Agency’s operational costs
included in the United Nations regular budget.
In conclusion, Lebanon upholds the political
solution that we have always called for, namely,
achieving just and lasting peace based on ending the
occupation and creating an independent Palestinian
State along 4 June the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem
as its capital, while fairly resolving the refugee issue
and other final status issues in line with the resolutions
of the international legitimacy, the latest of which is
resolution 2334 (2016), as well as the Arab Peace
Initiative, adopted in Beirut in 2002.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow us
to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this plenary meeting to discuss an issue to
which our country attaches special importance, owing
to its historically principled position and its firm support
for the just cause of the heroic Palestinian people.
Seventy-five years have passed since the partition
of Palestine. These 75 years have been a period in
which the heroic Palestinian people resisted with great
courage and dignity the colonial aggression, military
brutality and criminal apartheid policy perpetuated
until today by the occupying Power with total impunity.
We are deeply concerned about the worsening situation
on the ground, while the suffering of the noble
Palestinian people, victims of violent attacks by the
Israeli occupying forces, only continues to be prolonged
over time.
Israel continues to systematically perpetrate war
crimes, crimes against humanity and the crime of
ethnic cleansing against the Palestinian people. In the
last 20 years alone, Israeli occupying forces have killed
more than 10,000 Palestinians, including at least 2,000
children. We ask: where are those who promote the
concept of the responsibility to protect?
At the same time, over these painful 75 years,
hundreds of thousands of homes have been destroyed,
and hundreds of thousands of Palestinians have been
displaced within their own ancestral lands, while
others have had to seek refuge beyond the borders
of their homeland. Attacks have also been launched
against vital public and private infrastructure, even in
the middle of the worst pandemic of the last 100 years.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela strongly
condemns the Israeli aggression against the civilian
population in the occupied Palestinian territories. This

22-716849/21

A/77/PV.42

aggression is proof, inter alia, of Israel’s relentless
efforts to change the historical and legal status of the
State of Palestine, thus paving the way to consummate
its illegal policy of annexation and colonial expansion
and undermining any prospect for a political process
that would make the two-State solution a reality. It also
demonstrates that Israel has no intention of ending the
occupation and that it is pursuing policies clearly aimed
at gaining total control of the occupied Palestinian
territory, while attempting to alter the demographic
situation, maintaining a repressive environment for the
Palestinians and a favourable one for the Israeli settlers,
as reports issued by the United Nations conclude.
We also condemn in the strongest terms the
occupying Power’s failure to cease its violations of
international law in the occupied Palestinian territories,
in particular relevant United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016).
Israel therefore continues its colonizing practices
and apartheid policies, in flagrant violation of the
human rights of all Palestinian people. We hope that
a forthcoming advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice will provide not only the necessary
legal guidance to bring us closer to achieving justice,
reparations and peace both in Palestine and in the
entire Middle East region, but that it will also allow
us to keep alive a political horizon for the end of the
Israeli occupation.
Venezuela believes that it is essential to guarantee
this political horizon for an end of the Israeli
occupation and for just, lasting and comprehensive
peace, in accordance with internationally recognized
parameters, international law and the provisions of the
relevant resolutions of both the General Assembly and
the Security Council, based on a two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security. It is therefore time for the Palestinian
people to live and not merely survive on their own
ancestral lands, which are now subject to an illegal and
forcible occupation.
To this end, we believe it is essential to move
forward with a sense of urgency in at least three critical
areas. First, the prevailing cycle of impunity must end.
Israel must be held accountable before international
justice for the crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed over so many years. It is precisely this
lack of accountability, supported by the international
framework of impunity fostered over time by the
Government of one of its main partners, a permanent
10/21

30/11/2022

member of the Security Council, that has resulted in
encouraging all these criminal practices and policies,
which Israel carries out on a daily basis, again, to date,
with total impunity.
Secondly, as long as there is no end to this historical
injustice and no progress in accountability, and as
long as the occupying Power continues its shoot-tokill policies, indiscriminate aerial bombardment, and
violence and systemic terror by the Israeli occupying
forces and settlers, among other cruel and inhumane
practices being committed daily against the Palestinian
civilian population, then we must move forward
without further delay to adopt those measures set
forth in international humanitarian law that provide
and guarantee international protection for the heroic
Palestinian people.
Thirdly, an end must be put to the illegal settlement
policy, evictions and demolition of homes, expropriation
of Palestinian land, discrimination against Palestinians,
arbitrary arrests and detentions of innocent Palestinian
civilians, persecution of Palestinian civil society
organizations, inflammatory speeches that only
encourage fanatical groups and foment, inter alia, the
commission of hate crimes and the targeting of religious
sites. We are confident that doing so will help not only
to reduce tensions and the persistent cycle of violence,
but also ultimately end the conflict.
We also take this opportunity to reiterate that the
international community cannot continue to drag its
feet on the situation of Palestine refugees and their
right of return. Absent the conditions for the return of
the Palestinian refugees, we would like to recognize the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which, despite financial
difficulties, is having a real impact on the provision of
humanitarian and development assistance to address
the tragic reality of Palestine refugees.
Moreover, we stress our rejection of the lack of
compliance with the provisions of Security Council
resolution 497 (1981), which for more than 40 years has
demanded that Israel withdraw from the Syrian Golan,
while reiterating our rejection of any measure or action
taken unilaterally by the occupying Power to alter the
legal, physical or demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan. We also reject all measures by which
it seeks to exercise jurisdiction in and administration
over the occupied Syrian Golan by force.
22-71684

30/11/2022

We conclude by reaffirming that multilateralism
and diplomacy provide the tools to reach a just and
lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. That
solution cannot be unilateral, forced or unjust, nor
can it be based on double standards or non-existent
exceptionalism. It is time to move from rhetoric to
action and for the General Assembly to demand that
Israel take concrete and immediate actions, which is
why we support and call for a vote in favour of all the
draft resolutions submitted under agenda items 32 and
33 (A/77/L.23, A/77/L.24, A/77/L.25, A/77/L.26 and
A/77/L.27).
We in Venezuela are convinced that the two-State
solution is the only way to put an end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. We are sure that such an end will
result in peace and stability in the Middle East region
as a whole because it will also entail the possibility of
moving towards Israel’s withdrawal from the Syrian
Golan and the rest of occupied Arab territories.
Finally, we reaffirm our unwavering solidarity
with the Palestinian people and our irrevocable position
in support of the defence of their independence,
their inalienable right to self-determination and the
realization of their legitimate national aspirations
in their free, independent and sovereign State of
Palestine, within the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and as a full-fledged member
of the United Nations. We cannot continue to delay the
heroic Palestinian people’s yearnings for peace, justice
and freedom.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Sovereign Order of Malta.
Mr. Beresford-Hill (Sovereign Order of Malta):
The Sovereign Order of Malta is very grateful for this
opportunity to speak on behalf of our organization on
the question of Palestine and on resolving the suffering
of the Palestinian people, which represent a key and
transcendental importance for our work and mission.
Since 1993, the collective effort of the multilateral
community has continuously negotiated in favour
of Palestine’s right to self-determination. However,
since the Oslo Accords were initially signed, no
transformative progress has been made to alleviate the
violence and suffering facing the citizens of Palestine.
As the Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People states:
“The stalled peace process and the lack of new
initiatives to benefit the Palestinian people’s quest

A/77/PV.42

for self-determination have highlighted the need
for enhanced global cooperation to reinvigorate
negotiations and provide a political horizon leading
to a just solution to the question of Palestine and
lasting peace” (A/77/35, para. 7).
Since 2000, records show that over 10,000
Palestinians have died as a consequence of this
conflict. And while this is not matched by an equal
number of Israeli fatalities, what it reveals is the intense
personal loss and suffering of individuals, families and
communities throughout the region and across borders,
and it points to the eternal question: “why?”
There seems to be no answer; indeed, not only has
there been a failure to achieve progress, but regression is
taking centre stage. We join His Holiness Pope Francis
in expressing hope that the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities will “more readily take to heart” the search
for dialogue and the building of mutual trust. This, as
he puts it, is essential if there is to be lasting peace in
the Holy Land.
Since the year 1048, the Sovereign Order of Malta
has provided medical assistance to the most vulnerable
people of society. Our presence in Palestine remains
central to our cause. Through employment and medical
assistance, we protect the most vulnerable, particularly
women, children and refugees, and we try to provide
them with hope. We appreciate that 90 per cent of the
Bethlehem workforce depends on tourism and religious
practices, and the rising tensions and the impact of the
coronavirus disease have only exacerbated the decline
of the local economy and the poverty that ensues.
Through our own hospital, Holy Family, we deliver
approximately 70 per cent of all Bethlehem infants,
maintaining a survival rate of nearly 100 per cent.
Furthermore, we offer post-menopausal gynaecological
check-ups, cancer screenings, surgeries and paramedical
services. Thanks to our outreach clinics, medical and
social care can be brought to mothers and women who
live in rural villages, scattered communities or refugee
camps owing to their inability to travel to the hospital.
Our colleagues in the Alliance of the Orders of
Saint John, particularly the Venerable Order of Saint
John, is the only voluntary provider of expert eye care
in the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem, treating
patients of any ethnicity, religion or ability to pay.
Their extensive network provides essential sightsaving and life-changing eye care to the most remote
and impoverished communities in the region. Together

22-7168411/21

A/77/PV.42

we serve a population of 2.5 million people, and by
protecting sight, we are safeguarding the economic and
social independence of people of all ages across the
West Bank and Gaza.
Our collaborative response towards aiding the
victims of this religious and political turmoil is of
course central. However, the Sovereign Order of Malta
joins many others in this Hall today in saying that our
efforts aimed at alleviating this pain and suffering
will only be eased when the two-State solution is
unanimously recognized and adopted, even if it involves
negotiated flexibility.
Throughout our work in this region, we continue
to champion interreligious dialogue across all levels of
human interaction. We remind everyone that at the heart
of a political conflict there is a social and humanitarian
dimension. Our goal is to promote a culture of global
peace that embraces Palestine and Israel.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item. I should
like to inform members that consideration of draft
resolutions A/77/L.23, A/77/L.24, A/77/L.25 and
A/77/L.26 will take place following the conclusion of
the debate on agenda item 32.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 33.
Agenda item 32
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/298)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.27)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.27.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express Egypt’s appreciation
for today’s meeting held under agenda item 32, “The
situation in the Middle East”, and for the opportunity
to address draft resolution A/77/L.27 on the Syrian
Golan, which Egypt proudly introduces in the General
Assembly every year
Egypt is aware that 55 years have passed since the
occupation of Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan in 1967. Since then, there have been
enormous changes in the region. As is the case every
year, Egypt is eager to introduce a draft resolution
12/21

30/11/2022

on the Syrian Golan in the General Assembly under
the agenda item entitled “The situation in the Middle
East”. We believe that the occupation is unacceptable
under any circumstances, but particularly as a means to
annex territories of other countries, which is a violation
of all principles of international law and the United
Nations Charter.
The developments in the Middle East in last decade
in general and the Syrian Arab Republic in particular
must not deter the international community from
upholding international law and the principles of the
United Nations Charter, despite the great pressure
on it resulting from the numerous conflicts breaking
in many parts of the world. Egypt still believes that
international law must be upheld and that escalation
and foreign policies based on competition and double
standards should be avoided. Only in this way can all
conflicts in today’s world be settled in a unified and
equal manner.
Egypt stresses that we cannot move beyond the
current deteriorating situation in the Middle East,
unless we respect principles of international law and
resolutions of international legitimacy pertaining to
all crises that the region is experiencing. Over the last
decade, the Middle East region has had to face several
new crises in a number of countries. Still, that must
not stop us from giving attention to the Arab territories
occupied in 1967, whether they be the Syrian Golan,
south Lebanon or Palestine. Egypt was the first country
in the region to take the first step towards a peace based
on justice, respect for international law and the United
Nations Charter. Even now, we are still striving to
achieve that goal.
We cannot imagine achieving peace, security and
stability in the Middle East while Arab territories
continue to be occupied and de facto control over
them remains ongoing. Egypt upholds the need to end
the occupation of all Arab territories occupied since
5 June 1967. If the international community is serious
about respect for the principles of the United Nations
Charter and international law and the inadmissibility of
the annexation of territories by force without applying
double standards or exceptions, then it must take a firm
position about the continued decades-long occupation
of the Syrian Golan where there has been no progress
towards ending occupation, as called for by relevant
United Nations resolutions. All those resolutions
confirm the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force and reject all unilateral decisions
22-71684

30/11/2022

regarding demographic changes in occupied areas.
In that regard, Egypt is keen to introduce the draft
resolution on the Syrian Golan every year before the
General Assembly. This year, the draft resolution retains
the same language used last year, with a few technical
updates. It recalls Security Council resolution 497
(1981), as well as the principles of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, while reaffirming
in particular the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force. It also reaffirms the applicability of
the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War and its applicability
to the occupied Syrian Golan.
We underscore that settlement building or any
other settlement activity by Israel constitutes a change
to the very nature of the occupied Syrian Golan. The
draft resolution underscores that Israel’s continued
occupation of the Syrian Golan is an obstacle to
achieving just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the
region. It requests Israel to resume peace negotiations
for its complete withdrawal from the occupied Syrian
Golan up to the 4 June 1967 border, pursuant to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Egypt hopes that all Member States of the United
Nations will support the draft resolution, as last year,
in order to reaffirm from all of us the importance of
respecting and upholding international law and of
rejecting the acquisition of territory belonging to
others by force. It also underscores the importance of
respecting the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations without applying double standards.

A/77/PV.42

occupied Syrian Golan are null and void and have no
international legal effect at all. The Security Council
also emphasized in its resolution 497 (1981) the right
position of the General Assembly by rejecting the
unilateral and provocative decision taken by the Israeli
occupation authorities to annex the occupied Syrian
Golan, as it considers that decision null and void and of
no legal effect.
Israel’s intransigence, as the occupying Power, and
its refusal until now to comply with relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions reveals
the unacceptable inability of the United Nations to
compel Israel to end its occupation of the Syrian Arab
Golan. The occupation continues with impunity and
with protection provided to Israel by the United States
of America and other States. Their support to Israel is
unconditional at the United Nations and beyond. That
has encouraged the Israeli occupation authorities to
continue their illegitimate and aggressive policies and
to escalate their aggression against the territories of
the Syrian Arab Republic, including against civilian
infrastructure, such as civilian ports and airports.
Those actions endanger the lives of civilians,
hinder the provision of international humanitarian
aid and threaten peace and security in the region and
the world. Israel’s continued defiance of resolutions
of international legitimacy and the inability of the
United Nations to implement its resolutions are genuine
obstacles to achieving just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East as well as security and stability.

Mr. Dandy (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to sincerely thank the
Permanent Representative of the sisterly Arab Republic
of Egypt for introducing draft resolution A/77/L.27,
entitled “The Syrian Golan”. I also thank all the
Member States that co-sponsored it.

My country calls on the United Nations to take
immediate and decisive measures to implement its
resolutions to ensure an end to the Israeli occupation
of occupied Syrian Golan and other occupied Arab
territories; violations perpetrated by Israeli occupation
forces against Syrian sovereignty; the crime of
settlement expansion; demographic change; the pillage
of resources; the confiscation of land and property;
murder; arbitrary arrests; torture; and other serious
violations. Those violations constitute a systematic
policy that has been implemented for several decades
by the occupation authorities in the occupied Syrian
Golan and against our people, living under occupation.

In all the resolutions that it has been adopting every
year for more than five decades, the General Assembly
has always urged Israel, the occupying Power, to end
its occupation of the Syrian Golan. All resolutions
have emphasized that all measures taken by Israel to
impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the

The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms our firm
commitment to our right to reclaim all of the occupied
Syrian Golan up to the 4 June 1967 border. It is a
non-negotiable right that is not subject to the statute
of limitations. Syria also emphasizes that all decisions
and measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to

Egypt looks forward to the day when security,
peace and stability will be realized in the sisterly Syrian
Arab Republic and in all countries of the Middle East
region. That cannot be achieved without the primacy of
international law on the global stage.

22-7168413/21

A/77/PV.42

change the natural characteristics of the Syrian Golan
and its demographic structure or to impose its laws,
jurisdiction or administration on it are null and void
and have no legal effect, in line with international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Syria again expresses its solidarity with the
brotherly Palestinian people in their struggle to liberate
their occupied territory and create an independent and
sovereign State, with Jerusalem as its capital, and to
guarantee the right of return for Palestinian refugees,
in line with international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions, primarily resolution 194 (III). We
reiterate our support for the decision taken by Palestine
to become a full-fledged member of the United Nations,
which is long overdue.
The majority of the Member States pf the
Organization have fought to liberate their territories
from foreign occupation, in all its forms. Their people
have fought for self-determination and for realizing
their aspirations. Now, we urge all Member States to
vote in favour of draft resolution A/77/L.27, entitled
“The Syrian Golan”. We also urge them to vote in favour
of all draft resolutions concerning Palestine to convey
the commitment of those States to the principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular the core principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force, in order to
demonstrate that those States are determined to end
the injustice to people living under occupation and to
support them in achieving liberation.
In conclusion, I thank and appreciate all the States
that will support the draft resolution and vote in favour
of it in order to reiterate their principled position in
solidarity with this just cause.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Middle East,
as contained in document A/77/298, and would like to
clarify its principled position on the agenda item.
The Syrian Golan is an integral part of the territory
of the Syrian Arab Republic and its recovery by the
means provided for under international law is an eternal
right that cannot be bartered or waived. From the start
of Israel’s illegal occupation of the Syrian Golan in
1967, the international community has reiterated its
rejection of that occupation and demanded that Israel
withdraw from the entire occupied Syrian Golan, up to
the 4 June 1967 border.
14/21

30/11/2022

However, in defiance of the just demands of the
international community and all relevant United Nations
resolutions, Israel has continued its illegal occupation
of the Syrian Golan for 55 years and systematically
commits heinous crimes aimed at changing the legal
and demographic nature of the Golan, seizes land
and property, loots natural resources and wealth and
implements settlement plans and projects, with the
ultimate purpose of perpetrating and prolonging
the occupation.
The escalating and historical aggression
perpetrated by the Israeli occupation forces has come
under the protection of the United States and Western
countries, which leads Israel to continue its violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
thereby endangering security and stability in Syria
and the Middle East. In that context, my delegation
strongly condemns all practices and actions carried
out by Israel that are aimed at seriously violating the
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and
urges the international community to take urgent
measures to put an end to Israel’s occupation and its
aggressive practices.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express strong support to and solidarity with the
Government and the people of the Syrian Arab Republic
in their just struggle to reclaim the illegally occupied
Syrian Golan and fully restore the territorial integrity
of the country.
In conclusion, my delegation will vote in favour of
draft resolution A/77/L.27 and calls upon all member
States to vote in favour of that draft resolution in a
show of support for and solidarity with the Syrian Arab
Republic in its just struggle.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. I would like to inform
members that action on the draft resolution will be
taken after we take action on the other draft resolutions
under agenda item 33, entitled “Question of Palestine”.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 32.
22-71684

30/11/2022

Agenda item 33 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/77/L.23, A/77/L.24,
A/77/L.25, A/77/L.26)
The Acting President: We shall now proceed
to consider draft resolutions A/77/L.23, A/77/L.24,
A/77/L.25 and A/77/L.26. Delegations wishing to make
a statement in explanation of vote before the voting on
any of the draft resolutions are invited to do so now in
one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ghelich (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation acknowledges the consideration of the
draft resolutions under agenda items 32 and 33, which
express strong support for the cause of Palestine.
In addition to the failure to hold the occupying
regime accountable for its crimes against the Palestinian
people, it is regrettable that no progress has been made
towards ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
lands over the past decades, despite the numerous and
consistent calls of the international community.
The question of Palestine is the longest standing
crisis of all time, with no feasible conclusion in sight. It
has remained the core issue facing the Middle East and
has had reverberating effects, directly and indirectly
affecting other issues in the region. As a result,
Palestinians have been forced to undergo that historical
experience over the course of more than seven decades,
with developments in recent years demonstrating
that Palestinians have no choice but to continue their
resistance against occupation, aggression and violation
of their rights.
My delegation deems it necessary to reiterate the
principled position of the Islamic Republic of Iran
concerning the settlement of the Palestinian issue.
Our position was formulated within the framework of
a four-point initiative to hold a national referendum in
Palestine, which was submitted to the United Nations
and its Secretary-General on 1 October 2019. We
re-emphasize that the only way to achieve sustainable
peace in the Middle East is not through the promotion of
a discriminatory and selective policy of support for the
Israeli regime, while simultaneously condemning the
legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people against the

A/77/PV.42

occupation, but instead through a referendum that gives
Palestinian Muslims, Jews and Christians the ability to
choose their own political system in order to ensure
that they can enjoy their rights fairly and equally.
Having stated its principled position today, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolutions
submitted under agenda items 32 and 33. Furthermore,
we consider them a demonstration of the strong
support of the international community for the cause of
Palestine, in particular the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
Regarding the occupation of the Syrian Golan as an
integral area of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic,
my country strongly condemns the discriminatory and
illegal policies aimed at the Syrian population in that
area and the efforts to change its physical character,
demography, composition, institutional structure and
legal status. The Israeli decision to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights is null and void and has no international
legal effect, as stated by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
While I have the floor, I would also like to respond
briefly to the statement made by the representative of
Israel earlier today. He claimed that the Jewish people
were expelled from the Middle East and North Africa
by Iran and Arab countries. I do not want to provide
a substantive response to that nonsensical comment,
which contradicts historical facts. However, I would
like to reiterate that thousands of Iranian Jewish people,
namely Persian Jewish people, currently live in Iran.
My Jewish compatriots and their ancestors have lived
in Iran for thousands of years. The constitutional law
of the Islamic Republic of Iran recognizes their right
to freely perform their religious rites and ceremonies.
They also have a representative in the Parliament and
willingly participate in civil communities, as well as
various social activities.
The President took the Chair.
It is very ironic that the Israeli regime, which is
famous for its authorities’ apartheid policies and
war crimes — all well -documented by various
United Nations bodies and agencies — can allow itself
to continue to make false accusations against others and
then complain about the condemnation of its actions to
hide its daily atrocities.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.

22-7168415/21

A/77/PV.42

30/11/2022

The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolutions, one by one.

United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.23, entitled “Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People”.

Against:
Albania, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Czechia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, Slovakia, United States
of America

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/77/L.23, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, the Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, the
Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania,
Morocco, Namibia, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, the Sudan, the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam
and Zimbabwe.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
16/21

Abstaining:
Andorra, Armenia, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Cameroon, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malawi,
Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay
Draft resolution A/77/L.23 was adopted by 101
votes to 17, with 53 abstentions (resolution 77/22).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Somalia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.24, entitled
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations listed in document A/77/L.24,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, the
Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau
Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco,
Namibia, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the
Sudan, the United Arab Emirates and Viet Nam.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
22-71684

30/11/2022

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Israel, Italy,
Liberia, Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Netherlands,
Palau, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cameroon, Colombia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Eswatini,
Finland, France, Georgia, Honduras, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Spain, Togo, Uruguay

A/77/PV.42

Draft resolution A/77/L.24 was adopted by 90 votes
to 30, with 47 abstentions (resolution 77/23).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Somalia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour; and the delegation of Costa Rica informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/77/L.25, entitled “Special
information programme on the question of Palestine
of the Department of Global Communications of the
Secretariat”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/77/L.25, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam, the Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Sudan,
the United Arab Emirates and Viet Nam.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,

22-7168417/21

A/77/PV.42

30/11/2022

Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czechia, Hungary, Israel,
Liberia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon,
Eritrea,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Rwanda, South Sudan, Togo, Uruguay
Draft resolution A/77/L.25 was adopted by 149
votes to 11, with 13 abstentions (resolution 77/24).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Somalia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.26, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution A/77/L.26 and in addition to the delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.26: Algeria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti,
the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia,
Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
18/21

Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Sudan,
the United Arab Emirates and Viet Nam.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Hungary, Israel, Liberia, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
22-71684

30/11/2022

Abstaining:
Australia, Brazil, Cameroon, Czechia, Guatemala,
Madagascar, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, South
Sudan, Uruguay
Draft resolution A/77/L.26 was adopted by 153
votes to 9, with 10 abstentions (resolution 77/25).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Chile informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Ponikvar (Slovenia): Slovenia’s vote in favour
of this year’s resolution on the peaceful settlement of
the question of Palestine (resolution 77/25) is a vote in
favour of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. With the tensions again close to an
all-time high, we need collective efforts to re-establish
a political horizon for the negotiations process — a
precondition to bringing the Middle East onto the path
towards peace and stability. With our vote in favour,
we are reaffirming our commitment to a peaceful, just
and comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, based on a two-State solution, within the
borders set in 1967 and with Jerusalem as the capital of
both countries. We hope all sides genuinely recommit
to that process, which could enhance stability, increase
prosperity and strengthen security for both Palestinians
and Israelis alike.
We would also like to use this opportunity to thank
those involved in the negotiations on all the resolutions
for their engagement this year.
Ms. Henderson (Australia): Australia shifted
from voting against to abstaining in the voting on
resolution 77/25, on the peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine, because it believes in a just
and enduring two-State solution negotiated between
the parties.

A/77/PV.42

Equally, Israel must cease creating and expanding
settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Settlements remain an obstacle to peace and undermine
confidence in any peace process.
For negotiations to have any chance of success,
conditions on the ground must remain stable. We are
concerned that unilateral actions by any party damage
prospects for peace and undermine the viability of a
two-State solution. All sides must respect human rights
and international law and do everything possible to
protect civilians.
Australia continues to believe that references to the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion on the
security barrier (see A/ES-10/273) should reflect the
opinion’s non-binding character.
We do not support the other resolutions considered
under this agenda item. Viewing any conflict from
only one perspective does nothing to advance the
cause of peace. Those resolutions divert increasingly
strained United Nations resources and contribute to the
disproportionate focus Israel continues to receive in the
multilateral system.
Australia wants to see a secure Israel living in
peace alongside a viable Palestinian State. Our firm
and sincere hope is that Israel and the Palestinians will
return to the negotiating table as soon as possible. We
continue to encourage them to do so.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting. We will now hear
statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I give the floor to the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.

The conflict in Gaza in August and escalating
tensions in the West Bank highlight the risks to peace
and security of allowing the status quo to continue.

The EU wishes to thank the Palestinian delegation
for its cooperation during our negotiations on a number
of resolutions on which action is being taken by the
General Assembly. The EU welcomes the streamlining
of the resolutions, including through the use of
balanced language and a reduction in the number of
these resolutions.

Rocket attacks against Israel must cease. We call
on the Palestinian leadership to refrain from incitement
and provocation and to foster an atmosphere of tolerance
to bring violence to an end.

The EU acknowledges the Palestinian Mission’s
decision to no longer present two of the resolutions
under the agenda item “Question of Palestine” unless a
substantive amendment is required.

22-7168419/21

A/77/PV.42

30/11/2022

At this point in time, we would like to put on record
that, with regard to all resolutions that are adopted
during the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly, the EU and its member States consider that,
whenever the Palestinian Government is mentioned,
that refers to the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore,
the use of the term “Palestine” in the resolutions cannot
be construed as recognition of a State of Palestine and
is without prejudice to the individual positions of the
member States on that issue and, hence, on the question
of the validity of an accession to the conventions and
treaties mentioned therein.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 33.

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Liberia, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

Agenda item 32 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolution (A/77/L.27)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/77/L.27, entitled “The
Syrian Golan”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.27
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/77/L.27: Bahrain, Bangladesh, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam,
Cuba, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Senegal,
South Africa, the Sudan, the United Arab Emirates and
the State of Palestine.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
20/21

Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia,
Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Ukraine,
Uruguay
Draft resolution A/77/L.27 was adopted by 92 votes
to 9, with 65 abstentions (resolution 77/26).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Qatar informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Argentina.
22-71684

30/11/2022

Mr. Alvarez (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina voted in favour of resolution 77/26 because
it believes that its essential character is linked
to the illegality of the acquisition of territory by
force. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations prohibits the threat or use of force
against the territory or integrity of a State.
At the same time, I wish to clarify Argentina’s
position with respect to paragraph 6 of the resolution.
Our vote does not prejudge the content of that paragraph,
in particular the reference to the line of 4 June 1967.
Argentina considers that it is important to make
progress in the search for a solution to the SyrianIsraeli aspect of the Middle East conflict to bring an
end to the occupation of the Golan Heights. Therefore,
the Government of Argentina reiterates once again
the importance of resuming negotiations to find a
lasting solution to the situation in the Syrian Golan,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for peace.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me to express our
gratitude to all those who voted in favour of today’s
resolutions. We are very thankful that, in spite of
everything, for all the resolutions, the votes in favour
increased on average by 8 to 10 votes. That is a strong
illustration that the international community is still
committed to the cause of justice for the Palestinian
people. And we thank Member States again for that
very strong message that they have sent today.
Allow me also to express our gratitude and thanks
to the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, my twin
brother, Ambassador Cheikh Niang, and to all members
of the Bureau and members of the Committee for their
tireless efforts to advance justice for the Palestinian
people and for all the great things that they have been
doing over the years to get us closer to the finish
line, to justice, to the end of occupation and to the
independence of the sovereign State of Palestine on
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital and with justice for the Palestine refugees on the
basis of international law and resolution 194 (III).

A/77/PV.42

We are also grateful for the Division for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat and the Special
Information Programme on the Question of Palestine
of the Department of Global Communications of
the Secretariat.
We are also very grateful for the fact that
the Secretary-General named the annual training
programme for young Palestinian journalists
the Shireen Abu Akleh Training Programme for
Palestinian Broadcasters and Journalists. By naming
the programme after her, we will remember Shireen
Abu Akleh in a very deserving way.
We are very grateful to those who are sitting in
their seats and who stayed the course and listened to
long statements and a long debate in the morning and
this afternoon and cast the vote the way they did to say
to the Palestinian people:
“We are with you. You will not be left behind.
We will not abandon you. And we will continue
expressing our solidarity with you until you attain
your inalienable rights.”
This evening they are sending the message to our
people in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and the besieged Gaza Strip and the millions
of Palestinians everywhere that the international
community is with them, with justice, with international
law and with relevant United Nations resolutions. For
all those things, we thank Member States again. I will
not make this any longer, because it was a very long day.
I want to congratulate the President for a
courageous statement yesterday (see A/AC.183/PV.409)
in the celebration of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People and for his statement today
at the beginning of the debate (see A/77/PV.41). I must
also congratulate the President for your his in speaking
to us in several official languages of the United
Nations. Most important to me, I want to congratulate
him for his sophisticated Arabic language. He is really
a true Arabic scholar, using the language very well
and appropriately.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 32.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

22-7168421/21
