VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November 1982
37/26.

Question of the United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States Vir­
gin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In­
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 16
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to the United
States Virgin Islands,
Noting with appreciation the continued active participa­
tion of the administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the United States Virgin Islands,
thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and mean­
ingful examination of the situation in the Territory and ex­
pressing its satisfaction at the willingness of the administering
Power to receive visiting missions in the Territories under
its administration,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power, 17
Taking note of the fact that the proposed constitution
submitted to a referendum on 3 November 1981 after an
extensive debate was not accepted by the people of the
Territory,
Bearing in mind that the territorial Government has taken
positive steps by adopting legislation designed to solve the
problem of aliens in the Territory,
Noting that the territorial Government has pursued its
efforts to diversify the economy and noting also the progress
achieved in the fields of construction and manufacturing,
including developments in oil refining and the production
of alumina and rum,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts to revitalize health
care programmes and to discourage juvenile delinquency,
the measures to improve crime prevention and the action
taken to expand and upgrade school facilities,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United
States Virgin Islands; 18
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands to self-determination and in­
dependence in conformity with the Declaration on the Grant­
ing of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy im­
plementation of the Declaration contained in General As­
sembly resolution 1514 (XV). which fully applies to the
United States Virgin Islands;
16
17

Ibid., chaps. III. IV and XXIV.
Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Fourth Committee. 20th meeting,

paras. 13-18.

18
Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session. Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev.1 ),
chap. XXIV.

225

4. Calls upon the administering Power, taking into ac­
count the freely expressed wishes of the people of the United
States Virgin Islands, to take all necessary steps to expedite
the process of decolonization in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Declaration, as well as all other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is the obligation of the administering
Power, in consultation with the territorial Government, to
inform the local people of the possibilities open to them,
so as to enable them to exercise freely and without inter­
ference their inalienable right to self-determination and in­
dependence in accordance with General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and, in this respect, calls upon the administering
Power to facilitate the work of the recently established Status
Commission and to ensure that the people are fully informed
of the discussions concerning the future political status of
the Territory;
6. Urges the administering Power to expedite the pas­
sage of legislation currently before the Congress of the United
States of America concerning the problem of aliens in the
Territory;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power
under the Charter for the economic and social development
of the Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to strengthen the economy of
the Territory by taking additional measures of diversification
in all fields and developing an adequate infrastructure;
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the Government of the United States Virgin Islands, to safe­
guard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to
the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective
measures which guarantee the right of the people to own
and dispose of those resources and to establish and maintain
control of their future development;
10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to continue to improve social
conditions and to pay particular attention to overcoming
problems of unemployment, public housing, health care,
education and crime;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the ex­
amination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the United
States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in consul­
tation with the administering Power, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
77th plenary meeting
23 November /982
37/27.

Question of Montserrat

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Montserrat,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of In­
dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 19
Having also examined the report of the United Nations
visiting rnission20 dispatched to the Territory in August 1982,
19
20

Ibid .. chaps. Ill and XXV111
AIAC.109/722.
