190

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

and political affairs of society and in the endeavour to promote international peace and co-operation;
2. Appeals to all Governments to take the necessary
measures to put into practice the principies and provisions
ofthe Declaration on the Participation of Women in Promoting International Peace and Co-operation;
3. Invites all Governments to give wide publicity to the
Declaration and its implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
adequate steps to ensure that publicity is given to the Declaration;
5. Invites all appropriate bodies of the United Nations
system that have not yet done so, including the regional
commissions and the specialized agencies, to develop and
implement comprehensive policies on the three objectives
ofthe United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace and to incorporate them in their
medium-term plans, statements of objectives, programmes
and other major policy statements;
6. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to
give adequate attention to all the priority themes under
the headings of equality, development and peace on account ofthe complexity of all the matters addressed in the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement
of Women and in other policy documents, including the
participation of women in promoting international peace
and co-operation;
7. Decides to consider the further implementation of
the Declaration at its forty-third session, as a sub-item of
the item entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women to the year 2000".

85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987
42/62.

Implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 40/108 of 13 December 1985 and 41/111 of
4 December 1986, in which, inter afia, it endorsed the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement
ofWomen40 for the period up to the year 2000 and set out
measures for their immediate implementation and for the
overall achievement of the goals and objectives of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Taking into consideration Economic and Social Council
resolutions 1987/18, 1987/19, 1987/20, 1987/21,
1987/22, 1987/23, 1987/24, 1987/25 and 1987/26 of
26 May 1987,
Taking note of the Guiding Principies for Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes in the Near
Future, 21 adopted by the Interregional Consultation on
Developmental Social W elfare Policies and Programmes,
held at Vienna from 7 to 15 September 1987,
Noting with concern the serious impact of the world economic situation on the programmes and plans for the advancement of women, especially in the global context,
Conscious of the important and constructive contribution to the advancement of the status of women made by
the Commission on the Sta tus of W ornen, the specialized
agencies, the regional commissions and other organizations ofthe United Nations system, Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,

Emphasizing once again the priority of the implementation, monitoring, review and appraisal ofthe Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies,
Welcoming the significant progress made by the Commission on the Status of Wornen at its special session in
1987 in restructuring its agenda along functional lines, developing a systematic long-term programme of work,
strengthening and rationalizing its role and functions and
mobilizing the resources of the United Nations system as a
whole towards the advancement of women by integrating
this objective into the programme planning and budgeting
processes of the Organization,
Welcoming also the designation by the SecretaryGeneral of the advancement of women as one of two priorities of the Organization for the next biennium,
Recognizing the need for the Commission on the Status
of Women to consider at its regular sessions the priority
themes for the next five sessions of the Commission, contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1987 /24,
l. Takes note ofthe reports ofthe Secretary-General48
concerning the implementation of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies for the Advancement of Women;
2. Takes note also of resolutions 1, 2 and 4 adopted by
the Commission on the Status of Women at its special session in 1987,49 in particular its recommendation that the
implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies and the status of women in general should be incorporated as a global priority for the period 1990-1995 in the
introduction of the Organization's next medium-term
plan;
3. Reaffirms the need for the Forward-looking Strategies to be translated immediately into concrete action by
Governments, as determined by overall national priorities,
as well as by the organizations of the United Nations system, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations;
4. Reaffirms also the central role of the Commission
on the Status of Women in matters related to the advancement of women and calls upon the Commission to promote the implementation of the Forward-looking Strategies to the year 2000 based on the goals of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace and the subtheme "Employment, Health and Education", and urges all organizations ofthe United Nations
system to co-operate with the Commission in this task;
5. Reaffirmsfurther, in the implementation ofthe Forward-looking Strategies, the role of the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs ofthe Secretariat,
in particular the Branch for the Advancement of Women,
as the substantive secretariat of the Commission on the
Status of Women and as a focal point for matters on
women, the catalysing role of the United Nations Development Fund for Women and the role ofthe International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women in the promotion ofthe role ofwomen in the context of the participation of women in development;
6. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1987 /21, in which the Council, in ter afia, decided that the
Commission on the Status of Women, commencing with
its thirty-second session, should meet annually until the
year 2000, with a long-term programme of work that
would allow sufficient preparation for each session;

48 A/42/516 and A/42/528.
49 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1987.
Supplement No. 2 (E/1987/15). chap. I, sect. C.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Endorses also Economic and Social Council resolution 1987 /24, in particular the annex thereto containing
the priority themes for the next five sessions of the Commission on the Status ofWomen, which should be considered at regular sessions of the Commission under an
agenda item entitled "Priority themes", notwithstanding
world conferences and preparatory meetings or any process of review and appraisal that might take place;
8. Requests the relevant United Nations bodies to provide focused and action-oriented input when reporting to
the Commission on the priority themes;
9. Reaffirms the need for the United Nations to develop an integrated reporting system with the Commission
on the Status of Women at its centre and, building upon
existing information and resources, to monitor the review
and appraisal of progress with regard to the advancement
ofwomen, based on clear and relevant statistical and other
measurable indicators which will assist Member States in
identifying problems and in developing remedial measures, at the national, regional and international levels;
10. Encourages the Special Commission of the Economic and Social Council on the In-depth Study of the
United Nations Intergovernmental Structure and Functions in the Economic and Social Fields to take into consideration the unique multidisciplinary and crossorganizational mandate of the Commission on the Status
of Women, which is of particular importance in coordinating the efforts of the United Nations in the economic and social fields towards the advancement of
women;
11. Emphasizes, in the framework of the Forwardlooking Strategies, the importance of the total integration
of women in the development process, bearing in mind the
specific and urgent needs of the developing countries, and
calls upon Member States to establish specific targets at
each level in order to increase the participation of women
in professional and decision-making positions in their
countries;
12. Emphasizes a/so the need to give urgent attention
to redressing socio-economic inequities at the national and
international levels as a necessary step towards the full
realization of the goals and objectives of the Forwardlooking Strategies;
13. Urges that particular attention be given by the
United Nations and Governments to the situation of disabled women, and that Governments take steps to ensure
the equalization of opportunities and social justice for and
political participation of disabled women in each sector of
society;
14. Once again calls upon the Secretary-General and
the executive heads of the specialized agencies and other
United Nations bodies to establish five-year targets at each
level for the percentage of women in Professional and
decision-making positions, in accordance with the criteria
established by the General Assembly, in particular that of
equitable geographical distribution, in order that a definite
upward trend in the implementation of Assembly resolution 41/206 D of 11 December 1986 be registered in the
number of Professional and decision-making positions
held by women by 1990, and to set additional targets every
five years;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to extend the term
of office of the Co-ordinator for the Improvement of the
Status of Women in the Secretariat ofthe United Nations
for a satisfactory period to ensure that the action programme, 5° in which, inter alia, it is recommended that the
50 A/C.5/40/30, sect. III B.

191

situation of women in the Secretariat be improved, will
continue to be implemented;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments, organizations of the United Nations system, including the regional commissions and the specialized
agencies, and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to report periodically, through the Commission on the Status of Women, to the Economic and Social
Council on activities undertaken at all levels to implement
the Forward-looking Strategies;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in
his report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the Forward-looking
Strategies an assessment of recent developments that are
relevant to the priority themes to be considered at the
subsequent session of the Commission on the Status of
Women and to transmit to the Commission a summary of
relevant views expressed by delegations during the Assembly's debate;
18. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-third session on measures taken to implement the present resolution;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide for the existing weekly radio programmes on women
in the regular budget ofthe United Nations, with adequate
provisions for broadcasts in different languages, and to develop the focal point for issues relating to women in the
Department of Public lnformation of the Secretariat,
which, in concert with the Centre for Social Development
and Humanitarian Affairs, should provide a more effective
public information programme relating to the advancement of women;
20. Decides to consider these questions further at its
forty-third session under the item entitled "Forwardlooking strategies for the advancement of women to the
year 2000".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/63.

United Nations Development Fund for Women

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the United Nations Development
Fund for Women is to serve as a catalyst in the United Nations development co-operation system, with the goal of
ensuring the appropriate involvement of women in
mainstream development activities at the pre-investment
stages, and to support activities directly benefiting women
in line with national and regional priorities,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987 /26 of 26 May 1987 on the observance of the tenth
anniversary ofthe United Nations Development Fund for
Women,
l. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General51
containing the report of the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme and the report of the
Consultative Committee on the United Nations Development Fund for Women at its twenty-first session, and welcomes the constructive co-operation between the Programme and the Fund;
2. Takes note also with satisfaction of the success of the
ceremonies celebrating the tenth anniversary of the Fund
and expresses its appreciation to all who participated in
the ceremonies;
3. Expresses its appreciation also for the financial contributions to the Fund made by Governments, intergov51

A/42/597/Rev.l.
