S/2007/64

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 February 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 6 February 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1721 (2006) of
1 November 2006, in which the Security Council invited the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to review, before
1 February 2007, the progress achieved in the implementation of the peace process,
and requested them to report to the Council, through the Secretary-General, on their
assessment.
In this regard, I wish to convey the attached report on the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire, prepared by the ECOWAS Commission pursuant to paragraph 21 of the
aforementioned resolution (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-23202 (E) 140207

*0723202*

S/2007/64

Annex
Situation report on Côte d’Ivoire
31 January 2007

I.

Introduction
1.
The mandate given to the transitional Prime Minister, which was confirmed by
the United Nations Security Council, is to implement all the provisions of the road
map drawn up by the International Working Group and the Agreements concluded
between the Ivorian parties, with a view to holding free, open, fair and transparent
elections by 31 October 2007, with the support of the United Nations and potential
donors. By resolution 1721 (2006) of 1 November 2006, the transitional Prime
Minister is charged with the responsibility of executing the following programmes:
– Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
– Citizen identification and voter registration, as the basis for the
compilation of a credible electoral list.
– Disarmament and dismantling of the militias.
– Restoration of State authority and of the administration and public
services through the territory of Côte d’Ivoire.
– Technical preparations for the elections.
– The restructuring of the armed forces in accordance with paragraph 17 of
the decision of the African Union Peace and Security Council and
paragraph 3, article (f), of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
2.
The present report is in compliance with paragraph 21 of Security Council
resolution 1721 (2006) by which the Council requested the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union to continue to monitor and
closely follow up implementation of the peace process, and called on them to review
progress achieved, by 1 February 2007. The Security Council also requested the two
Institutions to present their assessment through the Secretary-General, and, if
necessary, submit any new recommendations to the Council.

II.

Status of implementation of resolution 1721 (2006)
3.
A significant development during the period under review was the Presidential
Dialogue Initiative announced by President Laurent Gbagbo on 18 December 2006,
and repeated in his New Year address to the nation, by which he engages the New
Forces in direct negotiations designed to resolve the five-year-old conflict. The
rationale for this approach was the acknowledgement that previous peace efforts had
failed, hence the need to engage the major protagonist in direct talks, and resolve
the crisis without outside interference. He put forward a five-point proposal that
remained significantly silent on the Security Council framework embodied in
resolution 1721 (2006).
4.
The response from the New Forces to the latest Presidential Dialogue Initiative
welcomed the move towards direct talks, but only within the framework of

2

07-23202

S/2007/64

resolution 1721 (2006), the said talks serving only as a mechanism for the
implementation of the peace plan as identified in the resolution.
5.
Despite the current stalemate in the Ivorian peace process, it is relevant to
report certain positive developments that have taken place. The Transitional Prime
Minister has continued to implement the day-to-day administrative programmes
contained in the approved road map, through the Council of Ministers of which he is
the Chairman. These include:
– The establishment of the working group on the preparations for the
citizen identification exercise and the establishment of a voters register.
The Prime Minister’s office has met with the principal actors in the
identification exercise, namely, the judiciary, court clerks/recorders and
medical personnel, mayors etc., in order to clarify the procedure involved
and its legal implications. Resumption of the identification exercise was
scheduled for 15 January 2007, by which time the issue of the
appointment of 208 additional courts and the appellate court would have
been resolved.
– Tenders for the selection of the principal operators to carry out the
identification exercise on behalf of the Government have been opened
and are being screened in conjunction with the United Nations High
Representative for the elections and UNOCI.
– On the issue of disarmament, work is ongoing on the preparation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration sites for ex-combatants.
The Quadripartite Monitoring Group established pursuant to the visit of
the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, to Yamoussoukro on 4 July 2006, has
been constituted, but has yet to carry out verification of the
pre-regroupment exercise, since work on the sites is yet to be concluded.
Meanwhile, a seminar on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
was organized in Yamoussoukro on 27 and 28 November 2006.
– The disarming and dismantling of the militias which was discontinued
during the National Programme for Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration in August 2006 has yet to resume. However, discussions
with the militia leaders on modalities for the resumption of the exercise
are ongoing under the auspices of the Prime Minister.
Major constraints
6.
As emphasized in the ECOWAS recommendations to the African Union, dated
October 2006, the entire peace process depends to a large extent on the degree of
confidence and collaboration between the two major executive arms of
government — the President and the Transitional Prime Minister on the one hand,
and all sections of the political class involved in the crisis, on the other.
7.
However, there is still great concern over the manifest lack of political will to
implement resolution 1721 (2006) and thereby advance the peace process. The
political class continues to exhibit a lukewarm attitude towards the crisis and
consequently to many crucial issues.
8.
Relations between the President and the Prime Minister are anything but
cordial. For example, since the adoption of resolution 1721 (2006), the Council of

07-23202

3

S/2007/64

Ministers, which is presided by the President, with the Prime Minister in attendance,
and formally adopts decisions and proposals presented by the Executive Council,
which is presided by the Prime Minister, has met only once. The tandem of
President and Prime Minister, as acknowledged by the Prime Minister himself, is no
longer pedalling in the same direction.
9.
There are other points of divergence hinging on issues of governance, such as
the handling of the toxic waste scandal during which the President reinstated
government officials accused in an ad hoc report and suspended by the Prime
Minister, the dismissal, again by the President, of the Directors-General of the
Radio and Television Corporation and the Print Media Group, Fraternité Matin, as
well as the dissolution of the Board of Directors of these State media groups.
The Mediation Group
10. In response to the worsening stalemate in the peace process and its
repercussions on the already unstable socio-political and security situation, a
delegation of the Mediation Group led by General Jean-Marie Mokoko, Chairman of
the Group and Special Representative of the African Union Chairman in Côte
d’Ivoire, undertook a consultative mission to the Heads of State of Nigeria, the
Niger, Burkina Faso and the Congo, to brief them on the lack of improvement in the
situation in the country, the implementation status of resolution 1721 (2006) and,
more particularly, to entreat their intervention in order to move the stalled process
forward.
11. A similar approach was proposed to the ECOWAS Council of Ministers,
through a report presented at its meeting on 22 December 2006 in Ouagadougou.

III.

Decision of the Authority of Heads of State and Government
12. The Authority of Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community
of West African States at its thirty-first session, held in Ouagadougou on 19 January
2007, having deliberated on and reviewed the situation in Côte d’Ivoire, decided as
follows:
(a) They expressed deep concern over the persistence of the crisis and
stressed the need to find a lasting solution to the crisis, based on the immediate
concomitant launching of a programme of citizen identification and disarming of the
armed groups in order to create the necessary conditions for the organization of free,
fair and credible elections by October 2007.
(b) The Authority called upon all Ivorian political forces to cooperate in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1721 (2006).
(c) They welcomed the political dialogue initiative by President Laurent
Gbagbo, for direct talks with Minister of State Guillaume Soro. The Authority
further enjoined its Chairman to facilitate the dialogue so as to give momentum to
the peace process.
(d) The Authority, in addition decided, in consultation with the African
Union, to send a high-level delegation to the permanent members of the Security
Council, with a view to exploring the ways and means of ensuring diligent
application of resolution 1721 (2006) depending on the outcome of the dialogue.

4

07-23202

S/2007/64

(e) The Authority called upon the United Nations Security Council to visit
Côte d’Ivoire to add further impetus to the peace process.

IV.

Latest developments
13. The current Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States,
President Blaise Compaore, subsequent to the Summit decisions, held talks, first
with the Ivorian President Laurent Gbagbo in Ouagadougou and, thereafter, with
Minister of State Guillaume Soro, of the Forces nouvelles in Bobo Dioulasso, in an
effort to ensure a speedy engagement of the “direct talks” proposed by President
Gbagbo.
14. The Heads of State and Government of the African Union at their Summit in
Addis Ababa on 29 and 30 January 2007 similarly welcomed the proposed direct
talks as a mechanism to advance the peace process.

V.

Observation
15. The socio-political situation in Côte d’Ivoire continues to generate great
concern, and remained tense during the period under review. Any mediation effort
must be premised on the need to ensure a harmonious relationship between the
“direct talks” and the timely implementation of resolution 1721 (2006), President
Laurent Gbagbo and the Transitional Prime Minister, Konan Banny.

VI.

Recommendations
16. In view of the developments highlighted in the present report, the Economic
Community of West African States hereby appeals to the United Nations
Secretary-General to request the Security Council to remain actively seized of the
situation in Côte d’Ivoire. More importantly, ECOWAS would wish the
Secretary-General to recommend to the Security Council to visit Côte d’Ivoire in the
next few months as a means of re-energizing implementation of resolution 1721
(2006).

07-23202

5
