S/PV.7621

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7621

st meeting
Monday, 15 February 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rodríguez Gómez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Augusto
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Ibáñez
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as
a key element for the maintenance of international peace and security
Letter dated 1 February 2016 from the Permanent Representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/103)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-03880 (E)
*1603880*

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Respect for the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations as a key element
for the maintenance of international peace and
security
Letter dated 1 February 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/103)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to warmly welcome to the Security Council the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
whose presence in the Chamber today underscores the
importance of the subject we are discussing.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Maldives, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland, the Republic
of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sweden, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Gonzalo
Koncke, Permanent Observer of the Organization of
American States to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in

2/92

15/02/2016

accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in that regard.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/103, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 February 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the presidency of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for having organized this open debate on a theme of
great importance to the United Nations.
(spoke in English)
Today’s event continues the useful discussion
initiated last year under the Chinese presidency. The
year 2015 saw important steps taken to uphold the
values and advance the vision set out in the Charter
of the United Nations. Reviews of the international
peace and security architecture provided valuable ideas
for strengthening our work in conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development ( General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
the Paris Agreement on climate change demonstrated
our capacity to overcome divisions and chart a course
towards the common good.
While we celebrate these achievements, we must
also recognize that 2015 was one of the most troubled
and turbulent years in recent history. Civil wars ravaged
Syria and Yemen. Violent extremism spread. The blatant
disrespect for fundamental principles of international
human rights and humanitarian law defies our common
humanity and challenges the Security Council in
fulfilling its duties under the Charter. For the millions
living amid war and extreme poverty, and for countless
others whose rights are violated or neglected in other
ways, the ideals and aspirations of the Charter remain
elusive. Bringing the promise of the Charter to the most
vulnerable must continue to be our goal.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Decades of experience have validated the Charter’s
vision. We understand better than ever that peace,
development and human rights are intrinsically
connected. We have seen that conflict-affected countries
generally experience the highest poverty rates and were
the least likely to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals. We know that human rights abuses are our most
effective early-warning signs of the instability that
often escalates into atrocity crimes.
The primary responsibility for preventing conflict
and protecting human rights lies with Member States.
It is clearly established in the Charter and reiterated in
numerous resolutions adopted by the Council, as well
as by the General Assembly. But in some situations,
Member States may lack the capacity to fulfil their
obligations. In others, it is Member States themselves
that are the main violators of human rights. The United
Nations can help Member States meet these national
challenges and uphold their responsibility to protect.
We continue to offer assistance in building up
national capacity to identify and address the precursors
of genocide and other grave crimes. The Human Rights
Up Front initiative is helping the United Nations system
to coordinate better across the peace and security,
development and human rights pillars, and to engage
with Member States at early stages of crises. We are
placing a growing focus on prevention through both
early warning and early action.
We should all much prefer to assess early
information than to wait for the warning signs of
disaster. We should be open to modest steps that could
address situations of concern before they grow more
serious and complex. Our engagement with Member
States on these matters will continue to be based on
cooperation, transparency and respect for sovereignty. I
know that at times Member States feel that such efforts
are a form of interference that undermines national
sovereignty, but it is violence and conflict — and not
our attempt to help Member States prevent them — that
threaten State sovereignty. It is violations of human
rights by the State that erode the legitimacy of the
State. In its engagements, the United Nations seeks to
reinforce sovereignty, not challenge or undermine it.
Article 99 of the Charter empowers the SecretaryGeneral to
“bring to the attention of the Security Council
any matter which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security”.

S/PV.7621

The General Assembly has recognized this as well.
Article 99 has been formally invoked only rarely in
United Nations history, but that does not mean it is no
longer operative or relevant, or that it cannot be invoked
in the future. It remains a key mechanism.
Whether or not Article 99 is formally invoked may
be secondary. First and foremost is our responsibility
to alert the Council when we see situations that we feel
require its engagement. I will continue to act in that
spirit. When considering which items reach the agenda
of the Security Council, my further hope is that we will
be driven by the Charter, not by geopolitical rivalries
or other external dynamics. When a Member State uses
an overly broad definition of terrorism to monopolize
power at the risk of long-term stability, that would seem
to merit the Council’s attention. When we see massive
loss of life and cross-border flows of people, that would
seem to merit the Council’s attention. We must not avert
our eyes from these or other such situations, no matter
how complex or contentious they might be to discuss.
And the world must see that the Council is addressing
the situations that matter most to most people.
The Security Council has many tools with which to
encourage and seek to secure the peaceful resolution of
disputes before they escalate, but ultimately the unity
of the Security Council is the crucial factor. We have
seen what heights are possible when unity is visible,
and we have seen the depths that are inevitable when
unity has vanished. We look forward to working with
Council members to best serve we the peoples in the
enduring spirit of the Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
I should like to offer a special welcome to the young
Venezuelans of the Venezuelan chapter of the Model
United Nations who are here with us this morning,
bearing witness to our discussion of the future of the
multilateral system and the right to international peace
and security.
I should like to begin by conveying the greetings of
the President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
His Excellency Mr. Nicolás Maduro Moros. I wish
to stress the importance to Venezuela of respect for
the international rule of law to the maintenance of

16-038803/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

international peace and security. There is a pressing
need to highlight the existing and often lethal means for
dismantling national and international legal orders as a
way to undermine one particular fundamental principle
of the Charter of the United Nations — the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States.
Throughout human history, war and conflict have
caused untold suffering that have hindered social
development and economic progress. The prevention of
conflicts has therefore always been a shared objective of
the international community. Ensuring and maintaining
peace as a principle and fundamental right are critical
to implementing not only the Millennium Development
Goals but also the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1),
adopted by the Organization on the occasion of its 70th
anniversary. We warmly thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his role in those initiatives.
This debate is all the more relevant for taking place
70 years after the establishment of the United Nations,
as it serves to remind us of the fundamental importance
of sovereign equality and of the fact that the purposes of
the Organization will be achieved only if States enjoy
such equality and fully fulfil the requirements of that
principle in the course of their international relations.
As the Secretary-General called for last year during the
presidency of the People’s Republic of China, we aim to
further entrench that aspect. Actively and permanently
promoting the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international law, including
honouring and fulfilling their provisions, are the
basis for ensuring the maintenance of international
peace and security. The sovereign equality of States,
national independence, unity and territorial integrity,
non-interference in internal affairs, non-aggression,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, cooperation and the
right of peoples to self-determination and the fostering
of friendly relations and cooperation among countries,
tolerance and peaceful coexistence as good neighbours
are the essential ingredients of world peace.
The Charter of the United Nations became the first
international multilateral legal instrument to expressly
and definitively prohibit war as a tool of foreign
policy. As such, the development of international
law is one of the most important aims of the United
Nations. The Preamble sets the goal of establishing
conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of

4/92

15/02/2016

international law can be maintained. As members are
aware, during the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, the General Assembly adopted a declaration
on the inadmissibility of intervention in the internal
affairs of States and on safeguarding independence
and sovereignty. For most countries without coercive
capacity or tools to impose conditions on inter-State
or regional relations, respect for international law is
the most important pillar for international peace and
security, including the obligation of all States to ensure
a more just and equitable world.
In the course of its history, the Organization has
had important achievements in the area of international
peace, security and cooperation. It has made significant
contributions to human rights, decolonization and
economic and social development. Nevertheless, the
world is in a constant state of needing stability and peace,
which makes it necessary to activate the mechanisms
and legal framework to address the challenges posed by
extreme violence, terrorism, intolerance and the spread
of hatred. There has been an almost three-fold increase
since 2008 in the number of ongoing civil wars — from
four to 11— which is in contrast to the long-running
trend we saw beginning in the 1990s. There are eight
armed conflicts in Africa alone, while four violent
conflicts in the Middle East have led to the dismantling
of sovereign States and made it possible for terrorists
and violent armed groups to take control.
The situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian
question is a case in point in which the Security Council
has had a crucial role and has adopted countless
resolutions. Yet that situation remains unresolved after
almost 70 years and continues to have a determining
impact on peace and security in a region that, for
the past five years, has suffered the consequences of
mistaken approaches to addressing solutions in a fair
and comprehensive way wherein, first and foremost,
the establishment of the Palestinian State constitutes
the basic, decisive element for peace in the region. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela — inspired by and
following in the footsteps of our eternal Commander
Hugo Chávez Frías — resolutely supports the
Palestinian cause for an independent, sovereign State
that — and we will never tire of saying it — has the
right to an immediate cessation of the criminal acts
of aggression on the part of Israel against its people,
including children, older persons and women, as well as
the right to finally legitimately recover its territories,
with the support of the international community.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

The phenomenon of terrorism, the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, protracted conflicts,
pending colonial situations and the instability and
violence in the Middle East and parts of Africa are
a result of approaches contrary to the purposes and
principles of international law and of the Charter of
the United Nations. Violating the rule of law therefore
leads to prolonged violent conflict. Humankind faces
the real threat of permanent war.
While we are here discussing the rule of
international law, intensive negotiations by a group
of countries are being held to urgently find a peaceful
resolution to the conflict in Syria, a country plagued by
terrorism and extreme violence as a way to delegitimize
the will of its people and bring about the disintegration
of its territory.
Many of the conflicts that have occurred over the
past seven decades could have been prevented if the
causes that generated them had not been repeatedly
linked to the particular interests of imperialist
domination. While developing countries have been
standard-bearers for the validity of and strict adherence
to the purposes and principles of the Charter, some of
the most developed countries have been determined
to act to the contrary, leading to unilateral acts of
aggression that negate the foundation and very essence
of the Organization and constant ambition to ensure
capitalist rule over countries’ natural resources,
while adhering to colonial and neocolonial strategies
and practices,. All of that has served to worsen
socioeconomic inequality, discrimination, xenophobia,
interventionism and violations of the right to selfdetermination. Paradoxically, they invade, assassinate,
pay mercenaries, occupy territory and usurp the
sovereignty and self-determination of peoples — all in
the name of democracy and human rights.
In addition to that, we should also note the
growing intrusion into the internal affairs of States
by Governments in violation of the principle of
non-interference. Attempts to ignore the right of
countries and peoples to decide their future, particularly
when it comes to defining for themselves their political,
economic and social systems, constitute an obstacle
to peaceful coexistence among nations, and thus to
international peace and security.
The world continues to suffer from a clash between
antagonistic models of economic exploitation by
hegemonic, imperial Powers that insatiably seek to

S/PV.7621

appropriate natural resources and raw materials to
satisfy the interests of a global minority. According to
the Oxfam report for 2015, 1 per cent of the world’s
population has wealth equivalent to 99 per cent of
the rest of the population. The capitalist system has
therefore been transformed internally in order to
ensure its survival and hegemonic domination, even at
the cost of jeopardizing the existence of humankind.
That essential transformation has been accompanied
by real forces that have recently transformed the
nature of conflicts and of the threats to international
peace and security. Conflicts today do not just concern
military confrontations, but also encompass economic
strangulation, psychological wars, social devastation
and financial and technological strangulation — all
of which have a negative impact on the stability of
countries, undermine sovereignty and contravene the
principle of non-interference in internal affairs.
The dismantling of the rule of law at the national
and international levels entails using powerful,
unconventional methods of war whereby the military
occupation of vast amounts of territories serves to further
institutional vulnerability and the delegitimizaition of
sovereign States already heavily weakened by those
real forces I mentioned.
Latin America, a region of peace, is today suffering
real threats that could lead to the fragmentation of its
independent national States. The neoliberal era — which
was supplanted by models of development focused on
the internal capacities, technologies and potentials of
our countries that turned away from the colonial yokes
that sought only to plunder our wealth — is trying
to make a comeback in our region through the use of
unconventional means for the dismantling of the rule
of law at the national level and the substitution of the
institutions of governance by the forces I referred to.
Coups d’états have been assuming new forms and have
been attempting to weaken institutions, provoked by
the meddling of those Powers outside international
law in line with undemocratic and violent factors that
promote hatred and intolerance.
The severity and complexity of the challenges
currently being faced require a determined approach by
the United Nations, particularly by the Security Council,
to enable Member States to agree on new multilateral
approaches that can respond within the framework of
the purposes and principles of the Charter in situations
that may arise from those new threats to the sovereignty
and political independence of countries. The Bolivarian

16-038805/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its full respect for
those values and calls attention to the risks and threats
that undermine their application and compromise the
ability of Member States in their complete, effective
implementation, with a view to strengthening
international peace and security. We firmly maintain
the necessity of rebuilding the multilateral framework
in order to urgently safeguard the rule of law to rein in
the shadow forces that seek to violently dominate the
world with their own laws, putting aside international
governance. They constitute real risks and threats to
the world, with the substitution of their multilateral
governance for the de facto powers that have effectively
limited the independence and sovereignty of countries.
To do that, it is necessary, within the sphere of the
Security Council, to avoid the application of double
standards. We the members of the Council need to be
the strongest and main defenders of international law,
the rule of law and the purposes and principles in the
Charter of the United Nations. We must set the example.
We must reject the application of double standards in
the addressing issues that affect international peace and
security. In addition, in order to safeguard and fully
uphold the purposes and the principles of the Charter,
Member States must reject and refrain from applying
unilateral coercive measures and national legislation
with extraterritorial effects. They also should not be
bringing to the Security Council issues that rightly
belong to the jurisdiction of States, in accordance with
paragraph 7, Article 2, of the Charter.
I would like to reiterate our position, voiced
during the seventieth session of the General Assembly,
in which we highlighted the need for the United
Nations to adapt its bodies to submit to the general
sovereignty of the peoples of the world who demand
that their voices be heard and respected. As our eternal
Commander Hugo Chávez said, we need to democratize
and adapt the United Nations and its bodies to
today’s challenges — challenges that flow from the
displacement of the multilateral system of the rule of
law by de facto powers.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Augusto (Angola): At the outset, let me
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Delcy Rodríguez Gómez,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic

6/92

15/02/2016

of Venezuela, and to thank her for presiding over this
open debate on the critical issue of respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and its purposes and principles.
We also wish to welcome and thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban-Ki-Moon, for his comprehensive and
thoughtful briefing.
The founding of the United Nations and the
adoption of the Charter was a remarkable achievement
for the international community — setting principles
for the development of friendly relations among
nations, establishing a principled commitment to
maintain international peace and security, declaring
the goal of achieving international cooperation in
solving international problems and creating a centre for
harmonizing the actions of the nations. Those purposes
and principles have became pillars of international
law and the framework of support for a system of
collective security that, despite setbacks, over the past
70 years has made the United Nations the centre of
international efforts to make the world more peaceful
based on respect for international law, human rights
and cooperation among all peoples and nations.
To maintain international peace and security is the
first purpose inscribed in the Charter. The prescription
to that end is the mobilization of collective action for
the prevention and removal of threats to peace. Through
such a multilateral approach, the United Nations became
the main forum for collective, multilateral action by the
international community, not only in the maintenance
of peace but in other domains of life as well.
The General Assembly, as a main organ of the
United Nations, has responsibilities that cannot be
declined in the maintenance of international peace
and security. However, it is on the security Council
that the Charter and the Member Sates entrust special
powers on matters pertaining to international peace
and security. By delegating to the Security Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and for acting on
its behalf, throughout the years the United Nations
membership has been providing tangible political and
material support to the Security Council, permitting
the discharge of its mandate in a world that is ever more
complicated and bellicose.
The Security Council has powers, inter alia, to
determine whether a situation constitutes a threat to
peace, to make recommendations and decide upon
provisional measures, to decide on measures, whether

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

or not involving the use of armed force, to mobilize
forces and assistance from Member States, and to plan
for the application of armed forces. In the discharge
of that powerful mandate, conferred upon it by the
international community, the Security Council is
bound, according to the Charter, to act in accordance
with its purposes and principles, putting the Security
Council, as powerful as it might be, under the scrutiny
of the Charter provisions, whose principles the Security
Council is bound to abide by.
To develop friendly relations among nations is
the second purpose inscribed in the Charter, while
respecting the principle of equal rights and the right
of all peoples to self-determination, with the final aim
of strengthening universal peace. Those principles,
establishing the pattern for relations among Member
States, became the cornerstone of contemporary
international relations: sovereign equality, the
fulfilment by States of their obligations in good faith,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, non-interference
in other countries’ internal affairs, refraining from the
threat or use of force, solidarity with United Nations
preventive or enforcement actions against any State and
the primacy of enforcement measures under Chapter
VII.
Those principles have become commonplace in
diplomatic life, an integral part of diplomatic documents
and a part of common knowledge in international
relations. However, the reality is not so rosy as the
proponents of the Charter idealized. The purposes and
the principles enshrined in the Charter are violated
time and again. Interference in other countries’ internal
affairs and violations of sovereignty are a quite common
and well-known feature of international relations, which
is in clear disrespect for the Charter, while negatively
impacting international peace and security. Therefore,
the need arises for a renewed approach in meeting the
noble purposes and principles of the Charter in order to
address evolving global dynamics and challenges.
To achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems is the third purpose inscribed
in the Charter — which, in our view, has been the
most successful and the most tangible contribution
of the United Nations to world peace and security.
International cooperation under United Nations auspices
comprises, inter alia, the fight against terrorism and
international crime, human rights, social and economic
development, climate change, epidemics, humanitarian
assistance and migration. Specialized agencies make

S/PV.7621

a unique contribution to international cooperation
development in all sectors of human activity — from
food and agriculture to health, labour, education,
culture, intellectual property, refugees, commerce,
atomic energy, and the list could go on and on.
Moreover, the United Nations presence in all Member
States through country teams or other structures attests
to the scope and importance of the United Nations
system in promoting international cooperation to solve
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian character.
Finally, the United Nations, as a centre for
harmonizing the action of nations, must meet the aims
of the Charter. In its role as the world parliament, the
General Assembly’s agenda and its influential work
attest to the international community’s commitment to
multilateralism. The willing participation of States in
the debate and decision-making process translate good
will and awareness on the importance of cooperating on
a wide range of issues that are matters of concern for the
entire international community. The recent adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), the outcome of the latest
Conference on Financing for Development and the
recent holding of the Climate Change Conference are
but a few instances the importance the United Nations
has assumed as the privileged centre for harmonizing
the actions of nations.
This is an excellent opportunity for once again
reaffirming our faith in, and commitment to, the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which remain as valid and as relevant as they
were at the time of the Charter’s adoption. Member
States are resolutely called upon to accept and apply
those principles as a recognition of the primacy of
law in international relations, where dialogue is the
best solution to solve international problems and avoid
recourse to the use of force.
Finally, we wish to commend the Venezuelan
presidency of the Security Council for providing us this
opportunity to discuss and take stock of our collective
responsibility at a time when the international
community faces enormous global challenges, such
as the proliferation of conflicts, famines, epidemics,
climate change and so on. To face such challenges,
international cooperation under United Nations
auspices is a key element.

16-038807/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by endorsing the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Venezuelan presidency for
having convened this open debate. The chosen subject
is fully topical and relevant.
In February 2015, at the initiative of the Chinese
presidency, we met to reflect on the importance of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace
and security (see S/PV.7389). I had an opportunity
then to refer to a number of points, to which I now
only enumerate: the full validity of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations 70 years
after they were drafted; the importance of the Preamble
of the Charter, whose values complement the triptych
that guides the actions of the Organization; and the
firm commitment of my country with all of them, which
is reflected in the initiative promoted by Spain on a
statement delivered to mark the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations, adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly, by which all Members renewed their
commitment to the Charter as a whole, and in particular
to its essential core made up of the values, purposes and
principles contained therein.
We note that local and regional conflicts are
increasing and that the action of the Organization in
maintaining international peace and security is not
what we would wish. There is therefore an urgent
need to continue to work to develop instruments that
will fully guarantee and uphold the values, purposes
and principles established in the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as to adapt those instruments to the
most fluid and complex international environment
since the post-Second World War period.
The observer of the African Union said a year ago,
“The question today is how to ensure that we
will fulfil the gap between the principles set forth
and the results we achieve each time that action is
taken.” (S/PV. 7389, p. 67)
I agree. We must focus the debate in the realm of the
practical, so that it is productive. We have not we heard
discordant voices, then or two day, questioning the
validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
We appreciate the nuances with which each Member
State proclaims its attachment to them depending on its
history or international profile, but, again, we note no

8/92

15/02/2016

rebuttal as to validity. However, there are differences
when it comes time to translating our words into
action — some concern nuance, but others are more
substantive. Debates like this should serve to identify
those discrepancies and to try to expand and strengthen
the consensus on the practical application of the values,
purposes and principles of the Charter. To that end, I
would like today to share with members a few thoughts.
The San Francisco Charter is the basic norm
governing coexistence in the international community.
Among its purposes and principles, as recalled by
the concept note (S/2016,103, annex), respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States is a crucial
safeguard for peace and stability. Violation thereof
inevitably results in chaos, violence and a return to
a state of nature of the past. The 1975 Helsinki Final
Act reaffirmed respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity as a fundamental principle for cooperation
and security in Europe. I would like to reiterate the full
validity of that concept here today.
International peace and security are inextricably
linked to respect for human rights, as the SecretaryGeneral said earlier. They are two sides of the same
coin, which is perhaps the reason that the drafters of the
Charter focused on it: safeguarding future generations
from the scourge of war and reaffirming faith in the
fundamental rights of man and in the dignity and
worth of the human being. Increasingly, we see the
close relationship between those two pillars of the
Organization, as well as the relationship of each one of
them with the third, namely, development. We need to
maximize the synergies that exist among those various
concepts. Initiatives such as the Human Rights Up Front
initiative, which highlights the relationship between
human rights violations and the risk of conflict, deserve
our full support.
In addition, human rights issues need to be given
due weight on the agenda of the Security Council,
which must devote increasing attention to such issues.
During our presidency in October 2015, we tried to
give the utmost relevance to the high-level review
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. We believe that the high level of participation
and commitment on the part of those involved in that
exercise explains, in large measure, the successful
result — in the form of an agenda that is essential for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is crucial that we work to develop international
law so that all States, organizations and international
entities operate under the rule of law and the principles
of legality, while also respecting fundamental human
rights. We must also concentrate on improving
the international legal architecture. That requires
making the legal order — articulated around the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations — applicable to all States, organizations and
individuals. Those purposes and principles need to be
implemented in a determined international context,
which in 2016 is not the same as in 1945. The nature of
conflict is different today. A few decades ago threats
to national sovereignty came primarily from without.
Today, they primarily come from within, and they are
rooted in ethnic and identity issues, which undermine
collective rights, respect for democracy and individual
liberties and rights.
The barbarism of terrorist groups, non-State armed
actors and other groups also represents a serious threat.
In order to preserve State sovereignty, efforts need to
be made to respect those principles of law. The United
Nations needs to pay greater attention to emerging
crises and to the factors underlying those conflicts and
their root causes. The panels that were created last year
in order to evaluate and review peace operations, the
peacekeeping architecture and the issue of women and
peace and security are instrumental in that regard.
The Secretary-General’s plan of action to prevent
violent extremism is also an example to follow, in
as much as its multidimensional approach places
prevention at the heart of that proposal, by reinforcing
good governance, representative institutions, political
participation, quality education, decent work,
particularly for youth, and respect for the rights that
account for such an important component in that
strategy for preventing violent extremism. Spain also
attaches great importance to initiatives involving
preventive diplomacy on the national level. Currently,
we are working on the organization of a conference on
preventative diplomacy in the Middle East and North
Africa, which will take up, from a regional perspective,
the roles that democratic governance, civil society and
the participation of women play in the prevention of
conflicts in the Mediterranean.
Occasionally, the lack of capacity or willingness
on the part of some Governments to ensure the rule of
law and respect for human rights creates a culture that
readily promotes humanitarian conflict and crises, such

S/PV.7621

as that which is now affecting millions of individuals in
Syria, Yemen, Darfur, the Sudan, South Sudan, Burundi
and so many other areas of the world. The consequences
are felt in neighbouring countries. We must be very
clear with regard to that problem. Sovereignty entails
responsibilities, such as protecting civilians from the
risk of becoming the victims of mass atrocities. When
States do not shoulder those responsibilities, that
puts peace at risk. In this debate, the responsibility to
protect is particularly relevant in that regard. It should
be promoted, while also respecting the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly when States
are not up to the task of exercising their responsibilities.
In accordance with the Outcome Document of the
2005 World Summit (General Assembly resolution
60/1), Spain is convinced that it is important to
continue building consensus around the importance
of implementing the responsibility to protect. In that
connection, in June of last year in Madrid, Chile and
Spain organized the fifth meeting of the Global Network
of the Responsibility to Protect Focal Points. We
discussed the challenges and threats facing vulnerable
communities. In December, we organized with Chile
an Arria-formula debate on the responsibility to protect
and non-State actors, the first of that kind on that
subject for the Security Council.
In other situations that implys a threat to
international peace and security, the Charter offers an
entire series of measures, peaceful measures for settling
differences, and measures through the International
Criminal Court. Measures can range from mediation
to coercive efforts even. All of those measures are
consistent with the objective of carrying out the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and promoting their respect. What appears to
us as incoherent is inaction, especially on the part of
the Council, which is primarily charged with ensuring
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Too often, the Council has not been up to the
task of fulfilling its responsibility, because one of the
permanent members used the right of veto or threatened
to use it. Occasionally, the simple threat of using the
right of veto discourages the search for solutions and
contributes to the stagnation of conflicts. That paralysis
only prolongs the suffering of civilians and diminishes
the credibility of multilateralism as a means to face
the challenges of international security. The most
glaring example, in that regard, is the tragic situation
in Syria. Spain beseeches all the permanent members

16-038809/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Security Council to commit individually and
collectively to refrain from the right of veto when there
is evidence of atrocity crimes. Spain has supported and
signed the code of conduct proposed by Liechtenstein
and the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, which calls on all members of the Council to
refrain from using the right of veto in cases involving
mass atrocities or crimes against humanity.
To conclude, I call for a collective effort to continue
building on that which unites us, which is the validity
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Those are essential to the future of all
States and States’ security, both within and outside of
their borders. My country will continue to work with
all Members of the Organization to uphold those rights.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam, I would like to thank the Venezuelan
presidency of the Security Council for this current
month for presenting this extremely important subject
for a debate in the Council.
Undoubtedly, the Charter of the United Nations is
not merely an international legal document. Rather, it
is the result and the product of a painful experience
that humankind went through. At the end of the Second
World War, the world had come to realize that it is
extremely important to have a number of purposes
and principles, along with fundamental rules, so as to
preserve international peace and security and achieve
the development and protection of human rights for all
times. Those principles were included in the Charter and
have acquired the status of jus cogens and have became a
charter or constitution legitimizing international action
taken multilaterally by States. States are not permitted
even to agree to disagree on those principles. Despite
the ideals of the purposes, principles and the rules of
the Charter, their real essence should be represented in
their implementation and respect and the presence of
the political will to carry them out.
The world has witnessed conflicts and decadeslong cases of occupation and conflict. Terrorism is
spreading. The use of weapons of mass destruction has
occurred. There are great numbers of refugees, and we
have seen the large illegal movements of migrants as a
result of double standards and violations of the purposes,
principles and rules of the Charter, and the fact that
certain parties have asserted incorrect or distorted
interpretations in order to render those principles void
of their intent. Against the backdrop of the current

10/92

15/02/2016

extreme and deteriorating situation and because the
United Nations is the umbrella for our international
acts, based on the Charter, the Organization must
assume its responsibilities and develop and reform its
performance, so as to be able to continue discharging
its role according to its mandate. Otherwise, the
alternative will be the sidelining of the United Nations.
It will not be relied upon, but rather looked upon as an
Organization without credibility and unable to move or
take action.
We believe that it is necessary for the political will
to be present in order to commit ourselves to all the
purposes and principles of the Charter, in particular
the peaceful settlement of disputes. In that respect,
Egypt underlines the importance of implementing the
following steps. When it discusses the various issues,
the Security Council must remain objective in its
assessment of the dimensions of threats to international
peace and security. The Security Council must adopt
the natural path to address issues, in accordance to
the Charter, giving priority to the peaceful means of
settling disputes, while respecting national sovereignty
and the principle of noninterference in the internal
affairs of States and taking all necessary actions to
that end. Among other things, that includes asking
the Secretary-General to engage his good offices,
strengthening possibilities for mediation and gathering
information from fact-finding committees, asking the
International Court of Justice for advisory opinions,
and implementating paragraph 3 of Article 36 of the
Charter, which refers to legal disputes and conflicts
among the parties to the International Court of Justice.
If the Security Council is to be successful in that
regard, it must be promptly and steadily informed and
updated on cases of conflict or situations that, if left
unchecked, could lead to disputes or conflicts. That in
itself require would the strengthening of early-warning
mechanisms at the United Nations and in the various
regions, the openness of the Council, and coordination
with the various regional mechanisms to avoid disputes
and conflicts.
Secondly, every effort should be made to settle
disputes, especially protracted ones, in particular the
question of Palestine, so that the United Nations does
not continue to lose the confidence of the international
community and States do not seek alternative methods
outside, the scope of the United Nations, to obtain or
exercise their rights. It is also extremely important to
prevent countries in conflict from collapsing and not to

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

be content with addressing them in a traditional manner
or with moving slowly, which would lead to escalation
or aggravation and allow terrorists to use those areas as
their playground. It would then become very difficult to
attain peace and security.
Thirdly, we must review the right of the veto and
its — as it has been used before— to obstruct the
implementation of the principles and purposes of the
Charter.
Fourthly, the United Nations must develop its
peacebuilding and peacekeeping activities so that it
can ensure that conflicts do not erupt or re-emerge. It
is also extremely important to give the United Nations
added value in that regard.
Fifthly, it is extremely important to promote social
and economic aspects in the work of the United Nations
because they are among the fundamental pillars
of the Organization’s work, in particular since the
international community has adopted the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1) in September 2015. In addition, it
could compensate for the failure of the United Nations
to address various crises and challenges that have
threatened international peace and security. However,
the most important problem that we face in that regard
is finding the necessary funding for relevant activities
and projects.
Sixthly, on the question of counter terrorism, we
must prove to our peoples that the United Nations
can take serious action above and beyond the mere
adoption of articulate resolutions in closed chambers.
We are not less capable than the Da’esh organization
in planning, managing and acting. We must therefore
move ahead and make tangible achievements on the
ground to confront Da’esh and stop it from spreading its
ideas and ideologies, recruiting fighters, using modern
technology and social media, and obtaining funding
from various sources. In that regard, we believe that
it is extremely important to ensure coordination at the
highest level, be it among the counter-terrorism bodies
of the United Nations or the efforts made within and
outside the Organization to counter terrorism.
Finally, the Egyptian delegation supports the
expected summary of today’s debate in a document to
be issued by the President of the Council that would
include recommendations, as outlined in the concept
note and pursuant to the suggestions submitted by

S/PV.7621

the various States for implementation by the Security
Council and its various committees.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank the Venezuelan presidency of the Security
Council for having convened today’s debate on respect
for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations as a key element for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Following the debate
convened by the Uruguayan presidency in January on
the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7606), it is useful
for 2016 to begin with a review of our fundamental
principles. The Charter of the United Nations is first
and foremost a charter of our values and the core of
our action. It is a legacy to be treasured and remains as
relevant as ever.
Our concept note (S/2016/103, annex) invites us
to focus on the purposes and principles of the Charter
and, more specifically, on its Preamble and Chapter
I. On closer reading, we are struck by two challenges
that remain a concern for us. First, in the wake of a
devastating war, our main priority was to maintain
international peace and security. That remains a concern
for us 70 years later. As the concept note recalls, our
Organization has made considerable progress in that
regard thanks in particular to peacekeeping operations,
in which uniformed personnel from 123 countries
participate. Since 1948, 3,438 of them have lost their
lives. We mourn those lives lost and pay special tribute
to them. We owe our security to them. In basing its
actions on the Charter, the Security Council must not
only be able to address crises that threaten international
peace and security, but also know when to withdraw
once the situation has normalized.
The maintenance of international peace and
security has become an increasingly complex challenge
because of the rising terrorist threat. Terrorism affects
all continents. It undermines our societies and even
destabilizes some States. Resolution 2249 (2015)
describes Da’esh as an unprecedented global threat
to international peace and security. We must act
together to combat terrorism with unwavering resolve,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and in line with respect for our human rights and
international humanitarian law commitments.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is not the only objective set out in the United
Nations Charter. The Second World War was freedom’s
fight against disdain for the human person. That is

16-0388011/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

why those who drafted the Charter stressed respect for
human rights as being inextricably linked to economic
and social progress and development. That is the second
concern that emerges from any reading of the purposes
and principles of the Charter, as well as the Preamble.
In those two areas, I believe that we have the strength to
unite to confront formidable challenges. I will briefly
mention a few of these.
First, humanitarian crises ushered in 2016,
beginning with the tragedy in Syria, which is indeed
becoming a black hole that is crushing our very
values. The communiqué published in Munich by the
International Syria Support Group offers a glimmer
of hope that all players involved will honour all their
commitments tangibly and in good faith. In Syria, as in
Yemen and all situations of armed conflict, it is crucial
to comply with international humanitarian law. Such
compliance is not only a requirement for the peoples of
the United Nations, whom the Charter stipulates that we
protect, but it is also the best guarantee that the worst
will not occur in conflict situations and that peace
and reconciliation remain achievable. Now more than
ever, it is useful to stress that respect for international
humanitarian law is not a concession or a favour, but an
obligation.
The second challenge is upholding the rule of law
and international law. Such collective standards are
recalled in Article 2 of the Charter; they seek to restrict
the use of force within the boundaries of collective
responsibility. It is imperative that we do our all to settle
disputes by peaceful means. At The Hague on 18 April,
the International Court of Justice, whose Statute is
part and parcel of the Charter, will mark the seventieth
anniversary of its first public hearing. I pay tribute to
its central role in settling disputes and strengthening
international law.
Thirdly, France remains convinced that the best
protection against conflict is harmonious development
of States and societies, in all its aspects, while upholding
human rights. Are we rising to these challenges
contained in the purposes and principles of the Charter?
I think that 2015 saw two developments that restored
confidence in and vigour to multilateralism and our
Organization, demonstrating our ability to continue to
set collective goals and norms.
The first action was the adoption by the General
Assembly on 25 September 2015 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and its

12/92

15/02/2016

17 Goals to build a sustainable future and eradicate
poverty. The second action was the adoption of the Paris
Climate Agreement on 12 December 2015, less than one
month after the attacks that drowned the city in blood.
The Venezuelan Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is
presiding over this meeting, helped us by facilitating
the drafting of the preamble, which underscores the
intrinsic link between combating climate change, fair
access to resources and eradicating poverty. Other
ministers, ambassadors and facilitators contributed
in an inclusive and transparent manner to a universal
and ambitious Agreement to preserve our planet. They
made it possible for the Paris Agreement to become the
first universal environmental agreement that explicitly
refers to mandatory respect for human rights.
We will be opening the legally binding Paris
Agreement for signature here in New York on 22 April.
It is to be hoped that the largest number of countries
possible will sign the Agreement on that date, if possible
at the level of Head of State and Government, and then
ratify it as soon as possible. I pay tribute here to the
untiring initiative and support of Secretary-General
Ban ki-Moon for our collective efforts in this regard.
These last two outcomes demonstrate that the
multilateralism embodied by the United Nations is still
alive and overcoming the often violent paradoxes of
our time. Inclusive and transparent discussions open
to those who mandate pursuant to the Charter — we
the peoples — have allowed us to create new collective
rules within the Organization. It is now our obligation to
implement them. In that context, France has proposed,
with the suppport of more than 90 countries, that
the permanent members voluntarily and collectively
abstain from the use of the veto when mass atrocities
have been perpetrated.
This year of 2016 should be a year of action to find
solutions together to the conflicts in Syria, Yemen, the
Middle East and Libya; to prevent others, such as in
Burundi; to consolidate peace processes, such as in
those in Mali and the Central African Republic; and to
provide the serious and swift response called for by the
most recent provocations of North Korea following a
new nuclear test and the launching of a ballistic missile
under the pretext of a rocket launch.
I would like to conclude my statement by quoting
from the concept note before us, as follows:
“the United Nations remains the best option we
have to face, from a perspective of peace and

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperation, the large and complex challenges to
be faced by humanity” (S/2016/103, annex, p.2).
This is indeed the basis of France’s commitment.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers in
welcoming you, Madam, to the Council and in thanking
the delegation of Venezuela for convening this debate. I
wish to also acknowledge the presence of the high-level
representatives of Angola and Spain.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We are also pleased to have with us SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon. We listened carefully to his
learned views, which give us much to think about and
reflect upon in this regard.
Malaysia firmly believes that all Member States
must remain united in our collective resolve to uphold
and respect the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Such commitment
is especially urgent and crucial in the light of the
challenges we face in maintaining international peace
and security today. Indeed, this seems a world away
from the challenges faced at the time when the Charter
was first promulgated. Periodic conversations and
assessments such as today’s, focusing on our collective
efforts in maintaining international peace and security,
are decidedly a welcome and useful exercise.
In its 70 years of existence, the global multilateral
system underpinned by the United Nations has paved the
way for great strides by Member States in fields such as
socioeconomic development, poverty eradication, the
promotion and protection of human rights, countering
terrorism and violent extremism and addressing
environmental concerns, among others. However,
the evolving nature of the threats and non-traditional
security challenges faced by the United Nations, and
particularly the Council, today threatens to undermine
many of the gains achieved. Today the prospect of
such threats and conflicts spilling over well beyond
local or domestic contexts are all too real. The threats
posed by the Ebola and Zika viruses, the scourge of
terrorism, the heinous crime of the trafficking and
smuggling of migrants, and the massive deplacement of
whole populations fleeing conflict are among the key
challenges that the international faces today.
At the same time, challenges of a more traditional
nature remain. The nuclear test detonation and ballistic

S/PV.7621

satellite launch by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea just some days ago shocked not only the
North-East Asian region, but the entire world. We
recall that upon its admission to the United Nations on
17 September 1991, the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, led by First Vice Foreign
Minister Kang Sok-ju, stated that
“the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as a
State Member of the United Nations, will remain
faithful to the purposes and principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter” (A/46/PV.1, p.33).
It is our fervent hope that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will renew and honour that
commitment. We hope that it will also consider
returning to peaceful negotiations with a view to
ensuring peace, security and stability in the Korean
peninsula and beyond.
Since its very existence, the United Nations has
contended with the question of Palestine and the struggle
of the Palestinian people for their self-determination. To
date, the Security Council’s approach to this issue stands
out as an example of selective inaction in implementing
the purposes and principles of the Charter. As long
as the situation of the occupied Palestinian territories
remains unresolved, the United Nations will continue
to be seen as lacking the necessary political will to
uphold the Charter or, at the very least, stand accused
of selectively applying it. In this context, the Council
bears a significant responsibility. It cannot continue
to be oblivious to the haunting cries of the Palestinian
subjugated to increasing dehumanization policies. The
longer that human rights and the rule of law are denied
to the Palestinians, the more we are collectively guilty
of not fully respecting and upholding the Charter.
Failure to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
exacerbates radicalism and fuels violent extremism,
the consequences of which are plain for all to see in
the increasingly frequent terrorist attacks targeting
civilians, including in capitals around the world.
I wish to recall the words of former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mohammed
Zahnoun on Somalia, who in 1992 observed,
“When you drop a vase and it breaks into
three pieces, you take the pieces and put them back
together. But what do you when the vase shatters
into a thousand pieces?”

16-0388013/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nearly a quarter century later, such words also
aptly describe the conflagration in Syria, which
threatens to consume not only itself, but possibly
even its neighbours, should it deteriorate further. In
welcoming the agreement reached by the principals
of the International Syria Support Group in Munich
several days ago on a nationwide ceasefire, we call
on all parties to respect and implement the ceasefire
without preconditions. Pending the ceasefire, we further
call on them to ensure unimpeded humanitarian access
throughout the country. The Syrian authorities must live
up to their international obligations and demonstrate
their respect for the Charter’s humanitarian imperative
in this regard.
At the other end of the Middle East, the outlook
for the situation in Yemen seems equally bleak, with
no end in sight to the acute suffering of the civilian
population, who are besieged on all sides. We call on
the parties to the conflict to reinvigorate efforts to
resume negotiations for a peaceful settlement to the
conflict. Over in Africa, Malaysia is encouraged by,
among other things, the steady progress in Somalia,
supported by its international partners, in progressively
restoring normalcy to the country. We are also
encouraged by the collective resolve of the countries of
the region to make contributions to the Multinational
Joint Task Force, aimed at countering Boko Haram. The
collective actions of those countries, coupled with the
support of the international community, stand out as an
affirmation of Charter principles, including those laid
down in Chapter VIII.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore Malaysia’s
firm belief that the Charter is a living document. We,
the Member States, breathe life into it through our
collective and ongoing efforts to respect and uphold its
principles and purposes. We must continue to live by
its ideals.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation is pleased to see you, Madam,
preside personally, in your capacity as Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, over today’s open debate, which your
country judiciously chose to devote the important
subject of respect for the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations as a key element for the
maintenance of international peace and security
The Senegalese delegation also welcomes the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as a

14/92

15/02/2016

further demonstration of the importance of a theme being
explored yet again by the Security Council, following
its consideration under the Chinese presidency almost a
year ago (see S/PV.7389).
My delegation associates itself with the statements
to be made by the representatives of Pakistan on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Kuwait on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
In addressing the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Macky Sall, President of
the Republic of Senegal, said:
“Seventy years after the creation of our
Organization, we are walking in the footsteps of
the founding fathers to renew our collective faith
in the ideals of peace, security, development and
respect for human rights. Those values inspire the
principal mission of the Organization of preserving
the world from the scourge of war, creating the
conditions necessary to the maintenance of justice,
promoting social progress and ensuring a better
standard of living in greater freedom.” (A/70/PV.15,
p. 17)
These words of President Sall are the clearest
possible reflection of the renewed commitment
of Senegal to strict respect for the principles and
purposes of the United Nations. It goes without saying
that the perpetual quest for peace and security on
our planet — which is one of the raison d’être of our
Organization — challenges us all and requires each
Member State a high awareness of the need to respect
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, which is the world’s constitution.
We must keep in mind that coercive actions are
only a means and not an end in themselves. Thus, the
success of the Organization lies more in its ability to
resort to Chapter VI, on the peaceful settlement of
disputes, than to Chapter VII, which is more difficult
and even more costly to enforce. Senegal, a strong
supporter of preventive diplomacy, therefore favours
peace operations that combine these two Chapters in
this their most essential meanings. Our main challenge
is to adapt to a complex international environment that
is constantly changing due to, among other things, the
changing nature of conflict, the presence of increasingly
assertive regional organizations, the proliferation of
non-State armed groups and even the emergence of new,
asymmetric threats such as terrorism and international
health crises. This state of things requires us to make

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

a renewed commitment to respecting the principles
and purposes that governed the creation of the United
Nations, which are the sovereign equality of States,
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and non-resort to the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State.
Recognition of the political and legal value
of the principles contained in the Charter and the
strengthening of inclusive multilateralism are
prerequisites for maintaining peace and international
security. It is therefore important to promote the
maintenance of peace through partnership to place the
action of regional organizations at the heart of peace
efforts. Indeed, given the strong regional dimension
of most conflicts and in view of the vital role to be
played by neighbouring States in any peace process, the
positive engagement of regional actors is increasingly
encouraged by the United Nations, in accordance with
paragraph 1, Article 52, of Chapter VIII of the Charter.
In this regard, the Security Council should
further strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, which, in addition to
being already present on the ground, can contribute
to ensuring respect for the sovereignty of States while
promoting a preventive approach to achieving peaceful
and negotiated solutions of crises. With respect to the
African continent in particular, the strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, particularly the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States, can help develop rapid response capabilities in
the early hours of crises in order to avoid an escalation
of violence.
The successes in Côte D’Ivoire, Liberia, the Comoros
and Guinea Bissau speak for themselves of the essential
contribution that regional organizations can make, even
if the issue of funding remains a serious problem. While
it is true that peace is priceless, it certainly comes at a
price. States, international organizations — first and
foremost the United Nations — and the private sector
must contribute further to finding ways to finance
peace missions throughout the world in a timely and
sustainable manner.
The review of the principles and purposes of the
Charter in terms of peacekeeping also leads us to the
burning question of reforming the primary United
Nations organ entrusted with the maintenance of

S/PV.7621

international peace and security, the Security Council,
in order to make it more legitimate in its composition
and more credible and effectiveness in its action.
In another vein, we believe that multilingualism
is an important element of of the multilateral system
that must continue to be respected in all activities of
the United Nations system, in particular those aimed at
maintaining peace and security. Indeed, multilingualism
ensures the equal dignity of all cultures, contributes to
the effectiveness of the principle of the legal equality
of States and strengthens the democratization of global
governance, of which the quest for peace is a primary
directive.
I am pleased to affirm that the best guarantee of the
success of our efforts to counter the multiple threats to
international peace and security lies in the synergy of
the actions of all sectors of the international community
and the full respect of all for the principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
we believe that the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), the Paris agreement on
climate change and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
on financing for development will be of criticial
importance. This underscores the judiciousness of
the choice of theme for today’s debate made by the
outstanding Venezuelan presidency of the Security
Council this month.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting and to underscore the particular importance
of the topic of today’s Security Council meeting for
all Members of the United Nations family. This open
debate should serve as our common contribution to the
efforts of the international community to address the
challenges that the world faces today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.
Back in 1945, in signing the Charter of the United
Nations, the founding Member States were determined
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
and to “establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law could be maintained.
For those objectives, we established the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. As a founding Member
of the United Nations, Ukraine proudly has a stake
in that process, as its delegation chaired the drafting

16-0388015/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Charter’s Preamble and Chapter I — Purposes
and Principles — at the San Francisco Conference. In
today’s world, those provisions are the prerequisites to
any other purposes of the United Nations.
Regrettably, we have also witnessed deviations from
those principles or their misinterpretation according to
convenience. Since the founding of the United Nations,
the basic norms of the Charter have been violated on
many occasions. Any encroachment on the Charter’s
provisions, any arbitrary or selective interpretation of
its Articles or any actions that undermine its authority
or incite disregard for the letter and the spirit of its
principles represent a clear threat to international
peace, with far-reaching repercussions for the wellbeing of all peoples.
The current developments caused by Russia’s
illegal occupation of Crimea and its aggression in the
eastern Ukraine clearly serve to demonstrate that the
violation of fundamental principles of international law
by a permanent member of the Security Council is a
serious threat to peace and security in Europe and the
whole world. The same happened in Georgia in 2008.
It happened in Crimea in 2014. It is happening now
in eastern Ukraine. The neo-imperialistic ambitions
of the Russian Federation and its reckless militaristic
adventurism have created the worst security crisis
in Europe since the end of the Second World War. In
trying to justify its actions by misinterpretation of
the provisions of the Charter, Russia has on numerous
occasions, in the less than 25 years of its membership in
the United Nations, demonstrated that it did not respect
its own obligations under international law and the
Charter. Furthermore, in abusing the right of the veto in
the Security Council, the Russian Federation neglects
its obligations, as a permanent Council member, to
maintain peace and security.
According to General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX), of 14 December 1974, the actions undertaken
by the Russian Federation in Crimea, as well as in the
east of Ukraine, fall squarely under the definition of an
act of aggression — a crime against international peace.
Under Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, the
use of force against the territorial integrity of another
State is illegal; thus, no territorial acquisition can be
recognized as lawful or retrospectively legitimized.
Allow me to recall that the military invasion by
Russian troops began on 20 February 2014 by their
blocking and seizing Ukrainian civil and military

16/92

15/02/2016

facilities, administrative buildings and infrastructure;
illegitimately imposing the pro-Russian Crimean
authorities; and holding the so-called referendum of
16 March 2014, at the barrel of a Russian gun. In a
documentary for Russian State-run television broadcast
a year later, on 15 March 2015, the Russian President
admitted that the plan to annex Crimea had been
launched weeks before the so-called referendum. It is
no surprise that the authorities in Moscow had never
intended to comply with General Assembly resolution
68/262, entitled “Territorial integrity of Ukraine”,
which calls upon all States to desist from any attempts
to modify Ukraine’s borders.
The aggression has continued in the Donbas
region of Ukraine. The aggressor has thousands of
troops, heavy weapons, tanks, artillery, multiple rocket
launchers, missiles and other military equipment not
only at our borders but also on our soil. At the same
time, Russia remains a sponsor of terrorism in the east
of Ukraine and continues to provide financial, material,
military and technical support to the separatists in
Ukraine, which are organized, controlled and funded
by the Russian Federation, including, in many cases,
under cover of so-called humanitarian convoys. As
a result, the almost-two-year-old Russian military
aggression against Ukraine has already resulted in
more than 9,000 civilians dead, at least 20,000 injured
and millions of forcibly displaced persons.
The aggressive war launched by Russia against
Ukraine constitutes a grave breach of jus cogens — the
peremptory norms of international law — and a flagrant
disregard for the international obligations and
commitments undertaken by Russia under the Charter
of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and other
international treaties and documents. The actions of the
Russian Federation constitute yet further proof that in
practice there can be no isolated violation of a single
principle of the Charter, as all principles are inherently
connected and interdependent. Encroachment upon any
of them essentially entails a breach of the entire corpus
of the principles as a whole and of the many legal rules
deriving from those principles. My country considers
such actions as internationally wrongful acts violating
the erga omnes obligations of Russia and thus entailing
Russia’s international responsibility not only vis-à-vis
Ukraine but also vis-à-vis the entire international
community. Not a single State remains unconcerned in
this situation, no matter how distant it might be from
Ukraine geographically.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Over the past two years, Ukraine has on several
occasions urged the Russian Federation to accept its
international legal responsibility and demanded the
termination of such wrongful acts. We proceed from
the fact that Article 33 of the Charter envisages an
obligation to settle any international disputes peacefully
and provides a toolkit to do so. We remain committed
to a peaceful resolution of this conflict. But striving to
achieve that and trying to re-establish lost trust does
not, however, mean that a breach of the United Nations
principles should be accepted. That would be an
erroneous lesson to be drawn from history and would
be fatal for European and world security.
In that context, Ukraine has brought Russia’s
attention to the numerous facts of its aggression
and proposed to resolve any existing disputes at the
International Court of Justice or by ad hoc arbitration.
Ukraine has also brought to the attention of the Russian
Federation numerous cases of violations of international
humanitarian law and breaches of its obligations as
an occupying Power, as well as instances of human
rights violations attributable to it due to its effective
control over parts of Ukraine’s territory. In response,
the Russian side has expressed general, unsubstantiated
denials of those facts and has refused to recognize the
existence of a dispute or its responsibility.
Not only that: just a few days ago, I read the Russian
Foreign Minister’s statement claiming that the Russian
Federation allegedly did not violate its commitments
under the 1994 Budapest Memorandum on security
assurances in connection with Ukraine’s accession
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. Let me stress that in that Memorandum,
which was duly circulated to all Member States
through a joint letter also signed by Mr. Lavrov, Russia
undertook to respect the independence and sovereignty
and the existing borders of Ukraine and to refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity of my country, as well as to affirm that none
of its weapons would ever be used against Ukraine.
Once again, I have become convinced that the Russian
side reads international treaties in a specific manner: as
with the Minsk agreements, Moscow read the Budapest
Memorandum very selectively. Unfortunately, Russia
has ignored all of our previous proposals to convene
consultations in accordance with paragraph 6 of the
Memorandum. For a signatory that is sure that it does
not violate the Memorandum, why is there a concern

S/PV.7621

about such consultations? Let me reiterate our call on
all signatories to hold consultations without delay.
Ukraine is alarmed about Russia’s unprecedented
mounting militarization of occupied Crimea. To date,
Russia has deployed in Crimea more than 23,000
military personnel, hundreds of battle tanks, armoured
vehicles, combat aircraft and helicopters, dozens of
coastal missile systems and so on. A particular danger
is presented by the deployment in Crimea of potential
carriers of nuclear warheads, such as warships and
combat aircraft. Also worrisome is Russia’s intention to
refurbish the infrastructure of some Soviet-era storage
facilities in Crimea for nuclear weapons.
The illegal occupation and subsequent militarization
of Crimea therefore threatens to have far-reaching
consequences for security not only in the Black Sea
region, but in all of South Europe, as well as in North
Africa and the Middle East. The ongoing events in
Syria are convincing proof of that. Such a disturbing
state of affairs needs to be urgently and appropriately
addressed by the international community.
Against the background of intense activities
undertaken by the Russian occupation authorities to
transform Crimea into a huge military base, we have
observed a significant deterioration of the human
rights situation there. International reports provide
voluminous factual information about large-scale
and systematic violations of human rights in Crimea,
including disappearances, killings, torture and illtreatment. Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians who openly
supported the territorial integrity of Ukraine remain in
a particularly vulnerable position.
In the last week alone, we witnessed a new wave
of repression and intimidation directed at Crimean
Tatars. Early in the morning of 11 and 12 February,
Russian security forces surrounded a number of
villages across the peninsula and raided Crimean Tatar
homes, breaking windows and doors and confiscating
computers and other property. Some people were
detained. Russian security services opened a criminal
investigation against several Crimean Tatars, accusing
them of being involved in extremist activities. The
way it was done reminds us of the tragic days of the
1944 mass deportation of Crimean Tatars from their
homeland.
Sadly, all this is happening again today. On
Friday, I wrote to the President of the Security Council
to draw attention to those developments. We urge

16-0388017/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Russian Federation, as the occupying Power, to
immediately provide free and unconditional access to
the peninsula for an ongoing international presence
of the relevant mechanisms of the United Nations, the
Council of Europe and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, among other international
organizations.
Ukraine fully recognizes the key role the United
Nations plays in maintaining international peace and
security and its capacity to that end to take effective
measures to prevent and remove threats to peace. In
that regard, to ensure the effective implementation
of the Minsk agreements and resolution 2202 (2015),
proceeding from the need to involve additional
instruments in order to prevent further violations of
the Charter of the United Nations and guarantee lasting
peace and stability in certain areas of the Luhansk
and Donetsk regions of Ukraine, we continue to insist
that the deployment of a United Nations international
peacekeeping operation in the territory of Ukraine
could be an important step towards an effective solution
for the conflict unleashed by the Russian Federation
against my country.
The Charter has withstood dramatic changes in
international relations and proved its key place in today’s
global architecture as the primary international legal
instrument for preserving international peace, with
far-reaching effects for the well-being of all peoples.
Adherence to the principles embodied in the Charter is
the best safeguard for the implementation of all other
international legal documents and, ultimately, for the
international rule of law. We trust that the General
Assembly, the Security Council and world leaders will
exert every effort and explore every opportunity to
restore respect for the United Nations Charter.
In conclusion, I would like to quote Aristotle: “It
is not enough to win a war; it is more important to
organize the peace.” Today, seven decades after the end
of the Second World War and the adoption of the United
Nations Charter, we must not forget the Charter’s
primary purpose — to maintain international peace and
security. Unless the Charter is respected, there will be
no peace or security in the world. Unless the Charter is
respected, chaos and violence will prevail. The Charter
must be respected. Order must be restored. Violations
of the Charter must not go unpunished.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I welcome you,
Foreign Minister Rodríguez Gómez, as our President,

18/92

15/02/2016

and I also welcome the presence of Ministers from
Angola and Spain. We thank Venezuela for organizing
today’s open debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, which we thoroughly endorse.
The international community today faces more
concurrent crises, and of greater complexity, than
at any time since the creation of the United Nations.
In that sense, the Security Council’s mandate to
maintain international peace and security is more
relevant and necessary than ever. But the challenges
we face — intractable civil wars, entrenched local
and regional politics, sophisticated and well-resourced
transnational terrorist networks — are very different
from those envisaged at the time of the establishment
of the United Nations.
The Council has responded to those dynamic
and evolving threats by adapting its response — for
example, through the evolution of peacekeeping, the
development of peacebuilding and of protection-ofcivilians mandates, the deployment of political
missions and innovative responses to the emergence
of regional health emergencies. The Council can claim
many achievements as a result, in terms of conflicts
resolved and lives saved.
But the Council needs to continue developing and
evolving its approach if it is to be effective in fulfilling
its mandate. In recent years, its capacity to do so has been
sorely tested. The Council did not create the complex
conflicts that dominate the international landscape
today. But its ability to act decisively to prevent,
manage and, in some cases, even respond to those
crises has often been found wanting. The Council has
been slow to act to prevent clearly emerging crises. And
political divisions within the Council have hamstrung
its response to full blown crises — Syria being the most
obvious recent example. We Council members can and
must do better. New Zealand is focused on doing what
it can to address those shortcomings. Today I wish to
focus on five areas in which we believe the Council
needs to improve its game.
First, we need a more genuine focus on practical
problem-solving. For permanent and elected members
alike, Council membership brings with it the solemn
responsibility for preventing and resolving conflict.
Yet during our time in the Council, very few of the
discussions in which we have participated could be
characterized as genuine attempts at problem resolution.
What we have seen instead are set-piece statements,

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

rigid positioning and attempts to publicly embarrass
and undermine other Council members, even within
our so-called informal consultations. Put simply, few
Council members appear to be coming to the Chamber
or to the Consultations Room with ideas on how to
solve problems or even to engage seriously on them.
While we are all culpable, the worst offenders are those
who bear the greatest responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations— the permanent members. That
must change. New Zealand is focused on practical
steps that can be taken to achieve even modest progress
in improving the dynamics and performance of the
Council. As we set out during our presidency in July
of last year, we will continue to push for more informal
and unscripted conversations focused on agreeing on
pragmatic and constructive solutions. Ultimately, what
is required is a change of culture and of mindset.
Secondly, the Council must live up to its rhetoric
on conflict prevention. The Council currently finds
it extraordinarily difficult to respond quickly and
effectively to emerging crises. For example, despite
growing evidence of a crisis, it took the Council almost
six months to respond to the calls by New Zealand
and some others for a Council visiting mission to
Burundi. By the time the Council did respond, the
scope for the mission to have a meaningful impact had
shrunk dramatically. Syria presents an even starker
example of thit failure. For five years, the Council has
remained almost completely passive in the face of the
deepening conflict, paralysed by disagreements among
its permanent members. The international community
and the Syrian people are paying the price for that
failure, and will continue to do so for decades to come.
Seven years after its last resolution on the matter, the
Council remains unable to agree a collective response
to the growing instability in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories and the steady erosion of a basis
for a negotiated peace.
The Council has a clear responsibility to act in such
situations, and it has a range of tools at its disposal
for doing so. But it remains strangely reluctant to use
them, with discussions on preventive action generally
becoming hostage to national or bilateral interests, or
bogged down in false dichotomies between intervention
and deference to sovereignty. National sovereignty
must be respected, but it is not the only or paramount
principle in the Charter. We must not allow it to be used
as a shield by those who brutalize their own populations
and undermine regional and global security. Those that

S/PV.7621

defend such perpetrators on this basis bring discredit
upon themselves and the Council.
It must be possible for the Council to conceive
of ways of engaging early to de-escalate and resolve
crises, ways that are effective, respectful of sovereignty
and sensitive to regional leadership. As we have
seen, the consequences of the Council’s failure to act
in preventive mode can have far more devastating
consequences for a country’s sovereignty. Part of this
challenge lies in finding better and more collaborative
ways of working with key regional partners such as the
African Union.
Thirdly, we need to sharpen the effectiveness of the
tools available to the Council to discharge its mandate.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) represents an
important opportunity in this regard. Over the balance
of this year we will work with Council colleagues
to implement key recommendations to improve the
effectiveness of Council mandates, including through
greater prioritization and sequencing of tasks and
deployments. We will also continue to advance our
specific proposals regarding enhanced engagement
with troop contributors and other key stakeholders in
the mandate process and enabling more responsible
monitoring and management of risk and performance
through enhanced situational awareness.
As I noted during last Thursday’s debate on the
sanctions committees (see S/PV.7620), we can also
improve the effectiveness of sanctions measures by
improving the functioning of our subsidiary bodies.
This means more timely and informed decision-making;
clear strategic direction; and flexibility to respond to
changing circumstances.
Fourthly, we need to encourage a greater culture
of collective decision-making or burden-sharing. The
Council continues to hamper its work by unnecessary
and outdated procedural constraints and rigidities.
There needs to be more scope for all 15 Council
members to make a substantive contribution and for
this to be regarded as a normal and natural way of
operating.
Fifthly, the Council must be more consistent in
supporting compliance with the international rules to
which we have all committed ourselves.
The Charter of the United Nations places the
Council at the centre of a rules-based international

16-0388019/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

order. It must respond decisively in instances where
such rules are undermined and flouted, such as the
recent nuclear test and ballistic-missile launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, or of gross and
systematic abuses of international humanitarian law.
It is particularly important in this regard for the
Council to follow through on its own decisions. We
need to be more honest in assessing their effective
implementation and determining our response where
they have been defied or neglected, or have proved
ineffective or mistaken. This is as true of peacekeeping
mandates and sanctions measures as it is of International
Criminal Court referrals or the obligations imposed by
the Council on parties to a conflict.
To conclude, we cannot afford to lose sight of
the Council’s core purpose and its obligation to the
international community and to the millions of human
beings whose lives are being distorted by conflict. The
wider United Nations membership wants to see the
Council delivering better on its primary mandate of
maintaining international peace and security, and New
Zealand does too. That is why we want to work with
all Council members and other interested Members of
the Organization in making a genuine collective effort
focused on solving the problems that the Council is
tasked with confronting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for having convened this
debate and for being with us in person today. I want to
join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing, all of which I agree with, and for
his leadership of the Human Rights Up Front initiative.
The Security Council’s primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security is enshrined
in the Charter. That puts us, as my New Zealand
colleague has just said, at the center of the rulesbased international system. We face new threats that
the founders of the United Nations did not foresee,
but the responsibility that the Council holds remains.
It is a responsibility that empowers us to take a range
of measures, including force, should the situation on
a particular issue or in a particular country threaten
international peace and security. The only question to
be debated today is how we do so.
The Article of the Charter that you, Madam
President, mentioned — paragraph 7, Article
2 — is explicit in not prejudicing “the application of
enforcement measures under Chapter VII”.

20/92

15/02/2016

Threats to international peace and security have
changed; they now come mainly from intra-State
instability that spreads far beyond national borders.
Weak or failing States and non-State actors now pose
our greatest challenge. As the situation in Syria shows,
if they are left unaddressed, these threats undermine
both the rights of States and the rights of people.
In response, we should not let outdated
interpretations of the Charter be used to excuse inaction,
still less to justify action that makes the situation worse.
Sadly, there are some in the Council that do precisely
that: members that claim the primacy of sovereignty
above all else, or that would rather abuse the power
of the veto and ignore the responsibility conferred on
the Council by the Charter, or that disregard efforts
to restrain the use of the veto, including through the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group’s
code of conduct, which the Spanish Minister rightly
highlighted and which the United Kingdom is proud to
commit to.
Ironically, it is those members of the Council that
abuse sovereignty the most. Look at the invasion and
illegal annexation of Crimea two years ago. This was
the most egregious violation of sovereignty in recent
memory. That it was perpetrated by a permanent
member of the Council, a member that claims to uphold
the principles of the Charter, makes it even more
unacceptable still. I reaffirm in this Chamber the United
Kingdom’s full support for Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and I reassert our
commitment to the return of Crimea to its rightful place
as part of Ukraine.
In the light of the new threats that we face, our
response needs to be commensurate with the purposes
and principles of the Charter. In doing so, the Council
can bolster sovereignty. As the Secretary-General
argued recently in Cambridge, England, we need to
recognize that you cannot have true sovereignty without
respecting the human rights of the people you govern,
or, as he said today, that it is violence and conflict, not
our attempts to help Member States prevent it, that
threaten States’ sovereignty. It is violations of human
rights by the State that erode the legitimacy of the State.
The concept of sovereignty has not stood still; we
no longer accept the medieval view that the sovereign
owns everything and is the State. In the twenty-first
century, sovereignty has to amount to a contract
between governed and Government, and, crucially,

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

this contract depends in part on respect for human
rights. When human rights are violated and abused,
when basic freedoms are ignored, when a leader loses
legitimacy, peace and security can be threatened and
sovereignty is put at risk. We saw this for ourselves
when we visited Burundi last month; we heard stories of
summary executions, mass graves and sexual violence.
These warning signs should be all too familiar to the
Council. We must all know by now that if they are
left unchecked, the risk to sovereignty will not come
from too much action by the Council but from the
destabilizing consequences of too little.
If we are inactive, violence could spill across
borders, providing space for extremism to flourish,
undermining the rule of law and eroding respect for
human rights. That is exactly what has happened for
nearly six years in Syria. Has a heavier price ever been
paid for such a myopic interpretation of the Charter of the
United Nations? As a consequence, a quarter of million
people are dead, and millions upon millions have fled
their homes. Over 1 million people now live their lives
under siege, with many facing starvation. We should
all welcome the commitment made by the International
Syria Support Group in calling for a cessation of
hostilities last week. It is long overdue. However, it
will only succeed if the Syrian regime and its backers
change their behaviour, stop the bombing, observe the
ceasefire and allow humanitarian access — in short, if
they live up to their obligations.
Let me conclude with this final reflection: what
would our world look like if we really believed in an
outdated view of sovereignty — an extreme view in
which sovereignty trumped all principles in international
relations and international law? The Security Council
agenda would be thin. It would be a world where the
Council would not even attempt to prevent calamity in
Burundi; where peacekeeping operations would be far
fewer in number; where sanctions would never be used to
encourage regimes towards more acceptable behaviour;
where threats of proliferation went unchecked; where
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community went unpunished. There would be impunity
and no accountability. How could international justice
function at all?
It would be a world where we failed to uphold
even the first Article of the Charter, to take effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace. I am glad that we do not live in that
world. We live in a world — for all its imperfections

S/PV.7621

and challenges — where individuals can demand rights
and are entitled to hold their Governments to account.
We live in a world where old backward-looking
concepts of sovereignty no longer provide stability or
peace and security. We live in a world in which the
Charter, written 70 years ago, still applies exactly as
it was meant, respecting the rights of States and their
peoples and granting the Council the authority to take
enforcement action to maintain international peace and
security.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I wish to thank you, Madam, for being here to lead
our debate. I would also like to recognize the presence
of various Ministers and State Secretaries here today
from various Member States of the United Nations.
Furthermore, I would like to thank the President of the
Council for having organized this open debate, as well
as Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his informative
briefing.
The theme “Respect for the principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations as a key element for
the maintenance of international peace and security”
is particularly relevant for my country, considering its
long tradition of upholding international law and its
firm conviction of the need for an effective multilateral
system capable of addressing global issues. As a
founding Member of the United Nations, Uruguay has
always called for the full observance of the purposes
and principles enshrined in the San Francisco Charter,
which we view as a complex framework of fundamental
rights and obligations. They should be maintained, as
they are essential to the achievement of international
peace and security. Uruguay believes that all of those
purposes and principles remain fully valid today, and that
they are fundamental pillars on which the international
system stands. Respect for the purposes and principles
is conveyed through peaceful coexistence and good
relations between States, and must be addressed as a
whole, in particular as their interpretation or partial
use may lead to results that constitute a departure from
the Organization’s objective to maintain international
peace and security.
Legal principles such as the sovereign equality
of States, the fulfilment in good faith of international
obligations, territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, non-intervention in the internal affairs of
States and the non-use of force are binding and must be
observed in their entirety. That is essential to fulfilling
one of the purposes of the Organization, that is, to save

16-0388021/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

succeeding generations from the scourge of war. We
have been firm and consistent defenders of each and
every one of those principles, and have called for them
to be respected whenever they have been challenged.
A traditional aspect of my country’s foreign policy
is the rejection of the threat and the use of force, and
the search for peaceful means to resolve conflicts that
threaten international peace and security. For that
reason, Uruguay has generously offered to join the
Organization’s peacekeeping operations where such
was necessary to maintain international peace and
security, in accordance with the mandate of the Charter.
We have also reaffirmed the right to selfdetermination of peoples in all decolonization
processes, including those that have not yet been
concluded. We have called for full respect for State
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States when State actions were not conducted in
accordance with United Nations standards, in particular
those that regulate the powers of the Security Council.
For Uruguay, respect for international law and the rule
of law, at both the national and international levels, is a
fundamental guarantee. But they are only meaningful
when their benefits reach the inhabitants of each State.
Those individuals have rights, not only by virtue of their
nationality, but first and foremost by virtue of the simple
fact that they are human. One of the purposes enshrined
in the Charter is the promotion and encouragement of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all. The United Nations therefore, and the Security
Council in particular, is called upon to play a key role
while placing human rights and the dignity of persons
at the centre of the Organization’s actions.
The increasing number of violations of those
rights, which we witness every day in different parts of
the world, as well as recurring widespread attacks on
civilians in armed conflict, undermine the fulfilment of
the purposes and principles on which the Organization
is based. It is for that reason that the reaffirmation of
those principles, which were established at the end
of the Second World War, should certainly take into
consideration the evolution of international realities
as well as the evolution of the United Nations system,
international treaties and State practices.
We believe that it would be a mistake to pretend
that a broad interpretation of the principles of State
sovereignty and non-intervention could serve as
justification for any action taken by a State within its
borders that violate other principles of the Charter of

22/92

15/02/2016

the United Nations. Non-interference in the internal
affairs of States is a valid and necessary principle in
relations among States. However, that principle might
become an exception of domestic jurisdiction that
releases the State from the obligation to comply with its
international obligations.
The area of human rights could serve as the
paradigm for the evolution of the multilateral system
as the role of the international community grows in
importance in terms of protection. Obviously, States
continue to shoulder the main responsibility for
ensuring observance of the fundamental rights of their
citizens. But the international community has gradually
established an international system to promote and
protect human rights through the development of
norms, standards of conventional international law,
multilateral bodies and special procedures to which
the Member States of the United Nations are subject.
That development has taken place in accordance with
Charter principles when it comes to the mandates of
the United Nations, in particular the provisions of
Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter. The establishment
of the Human Rights Council, empowered to examine
any human rights violation, even when the countries
concerned disagree, is an illustration of that healthy
development.
Therefore, without attempting to erode in the
slightest the original meaning of the principle of
non-intervention, Uruguay has always defended,
both in this forum as well as in Latin America, its
understanding that the principle cannot be used
to undermine the moral and legal duty to protect
people, in particular from massive atrocities such as
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or
ethnic cleansing. In that connection, it is essential to
end impunity for those who commit such atrocities. In
such cases, an extreme interpretation of sovereignty
transforms it into impunity and thus puts our most
essential values and human rights at risk. The concept
of sovereignty implies responsibilities as well as rights.
And one of sovereignty’s most essential obligations is
the protection of the people.
We recognize that it is States that bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their peoples. However,
when they do not protect them, and when the threat of
atrocities is imminent, the international community
must abandon non-intervention and become involved.
It cannot stand by and has a duty to act to defend the
greater good. The Security Council has a particular

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

responsibility in that regard and must be ready to resort
to every instrument that the Charter has put it at its
disposal. But we must also underscore the fact that it
is the Council’s responsibility to act in a concerted
fashion in cases of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, Uruguay therefore believes that it
is vital that all States Members of the United Nations
agree to a code of conduct that limits the use of the
veto in cases of mass atrocities. Similarly, given the
indivisible and interdependent nature of human rights,
we believe their protection and promotion are directly
linked to people’s integral development and potential
for development.
Uruguay reiterates its belief in the importance of
continuing to work to build an effective multilateral
United Nations system capable of responding rapidly
and consistently to today’s challenges — a system that
provides the guarantees needed to ensure that individual
human rights are respected and that millions do not die
each year in armed conflict or from a lack of food or
basic services; a system that does not foster poverty or
put the interests of the strong above those of the weak.
Uruguay attaches particular importance to the
principle, enshrined in the Charter, that international
disputes should be resolved by peaceful means based
on international law. In that context, we reaffirm the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the mechanisms based on it designed to tackle the
chief threats to international peace and security. It is
those mechanisms, which include activities aimed at
preventing, managing and resolving conflicts, that will
enable us to achieve sustainable and lasting peace.
We believe that regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in that
regard. While we acknowledge the primary role
that the Charter assigns to the Security Council the
difficult task of maintaining international peace and
security, we are also aware of the complementary
role in that area that it gives to such organizations
as the Organization of American States, of which
Uruguay is a founding member, as well as of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Union of South American Nations and the
Southern Common Market, organizations in which
cooperation and political consultation have played a
major role in preventing conflict peacefully resolving

S/PV.7621

disputes. Regional and subregional organizations
are well positioned to understand the challenges and
dynamics to which countries in their regions, with their
geographical, cultural and historical proximity, are
exposed. Within their mandates, they can make a very
effective contribution to the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.
Uruguay reaffirms its strong and unequivocal
commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter drawn up in San Francisco. We intend
to work in close and constructive cooperation with
the other members of the Council in our efforts to
consistently defend the purposes and principles of
the Charter and preserve its integrity, with the aim of
building a more peaceful, just and equitable world.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to welcome you to the United Nations, Madam
President, and to congratulate you on the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela’s presidency of the Council for
the month of February.
(spoke in English)
I would like to begin by recalling the debate we had
in the Council exactly a year ago on a very similar topic
(see S/PV.7389). On that occasion, the-then Permanent
Representative of Austria, Ambassador Martin Sajdik,
made a statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Rule of Law, of which Japan is a member. He
stated that we should reaffirm our commitment to
all the purposes and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations — I repeat, all the purposes and
principles — and should not do so selectively. We
cannot pick and choose. I would like to echo his words
today. In that connection, I have noticed in past Council
debates that few members have mentioned the principle
of fulfilling one’s obligations under the Charter,
expressed specifically in paragraph 2, Article 2.
In the space of just one month, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea conducted its fourth nuclear
test and launched a ballistic missile, in clear and flagrant
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Keeping the principle of fulfilling our obligations
under the Charter in mind, we can see that this is not
merely a violation of Council resolutions; it is also a
totally unacceptable challenge to the Charter itself.
Such striking examples show how important it is that
we take concrete action to condemn these violations. In
doing so, we maintain the authority and credibility of
the United Nations. I would like to take this occasion

16-0388023/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

to urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to comply fully with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and with its international commitments,
including its obligations under the Charter.
I have been very encouraged today by the statements
made by several delegations so far on that specific
point. In that connection, I would like to reiterate
a point I made in this Chamber last week, when we
discussed general issues related to sanctions under the
Venezuelan presidency (see S/PV.7620). In the words
of the report issued last year by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009),
“The Panel continues to observe Member
States’ lack of implementation of the Security
Council resolutions, noting that inaction and low
reporting levels may be due to lack of will, technical
capacity and/or issues within their domestic legal
systems.” (S/2015/131, annex)
I would like to take this opportunity to call on all
Member States, including all of us on the Council,
to fulfil our own obligations under Security Council
resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations. That
is an important basis of the rule of law.
I welcome the reference in the concept note
(S/2016/103, annex) to the importance of the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes. It is critical to settle
disputes by peaceful means, based on international law
and not by force or coercion. In its most visible form, the
rule of law is embodied in judicial organs. By applying
international law, judicial organs such as international
courts disentangle complicated disputes and offer
legal solutions. Everyone in this Chamber agrees that
judicial bodies are important, but I cannot help noticing
that Member States, including my own, devote a lot of
energy to electing the judges of those bodies. We should
also be very active in actually making use of them.
Take the International Court of Justice as an
example. For seven decades, the Court has played a
constructive role in the field of the peaceful settlement
of international disputes through its resolution of 150
cases. In that context, I would like to reiterate my
Government’s plea for more Member States to accept
the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction. For Member States
that have not yet done so, I would like to remind them
of the existence of the Handbook of the International
Court of Justice, which is available on the Court’s
website. The Handbook, which is co-authored by seven

24/92

15/02/2016

member States led by Switzerland, including Japan, can
serve as a useful reference.
I would like to emphasize that the rule of law
should also be respected on the oceans and seas. The
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS),
based in Hamburg, Germany, can be a very effective
legal mechanism to that end. I am pleased to see that 23
cases have been referred to ITLOS in its 20-year history,
including four disputes involving my country, Japan. At
the same time, I believe that ITLOS has large potential
due to its excellent judges, capable staff members of the
Registry and biannual budget of more than €18 million.
I take this opportunity to call for active utilization of
the Tribunal to ensure the rule of law on the seas.
Finally, let me refer to the Security Council and its
relations with the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The ICC, the first permanent international criminal
court, is one of the most effective tools available to
the Council to end impunity, thereby contributing to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council can do more to enhance cooperation and
communication with the ICC.
I would like to end my statement by reaffirming
Japan’s determination to continue on its path, together
with the United Nations, so that all the purposes and
principles of the Charter are duly observed in the actual
world.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the initiative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to convene today’s open debate. We are
pleased to see you, Madam Minister, presiding over
this meeting here in New York. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
At present, international affairs are undergoing an
historic, accelerated process of change. Humankind is
facing unprecedented development opportunities and
newly emerging threats and challenges. The Charter
of the United Nations arose from the ravages of the
Second World War. It reflected humankind’s profound
retrospection on the two world wars and charted a
grand blueprint whereby the people of the planet could
work together to build a beautiful world.
In today’s world, the Charter remains a tower of
strength of great vitality and unmitigated relevance.
The international community must bear history firmly
in mind, steadfastly preserve the fruits of the victorious
anti-fascist world war and firmly defend the purposes

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

and principles of the Charter of the United Nations by
focusing on the following areas.
First, we must work vigorously to make international
relations more democratic and subject them to more
effective rule of law. Important principles enshrined
in the Charter — including respect for national
sovereignty, territorial integrity, peaceful settlement of
disputes and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States — are the cornerstones of modern international
law and international relations. Our only option is to
reinforce them, not weaken them.
It is imperative to adhere to the five principles
of peaceful coexistence in international relations and
respect each country’s prerogative to choose its own
development path and social system independently. It is
imperative to uphold the sovereign equality of all States
entitled to participate in the formulation of international
rules and to exercise their rights under the law on an
equal footing. The world’s destiny must remain in the
hands of all peoples. International justice and equality
must be upheld. Uniform rules must be applied in
distinguishing between right and wrong, promoting
peace and pursuing development. It is imperative to
abide by international law and universally agreed basic
norms of international relations, and give full play to
the important role of the United Nations in international
affairs, while safeguarding the mandate and authority of
the Security Council in matters involving international
peace and security.
Secondly, we should vigorously promote
international cooperation in all its aspects. We must
do away with all forms of Cold War mentality and
predilections for a zero-sum game, and instead embrace
the new notions of win-win for multi-stakeholders and
winning for all, so as to forge global partnerships at the
international and regional levels, weave cooperation
into all aspects of international interactions in the
political, economic, security and cultural domains,
and build a human community of common destiny,
characterized by everyone pulling together in the
same boat and the convergence of interests on an equal
footing. In nation to nation interactions, States should
respect one and other, treat each other as equals and
work together for the good of all. All parties should,
through consultation and cooperation, address major
international and regional issues in order to properly
deal with regional conflicts, terrorism and other
traditional and non-traditional security threats.

S/PV.7621

Thirdly, we should vigorously promote inclusion,
mutual learning and common development. We
must respect the diversity of civilizations, uphold
openness and inclusiveness, cross-fertilize through
exchanges and mutual benchmarking, and move
forward by seeking common ground while preserving
our differences. We must safeguard and develop an
open world economy, promote robust, sustainable and
balanced growth, improve global economic governance
and realize universal prosperity throughout the world.
We must help each other to our mutual benefit with a
view to effectively implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1). We must join hands in seeking a way forward in
building a global ecological civilization aimed at the
harmonious coexistence of man and nature in order to
realize the sustainable development of the world and
the overall development of humankind.
As a founding Member of the United Nations and
a permanent member of the Council, China was the
first country to sign the Charter of the United Nations.
Over the decades, China has contributed positively to
defending the purposes and principles of the Charter
and promoting the peace, progress and development of
humankind. While attending the summits marking the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, Chinese
President Xi Jinping comprehensively elaborated
the concept of building new international relations
focused on cooperation for a win-win situation. He
proposed forging partnerships based on consultation
and accommodation on an equal footing; building a
security landscape of justice and fairness by all and for
all; pursuing prospects for open, innovative, inclusive
and mutually beneficial development; promoting
exchange among civilizations that seeks harmony,
respects diversity and embraces and assimilates
equitable sustenance; constructing an ecosystem that
respects nature and seeks green development; and, by
integrating these five elements, elaborating an overall
agenda and pathway of seeking one human community
of common destiny.
That call by China is in line with and builds on the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and transcends the purview of the traditional
theory of international relations in an innovative spirit.
More importantly, it is a coherent fusion between the
Chinese dream of peace, development and cooperation
to the benefit of all, on the one hand, and the well-being
of all peoples of the world, on the other. It is in tune

16-0388025/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

with the trend of the times, in line with the common
interest of all nations, and of great significance to
international peace and security. It is a manifestation of
China’s responsibility and commitment as a permanent
member of the Council and a large developing country.
This year is the first of the implementation of the
outcomes of the seventieth anniversary summits of the
United Nations and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. This pivotal opportunity should be
seized by the international community in pursuing the
noble cause of world peace and development. China
stands ready to work with the United Nations and its
membership, continue to safeguard the international
order and international system built around the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, join
hands to forge new international relations characterized
by cooperation to the benefit of all, build a community
of common destiny with unity of purpose, and make
ever greater contributions to the peace, development
and the progress of humankind.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): In 1945,
at the conclusion of the United Nations Conference in
San Francisco, United States President Harry Truman
reflected on the just-completed Charter of the United
Nations and called it
“a declaration of great faith by the nations on this
Earth — faith that war is not inevitable, faith that
peace can be maintained”.
It was a feat unparalleled in history for the
representatives of 50 nations to be able to come
together after the world’s most devastating conflict and
imagine a new international order rooted in peaceful
cooperation and respect for human rights. In the 70
years that followed, we have worked to uphold this
declaration of faith, welcoming 143 new Member States
into the United Nations, avoiding a third world war and
expanding the promise of freedom and democracy to
millions. And yet, we have not fully transformed our
faith into a world without tyranny, a world without
strife and a world without poverty — the responsibility
that our predecessors in San Francisco passed to us.
Some seem to suggest that the solution is one of
retrenchment in which we would all play a more handsoff role in responding to drivers of conflict, and in
which we dismiss respect for the dignity and human
rights of individuals as a matter of purely domestic
concern. The purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, however, impel us to do the

26/92

15/02/2016

opposite. Animating the United Nations Charter is
a concern for the dignity of every person, regardless
of nationality. Respect for political independence
and sovereignty cannot mean turning a blind eye to
oppression, intimidation and abuse. Sovereignty is
an important aspect of States, of course, but as the
Secretary-General has emphasized today and as he has
said in the past,
“the less sovereignty is viewed as a wall or a shield,
the better our prospects will be for protecting
people and solving our shared problems”.
It is the United Nations Charter that leads us to
recognize the nexus between human rights and the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
is the United Nations Charter that leads us to act
decisively using all of the tools at our disposal to
respond to threats to international peace and security,
and it is the United Nations Charter that calls on us
to ensure that the Council keeps pace with emerging
threats. We must recommit to, not retreat from, those
principles today. That means demanding that Russia
end its illegal occupation of Crimea and cease support
for separatists intent on seizing even more of Ukraine,
in clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
It also means recognizing that, in carrying out our
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, that responsibility includes promoting respect
for human rights and those institutions necessary to
safeguard freedom.
As we have seen on far too many occasions,
widespread human rights violations and abuses can
themselves pose a threat to international peace and
security, and regimes that flagrantly violate the
universally recognized human rights of their own
people often show similar contempt for the universal
principles that help maintain our shared security. Take
North Korea, for example, where the Government
imprisons and tortures citizens for the so-called crime
of owning foreign films, and where 80,000 to 120,000
political prisoners are starved and beaten to death in
detention camps. Just as North Korea treats its citizens
with disdain, the regime also flouts the resolutions
of the Security Council on its nuclear and ballistic
missile activities while threatening its neighbours with
annihilation. In Syria, the Al-Assad regime’s brutal
response to peaceful political protest has devolved
into horrific attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, forced displacement and starvation. The
Syrian Government’s inability and unwillingness to

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

protect its citizens — indeed, its predilection to do the
opposite — has given armed extremist groups the space
to operate with impunity.
The very first Article, Article 1, of the Charter of
the United Nations, makes clear that the central purpose
of the United Nations is “promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms
for all”. In this clause, those drafting the Charter
recognized that repressive Governments that seek to
choke off freedom of expression, stifle the media and
prevent citizens from determining their own political
future undermine an international system based on
peaceful cooperation among the world’s peoples.
Governments in which people can hold their leaders
accountable through elections and an active civil
society and Governments in which an independent
judiciary can serve as a check on executive authority
are Governments that can help prevent, rather than
create threats to international peace and security.
It is by supporting strong democratic institutions
that we help prevent the horrors of genocide or the
emergence of ungoverned spaces where terrorist
organizations may thrive. The pursuit of these values
is not in tension with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations; it is precisely these values that
animate the United Nations. Despite these purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter, in the real world we
are witnessing the opposite trend — a sustained and
seemingly contagious effort to silence, crack down and
shut down space for civil society around the world,
rather than embracing the idea that empowered citizens
can work together to make sure the Governments work
for people.
Too many Governments are passing legislation and
taking administrative actions designed to keep people
scared and silent, and to keep them from speaking
out against abuses of power or from undertaking any
political activity whatsoever, including by keeping
leaders of the peaceful political opposition imprisoned
for exercising fundamental freedoms. They inundate
civil society organizations with frivolous prosecutions
and try to block what little funding exists to sustain
these groups. They accuse human rights defenders
and civil society organizations and those who support
them of carrying out nefarious foreign agendas or even
committing treason.
When regimes crack down on the enjoyment of
fundamental freedoms, these steps can be an indicator,

S/PV.7621

and too often a harbinger, of worse violations to come.
We cannot and should not wait to speak out until
Governments escalate to the point of slaughtering their
own people, as we saw in Rwanda, or to the point that a
regime employs medieval siege tactics to starve its own
people, as we see today in Syria. Borders cannot blind
us to our responsibilities as a Council, or as people with
conscience. We must respect sovereignty, but so too
must we recognize the relationship among democratic
processes, freedom, civil society, systematic violations
of human rights and threats to international peace and
security.
Many of the items on the Council’s agenda began
when Governments started to denigrate the dignity
of and erode the enjoyment of rights for their people.
These Governments all too often argue that the Charter
exempts them from criticism and that we must blind
ourselves to internal oppression, even where systematic
repression can be directly connected to broader regional
and international security. To do so would ignore the
lessons that led us to adopt the Charter of the United
Nations in the first place.
While we must be guided by the principle of the
sovereign equality of States enshrined in the Charter,
we cannot let ourselves become so afraid of encroaching
on State prerogatives as to prevent us from acting to
respond to the world’s real and emerging threats, even
if they look different than the threats the founders of
the Organization confronted 70 years ago. Indeed, we
must continue to update our understanding of threats to
keep pace with the world around us, and we have made
important strides in doing so, from addressing public
health crises like Ebola to countering the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters to new entities like the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The Security Council must
be prepared to recognize these kinds of new threats, and
when the Security Council determines the existence of
a threat to international peace and security, we must
use the tools at our disposal to act decisively.
At times, the Council has appropriately relied
upon swift mediation, under the good offices of the
Secretary-General, or upon cooperation with regional
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII, to forestall
conflicts. Yet we have also seen the value that comes
from the Council acting to impose sanctions, create
tribunals and deploy peacekeeping missions. Beginning
in 2006, the Council responded to increasing concerns
about Iran’s nuclear programme by adopting a robust
sanctions regime. The willingness of Member States to

16-0388027/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

work together to carry out their obligation to implement
and to enforce those resolutions created an opportunity
to bring them around to the negotiating table to address
the international community’s concerns. Those efforts
resulted in the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, the provisions of which, through full
and complete implementation, will continue to ensure
that Iran does not develop a nuclear weapon. That
diplomatic breakthrough would not have been possible
had the Council had not taken strong and decisive
action to address Iran’s nuclear activity.
I want to conclude with another prescient remark
that President Truman made in his address to delegates
in San Francisco. He noted that
“Nations, like individuals, must know the truth if
they would be free — must read and hear the truth,
learn and teach the truth.”
We in the Security Council, guided by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, should
take that lesson to heart. When we see Governments
whose actions contribute to global instability, or we
observe new threats to international peace and security,
we, as Council members, must speak the truth. We must
see the truth that is concealed by arguments that seek
to distort and manipulate the purposes and principles of
the Charter in an attempt to prevent the United Nations
and the Council from tackling the global challenges
that it was meant to confront. Those who had the
foresight to create the United Nations would demand
nothing less, as do the citizens of the world who bear
the consequences when we fail to live up to that moral
ambition.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the convening of today’s
discussion at the initiative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Madam President, as well as your
personal presiding over this Council meeting. A useful
discussion on the same theme took place a year ago on
the initiative of China (see S/PV.7389). It demonstrated
that almost no Member State remains indifferent to the
issue. And as of today, the discussion is far from being
exhausted.
The basic code of conduct for States in the world
is provided by the compilation of principles and rules
reflected in the Charter of the United Nations — such
as the independence and sovereign equality of States,
non-interference in their internal affairs, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the right of peoples to

28/92

15/02/2016

self-determination. Nobody, it would seem, calls into
question the immutable nature of the principles of the
Charter.
We are convinced that, today as well, many
parties reaffirm their commitment to them. However,
in practice those principles are not always upheld.
Seventy years after the end of the Second World War,
the basic principles that should serve as a backbone
for the system of international relations are becoming
for some an awkward obstacle and, consequently, are
subject to various types of interpretations, or are simply
circumvented. That inevitably leads to a situation in
which States are experiencing the explosive situations
that at the time created the conditions for world wars
and which the founders of the United Nations wanted to
exclude once and for all by creating a unified code of
conduct for all.
Today we cannot turn a blind eye to what is
happening as a result of undisguised interventions in
the internal affairs of States through support for illicit
changes of power or the forcible imposition of foreign
cultural or social norms. We all clearly saw how, from
the spark of popular unrest in Libya, through allegedly
disinterested outside assistance, a fire was fuelled
that destroyed the State, leaving in its place ashes and
chaos. The same sort of illicit intervention, involving
illegitimate air strikes or the provision of weapons to
non-Government armed forces, led to a rise in violent
extremism and radicalization in Syria, which eventually
resulted in the emergence and strengthening of such
terrible phenomena as the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Sham.
The Russian delegation is seriously concerned
about the most recent aggressive actions of the Turkish
Government, the massive shelling in neighbourhoods
of Syria on the border, as well as the possible movement
into Syria of fresh groups of mercenaries who seek
to join Jabhat Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and other terrorist
organizations. The consequences of the interventions
in Libya and Syria are striking by virtue of their scale,
as they have caused atrocious suffering to civilians, the
desecration of the cultural heritage of humankind and
unprecedented migrant flows.
We support the declared goal of today’s meeting,
namely, the commitment to the inviolability of the
purposes and principles of the Charter, a well as the
effort to find ways to involve States in their effective
implementation. We do indeed need to agree on how,

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations,
joint risk management will be carried out in a context
of increasingly complex international relations. We
will not succeed in achieving that purpose without
upholding the system of fundamental principles that I
have mentioned.
Those endeavours should include decisive measures
to do away with double standards in international
politics and to strengthen the role of the Security
Council as the primary body charged with agreeing on
collective approaches, based on respect for the cultural
and civilizational diversity of the contemporary world.
The past year, since the Security Council meeting
in February 2015, has served to confirm that positive
results can be achieved when members of the Council
come together in the interests of finding consolidated
positions in line with the purposes and principles of
the Charter. That was the very foundation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action to ensure the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, which
allowed us to get rid of one of the most explosive
sources of conflict in the Middle and Near East. The
destruction of the Syrian chemical weapons arsenal
was successfully carried out, important decisions were
made regarding countering terrorism and its financing,
and progress was achieved in the Syrian settlement. A
new comprehensive Paris Agreement has been drawn
up on the issue of climate change.
Today three delegations referred to the Ukrainian
crisis. We think that blatant interference in the internal
affairs of Ukraine took place through support from the
outside aimed at undertaking an anti-constitutional
coup d’état in 2014. There is well-known evidence of
that: we might recall the brazenness of high-ranking
American officials, sponsors of Kyiv, which was
recently fully unmasked in the French documentary
film entitled Ukraine: Masks of the Revolution. The
coup led to a degradation in the statehood of the
country, radicalization, an increase in nationalism and
numerous casualties.
We would like to recall that, against the backdrop
of that crisis, what happened in Crimea is what is
envisaged by international law, including United
Nations principles, namely, the right to exercise selfdetermination. According to the 1970 Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States, that right can
be realized, including through the establishment of a

S/PV.7621

sovereign and independent State, the free association or
integration with an independent State. It is noteworthy
that a number of States that have called into question the
legitimacy of the secession of Crimea said the opposite
with regard to Kosovo.
As to the current conflict in Ukraine, it is unlikely
to stop until the Government in Kyiv finds a common
ground with all the political forces and regions of
the country. We are ready assist in that effort in any
way possible. An important step there would be strict
compliance with the Minsk agreements, which, as we
well know, Kyiv seems to have a problem with. The
advantage of the Minsk agreements is their very specific
nature, which leaves no room for their manipulation or
arbitrary interpretation. That is the big headache for
Kyiv, which is attempting to not implement them fully.
In the current context, when accuracy in the
understanding of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and their inviolability often seems to be
lost, we think that there is a need to clearly underscore
our shared commitment to those provisions, for which
there are no alternatives. We hope that that would help
in preventing attempts to bring massive pressure to bear
on sovereign States by imposing unilateral decisions
and standards in the political, economic and ideological
areas. The dictates of the present are that there is a need
to establish a true democracy and the rule of law in
international relations.
Some delegations today spoke about violations of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
baselessly accusing Russia of such actions. To ensure
that such flights of fancy not give the wrong impression,
may I just give a quick review of the most egregious
cases of disregard for international law, including for
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, over the past decades, because clearly they
have been forgotten about.
In 1964, the United Kingdom bombed the Yemeni
city of Harib. The Security Council condemned that
action in resolution 188 (1964), underscoring that
reprisals were not compatible with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. In 1983, the United
States invaded Grenada. In its resolution 38/7, the
General Assembly called the United States actions “a
flagrant violation of international law”. Many of us are
probably aware that the President of the United States
at the time reacted to the adoption of the resolution by
saying that it would not spoil his appetite for breakfast.

16-0388029/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

In 1986, the United States carried out an armed attack
on Libya, which the General Assembly characterized
as a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. In 1989, the General Assembly called
the United States incursion in Panama an out-and-out
violation of international law.
Such violations have been repeatedly noted by the
International Court of Justice, the primary judicial
organ of the United Nations. For example, in its first
historic decision in the 1947 case of Corfu Channel
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland v. Albania), the Court recognized evidence of
violations by the United Kingdom of the sovereignty of
Albania. In its 1986 judgment in the well-known case
of Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against
Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), the
Court directly noted that the United States had violated
the sovereignty of Nicaragua and the norms governing
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and the
non-use of force. It is to be noted that the United States
openly continued to carry out actions that the Court
had qualified as violations of international law.
The attitude of unaccountability of the United
States and its allies continues. I could cite other
instances, such as the bombing of Yugoslavia and Iraq
and the events of recent years in Libya and Syria, of
which I spoke earlier. It would seem that a sense of their
own exceptional status has long allowed certain States
to place themselves above the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I would also like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a reasonable speed so that interpretation
may be provided accurately.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Argentina.
Mr. Foradori (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for the

30/92

15/02/2016

invitation to participate in this open debate, which is on
an issue of such great importance to the international
community, as well as to congratulate the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on its presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing at the beginning of
this debate.
The establishment of a special and strategic
arrangement at the end of the Second World War
conceived and forged the founding principles of world
peace. That emblematic and collective decision sought
to build a solid base for mutual and lasting trust among
nations. The men and women who drafted the Charter
of the United Nations possessed an explicit will to
integrate and a vision as long as history itself. What is
more, they knew that an idea without a goal was only
a dream and accordingly drafted a number of guiding
principles, the architecture of which was intended to be
nearly indestructible.
The maintenance of international peace and
security and the desire to take all the necessary
measures to ensure both would materialize only if
acts of aggression were suppressed and disputes were
resolved through peaceful means, based on justice and
international law. The battle fatigue that followed the
brutal war was the most compelling reason to appeal
to the collective will to not repeat the past. Friendship,
cooperation and respect were therefore the words that
dictated the path set out in San Francisco, when that
universal constitution was drafted. Mutual respect was
also one of the pillars that supported the fundamental
principles with regard to relations among States.
The sovereign equality of all Members of the United
Nations, refraining from the use or threat of the use
of force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of any State, and non-intervention in
internal affairs were the cardinal and guiding principles
that motivated that iron-clad collective will.
At that time, one had to be extremely bold to have
dreams and translate them into reality, avoiding the
arrival of a day in which those hopes might be merely
faded memories. However, the firm conviction of those
men and women allowed for an end to the macabre
ritual characterized by mutual suspicion, giving way
to mutual trust. In that process, there was no shortage
of sacrifice and effort, paving the way for the tireless
search for peace. The levelheadedness of those thinkers,
for whom the memories of the ravages of war were still
fresh, allowed them to assert, without major debate,

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

that cultural, social and humanitarian problems should
be solved. They also noted the need for economic
development and for encouraging respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, regardless
of race, gender or religion, among other things. Those
principles were also considered necessary conditions
for ensuring peace and harmony among peoples and
nations.
It was in the context of the dynamic balance
between non-intervention in internal affairs and the
need to respect human rights that one of the premises
of the Sustainable Development Goals, among others,
was born: the promotion of peaceful and inclusive
societies for sustainable development, access to justice
for all and the creation of effective, responsable and
inclusive institutions at all levels. Strengthening the
rule of law and promoting human rights were basic to
that process. The promotion of peace and justice was
thus established as one of 17 Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1). We therefore must make progress by
having a comprehensive approach to the consolidation
of all of those Goals. It is necessary that States not
conceal the absence of respect for human rights within
the handy premise of non-intervention in the affairs of
other States.
In an increasingly interdependent world, events
can no longer be seen apart from their impact on world
society. What happens in each of those events affects
everyone, and the most delicate responsibility rests on
striking a fine balance in terms of what opinions can
be considered a violation of a principle or construed as
strict respect for another. The United Nations therefore
made a decision to support peace processes with special
missions, staffed by men and women with experience,
to avoid further deepening conflicts. Accordingly,
Argentina certainly supports those processes and has
decided that when a conflict or a crisis breaks out, it will
cooperate actively to mitigate, to the extent possible,
the human consequences of those situations through the
participation of White Helmets. Cooperation, peace and
intervention in those processes therefore come together
on the basis of recovering to the maximum extent the
deepest sense of humanity.
It is difficult to perceive the fair measure of things,
as has always been the case. However, it is preferable to
make mistakes in trying to achieve peace and respect for
human rights than to show excessive zeal for respecting
non-intervention, according to the letter of the law, to

S/PV.7621

such an extent that it becomes indistinguishable from
disinterest or indifference to the suffering of others.
The calling to promote peace and friendship through
constructive criticism is not disrespectful and should
aim at building a lasting prosperity among peoples. It
is worth mentioning here that, when the Charter of the
United Nations highlights the need to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, Argentina
understands that exactly as “all”, without distinction as
to race, gender or religion, inter alia. Our commitment
to these purposes is also expressed in our fundamental
norm on the basis of which our own society is built. But
we also believe that compliance with those purposes
is not optional on the part of Members of the United
Nations, but mandatory.
In addition, our concept of society assumes that
the need to enjoy those fundamental freedoms and
to respect for human rights must be complied with
by all States, given our belief that for peoples, as for
individuals, who are genuinely close and friendly, it
is quite easy to cry in solitude and almost impossible
to laugh alone. That is why we believe that those who
drafted the Charter of the United Nations charted a
path for the future that is not contradictory but rather
complementary. We consider that vision to be as global
as the world in which we live, and it should be seen in
that way. It is not an option. It is a dictate, not one based
on a standard or a fundamental charter, but rather one
based on the collective conscience of our global society.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Castaneda Magaña (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): First, I would like to thank the Government
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for having
convened today’s open debate. It reflects responsible
and wise leadership on the part of that Government
in carrying out the work of the Security Council. We
take this opportunity to renew the bonds of friendship
between our two Governments and to convey special
greetings from President Salvador Sánchez Cerén to
President Nicolás Maduro Moros and demonstrate our
confidence in his country’s presidency of the Security
Council. We also welcome this opportunity to address
the issue of the maintenance of international peace and
security and respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations as a key element in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

16-0388031/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

My country, as a founding member and supporter
of the Charter of the United Nations, firmly believes
that comprehensive peace can be achieved only through
dialogue, harmony and full respect for international
law and human rights. We have made the promotion
and strengthening of security at the national and
international levels one of our priorities, with respect
for human rights as a vital component of our policy.
The key tool that the United Nations possesses to
uphold its responsibility in that area is represented by
its peacekeeping operations. That work has expanded
and the mandates have diversified. In addition, the tasks
carried out by peacekeeping operations are performed
in harsh environments in a constant state of flux. That
is why, in order for them to be successful, they require
the full support of the international community.
As a country that benefited from that type of
operations in the 1990s, we are deeply committed to
returning the invaluable support given to us by the
international community, and in particular the United
Nations, through the United Nations Mission in El
Salvador during the peace process in our country. We
therefore reiterate our full willingness to continue to
actively participate in current and future missions.
While we acknowledge that such operations face
complex challenges and difficult conditions, we are
concerned about ongoing attacks against troops and
personnel. We also realize that some field missions
do not have adequate security for troops or enough
personnel to carry out their work, which decreases their
level of security.
El Salvador welcomes the establishment of the
new security-risks policy and the steps that have been
taken, but we are concerned that it has been developed
without any consultation and that its dissemination
does not provide a clear strategy for Member States. In
that regard, we stress the need for transparent, active,
open and regular dialogue among the countries that
contribute personnel to peacekeeping operations, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, especially with
regard to the serious incidents that have occurred
recently relating to the safety of peacekeeping personnel
and to human rights violations against civilians.
We reiterate the need to provide comprehensive
training prior to the deployment of troops and during
operations, including appropriate equipment to fulfil
the assigned mandates and to maintain dialogue
between the Secretariat and potential contributors,
so as to develop viable and effective alternatives so

32/92

15/02/2016

that the international community can face such crises
in a timely manner. In that regard, our Government
supports the initiative of establishing rapid deployment
units that would be available to the Security Council.
In conclusion, we would like to make the following
points.
First, we believe that it is very important to
develop more realistic political strategies that are
contextualized and coordinated through valid and
effective consultations among the Security Council,
the Secretariat, host countries, regional actors and
troop-contributing countries, thereby creating an
institutional framework within which to reconsider the
establishment of and the mandates for such operations
and achieve the diligence, clarity and precision needed
to ensure the efficacy of peacekeeping operations and
the establishment of exit strategies.
Secondly, we believe that the use of modern
technologies could help improve the safety and security
of personnel and the assets of the United Nations. We
reiterate the need for the use of such technologies to be
guided by the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially the principle of respect for the
consent of host States, thereby ensuring respect for the
sovereignty of host States.
Thirdly, El Salvador welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General to establish an independent panel to
review allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
international forces in the Central African Republic.
We welcome the report to be presented by the panel
and look forward to a prompt and specific answer from
the Secretary-General to the recommendations made
and to the discussion on the subject, in which we will
actively take part.
Fourthly, El Salvador supports all initiatives
that ensure the participation of women in the various
contingents, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).
We hope that that policy will be clearly reflected in
the composition of staff, at all levels, under the special
mission policy recently approved by the Council with
regard to the peace process in Colombia.
Fifthly, El Salvador appreciates the importance
of maintaining a balance in the allocation of funds
between the maintenance of international peace and
security and the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1). We believe that ensuring the financing of the

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Agenda’s Goals will help us to prevent future conflicts.
As a country, we will continue inter-agency efforts to
train our police and military personnel. We emphasize
that the support that we have been able to provide to
peacekeeping operations would not have been possible
without the invaluable assistance of friendly countries
whose technical cooperation was vital. We hope that we
will continue to receive such support.
Finally, we call for working together to strengthen
transparency and efficiency in the management of
peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
I wish to convey to you, Sir, and to the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela the Movement’s appreciation for
having convened today’s ministerial debate on such a
fundamental topic. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his input into today’s debate. We hope that this
debate will contribute to making the United Nations,
and in particular the Council, more transparent,
democratic and consistent in its undertakings.
At a time when the international community
is celebrating the seventieth anniversary of the
Organization, there is no better time to engage Member
States in the defence of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations as the only way to
ensure international peace and security. The purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter are the same
pillars upon which the structure of international law is
founded. They encompass the fundamental concepts
of respect for the sovereignty and equality of States,
non-interference, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
refraining from the use or threat of use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
Member State. The purposes and principles must be
thoroughly respected at all times by all Member States.
NAM has been very strong and consistent in its
calls to the international community to uphold and
defend the principles of the United Nations Charter
and international law, as well as the means envisaged
in the Charter for the pacific settlement of disputes and
non-resort to the threat or use of force. The purposes
and principles of the Charter and the principles of

S/PV.7621

international law are essential in preserving and
promoting peace and security, the rule of law, economic
development and social progress and human rights for
all.
Global peace and security continue to elude
humankind as a result of, inter alia, the increasing
tendency of certain States to resort to unilateralism
and unilaterally imposed measures, non-fulfilment of
the commitments and obligations assumed under the
the relevant international legally binding instruments,
especially on weapons of mass destruction and
conventional-weapons treaties, terrorism, conflicts,
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, the use of double standards in
international relations and the continuing failure and
unwillingness of the majority of developed countries
to fulfil their commitments in the economic and social
fields. We underscore the need for the international
community to collectively redress those situations
in accordance with the Charter and the principles of
international law.
NAM member States, guided by the Movement’s
principled positions and recognizing the serious danger
and threats posed by the actions and measures that
undermine international law and international legal
instruments, stress the need to undertake a wide range
of measures, among others: first, identifying and
pursuing measures that may contribute to achieving a
peaceful, prosperous, just and equitable world order;
secondly, respecting the right of nations to decide
on their political, economic and social systems, as a
pathway to peaceful coexistence among nations and
thereby to peace and security; thirdly, conducting
external relations based on the ideals and the purposes
and principles of the Movement, the United Nations
Charter and international law, as well as the relevant
declarations adopted by the General Assembly; fourthly,
refraining from recognizing, adopting or implementing
extraterritorial or unilateral coercive measures
or laws, including unilateral economic sanctions,
other intimidating measures and arbitrary travel
restrictions that seek to exert pressure on countries
of the Non-Aligned Movement, thereby threatening
their sovereignty and independence and their freedom
of trade and investment and preventing them from
exercising their right to decide by their own free will
their own political, economic and social systems, where
such measures or laws constitute flagrant violations of
the United Nations Charter and international law, the

16-0388033/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

multilateral trading system, as well as the norms and
principles governing friendly relations among States;
fifthly, opposing and condemning the categorization
of countries as good or evil based on unilateral and
unjustified criteria, and the adoption of the doctrine
of pre-emptive attack, including attack by nuclear
weapons by certain States, which is inconsistent with
international law, in particular the international legally
binding instruments concerning nuclear disarmament;
finally, the Movement stresses that the United Nations
Charter includes sufficient provisions regarding the
use of force to maintain and preserve international
peace and security, and that achieving that goal
through the Security Council should be done strictly
in full conformity with the relevant Charter provisions.
Resorting to Chapter VII of the Charter as an umbrella
for addressing issues that do not pose a threat to
international peace and security must be avoided. In
that regard, the Council should fully utilize the relevant
Charter provisions, where appropriate, including of
Chapters VI and VIII. In addition, consistent with the
practice of the United Nations and international law,
as pronounced by the International Court of Justice,
Article 51 of the Charter is restrictive and should not be
rewritten or reinterpreted.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Minister for Foreign
Affairs Delcy Rodríguez Gómez of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for having organized this
important debate, as well as to express our appreciation
for the Venezuelan proposal to reflect on the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
instructive briefing.
As the concept note (S/2016/103, annex)
presented by Venezuela correctly points out, despite
considerable obstacles and numerous shortcomings,
the United Nations has been able to foster dialogue and
cooperation among nations in the past 70 years, while
promoting sustainable development and human rights,
consolidating the rule of international law and avoiding
the outbreak of a new global conflict. The multilateral
system founded in San Francisco in 1945 was able to
establish its credibility and rise to new challenges,

34/92

15/02/2016

precisely because it was based on universal purposes
and principles.
In setting the maintenance of international peace
and security as a fundamental purpose, the Charter
of the United Nations banned the use of war as an
instrument of State policy and affirmed the primacy
of prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The universal and non-selective applicability of those
principles could not be clearer, as Article 2 of the
Charter explicitly affirms and reiterates a number
of times that “all Members” shall act in accordance
with them. The Charter does not distinguish among
categories of members in that regard, and establishes
without ambiguity that all Members shall fulfil in good
faith the obligations assumed in becoming part of the
Organization.
Throughout the years, however, this basic premise
has been repeatedly challenged. Violations of the
Charter have been frequent. Disregard of the purposes
and principles has taken place in all regions of the
world. The role of the United Nations as a platform for
dialogue and diplomacy has been debilitated by attempts
to resolve controversies through unilateral coercive
measures, including unauthorized resort to military
action. Countering these corrosive trends demands
a genuine collective recommitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter, a true recommitment to
multilateralism, as all Members undertook by adopting
General Assembly resolution 70/3 in celebrating the
seventieth anniversary of the Organization last year.
In the emerging multipolar world we are
experiencing, it is necessary to re-establish an
international pact on the inadmissibility of the use
of force outside the Charter provisions and without
proper authorization by the Security Council. But we
should look even further and agree that, whenever
authorized, the use of force should be employed
responsibly — meaning that action should be judicious,
proportionate and strictly limited to the objectives of
the mandate and in line with international humanitarian
law.
While a renewed commitment to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations seems desirable
and warranted, it is also necessary to update our
governance structures. Since its foundation, shifts in
the international landscape and the emergence of new
challenges have required that the United Nations system
adapt to new realities. When the United Nations was

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

created, critical issues we face today, such as the threats
posed by terrorism or climate change, were not fully
anticipated. Overcoming these truly global challenges
requires cooperation and coordinated efforts within a
robust multilateral framework.
It is possible to affirm with respect to two of the
three main pillars of the United Nations that important
and transformative changes have been possible in
recent years — with respect to development, through
the decisions taken at the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development and the adoption of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1)), and on the human rights
front, with the creation of the Human Rights Council
and the establishment of a universal periodic review.
Many other examples could be provided, including the
successful negotiations on climate change undertaken
in Paris last December.
In the field of peace and security, despite
developments unforeseen in the original Charter
framework, such as peacekeeping operations, we are
facing a credibility deficit and have yet to overcome
deeply ingrained resistance to long-awaited reforms.
As a result, this body has gradually lost the capacity
to live up to the high moral and political standards
rightly expected from the peoples we represent. It must
be recognized that, unfortunately, the Security Council
has not always fulfilled its obligations as outlined in
the purposes and principles of the Charter and in other
relevant Charter provisions.
But let us look at the glass being half-full. There
are several opportunities before us. Important inputs
for reflection and decision have been provided by the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, the
High-level Advisory Group on Resolution 1325 (2000)
on Women, Peace and Security, as well as by the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. Likewise, on the humanitarian front, we
will have a chance to make progress in dealing with
crucial challenges and responding to the plight of
civilians affected by the conflicts we have failed to
resolve in the forthcoming Istanbul humanitarian
summit and in the General Assembly High-Level
Meeting on Addressing Large Movements of Refugees
and Migrants in September 2016.

S/PV.7621

Furthermore, the seventieth session of the General
Assembly provides an opportunity that cannot be
missed for achieving a concrete outcome on the crucial
matter of updating our collective security governance
framework. Reforming the Security Council by ensuring
that the voices of all members are heard through a
process that guarantees equitable representation and
improved decision-making is the indispensable mission
to strengthen an international order fit for the twentyfirst century based on the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations .
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to convey my warm greetings to you, Mr. President,
and express my appreciation for the invitation to
participate in today’s debate, which we consider to be
of a high relevance.
The purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, subsequently developed in General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV) and supplemented with the
consistent practice by States, represent a legal and
political heritage that is in full force and which must be
protected. In the purposes and principles of the Charter,
contained in Articles 1 and 2, respectively, there are
three fundamental concepts.
The first of these is universality, since the purposes
and principles are universal and maintain the basic
structure of the international system. The progressive
development of international law has been built on
the basis of these purposes and principles. And the
particularities and special contexts can in no way
relativize the universal scope of the purposes and
principles. Therefore, when they are violated, it is
necessary that the international community express its
concern.
The second concept is the comprehensive-body-oflaw nature of the purposes and principles, insofar as
they are systematized irrevocable and enforceable rules
and customary standards. Jurisprudence and, above all,
the unerring practices of States strengthen the political
will to be bound by and act on them.
Thirdly, we emphasize the preventive dimension.
Several factors can contribute to a dangerous
disaffection for the purposes and principles and, to
avoid that result, it is essential to act early. From
this perspective, the work of the Security Council is

16-0388035/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

15/02/2016

crucial, since remaining indifferent to these signals
means putting international peace and security at risk.
Similarly, the concerted work of the different organs
of the system can be key in preventing destabilization
and conflict cycles, as can also be the interaction with
regional organizations in the framework of Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Moreover, we should remember
that the General Assembly has preventive capabilities
in accordance with Articles 11 and 12 of the Charter
and the action of the Secretary-General and of the
different modalities of missions.

First, we are all fond of emphasizing that the United
Nations Charter was adopted in the name of “we the
peoples”. Yet rarely a week goes by without an incident
being reported from some part of the world in which
we the peoples — in whose name the Charter was
adopted — are the targets of terrorist attacks. While
terrorism remains a cardinal threat to the maintenance
of international peace and security, the efforts of the
United Nations and the Security Council in taking
decisive action to combat terrorism leaves much to be
desired.

During its recent membership of the Council,
Chile took up the peace, security and development
triad, asserting that it was imperative to understand
crises from a broader point of view, including essential
concepts such as cohesion, inclusiveness, human rights
and respect for differences, in order to address the root
causes of conflict. In this context, our country proposed
the topic of “Inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security” for the open debate
at the Council chaired by Chilean President Michelle
Bachelet Jeria on 19 January 2015 (see S/PV.7361).
The facts reveal that there is a correlation between
lack of inclusion and cycles of conflict and destruction
of the social fabric, forming an objective threat to
international peace and security. We have to act in this
field in a direct way to prevent destabilizing processes
and thereby safeguard the purposes and principles of
the Charter, which should be protected, as they provide
the basis for peaceful coexistence and cooperation.

By way of example, I would refer to the requirement
of consensus for listing an individual terrorist or a
terrorist organization in a Security Council sanctions
regime. This extension of the veto to all members of
the sanctions committees has in practice resulted
in the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities many a time being
held hostage to the whims and fancies of one Member
State or other. There is no explanation required, and
a simple statement of objection or a hold or a block
kills the listing request assiduously built against those
who have undertaken heinous activities. Who bears the
responsibility for such decisions, or, rather, indecision
when well-known terror groups and individuals whose
listings have been blocked or put on hold behind the
anonymous consensus decision-making process resort
to carnage at a subsequent date?

We conclude by reiterating our appreciation to the
Venezuelan presidency for convening today’s meeting.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): At the outset, I would
like to compliment you and your team, Mr. President,
for the useful concept note circulated for today’s
open debate (S/2016/103, annex). We also convey our
appreciation for the briefing by the Secretary General.
The Security Council has taken the lead in
referring to the purposes and principles of the Charter
while attempting to maintain international peace and
security. However, its own actions have not always
been in the spirit of the Charter. In view of the need for
brevity, for illustrative purposes, I would focus on three
areas symptomatic of where the spirit that imbues the
purposes and principles that underpin the Charter is no
longer evident in the Council’s day-to-day functioning

36/92

Furthermore, we have noticed that even brazen
public violations of the sanctions regime by listed
individuals and entities, far from attracting punitive
measures, do not elicit even the mildest censure. Yet
we, the general membership of the United Nations, are
expected to comply with the decisions of the Council’s
sanctions committees, or lack thereof.
My second point relates to peacekeeping, which
is the signature activity of the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In this context, we would like to raise the issue of the
lack of consultation between the Security Council and
the troop-contributing countries, despite Article 44 of
the Charter, which explicitly requires the Council to
invite Member States contributing troops that are not
members of the Council to participate in the decisions
of the Council. This has seriously compromised the
objectives of peacekeeping. We the troop-contributing

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7621

countries have our troops on the ground and have
important inputs to provide the Security Council,
which is tasked with formulating the mandates of the
peacekeeping operations. This lack of consultations
comes at the cost of the efficiency of peacekeeping
operations. While we stand ready to fulfil the mandate
finalized by the Council, it is logical that we expect the
Council to consult the troop-contributing countries.

equality and territorial integrity of Member States;
non-interference in their internal affairs; commitment
to the peaceful settlement of disputes; and refraining
from the threat or use of force — have become the
linchpin of the Organization, the core values of the
international community, the protection upon which
the weak can rely, and safeguards against the abuse of
power.

Thirdly, and finally, the Council needs to be
reminded that charity begins at home. It is ironical
that the Security Council is working towards the
establishment of democracy and the rule of law in
various parts of the world when its own house is not
in order. The current structure and methods of work
of the Security Council are divorced from reality and
represent a bygone era. To regain its legitimacy, there
is no option but for the Council to reform. We hope
that it will not require a cataclysmic crisis to foster this
fundamental change. There has never been a greater
need for reform of the Council, which is a sine qua non
for its optimal efficiency and would be a real form of
tribute to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

We have to acknowledge, however, that significant
threats to international peace and security continue
to exist, be they the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism and violent extremism,
prolonged sovereignty and territorial disputes, or
escalating intra-State and regional conflicts. Millions
of people around the world are living in destitution,
fleeing wars and conflicts or suffering from various
forms of deprivation.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): Viet Nam aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
My delegation commends the initiative by the
Venezuelan presidency to hold this open debate on the
crucial topic of respect for the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter. This is highly relevant
given the growing challenges to global security and
the crucial role of the United Nations in tackling these
challenges.
Since its founding seven decades ago, the United
Nations has successfully proved its relevance and
value as the most inclusive multilateral body in
safeguarding the global collective security architecture.
The Organization has helped avert wars, promote
decolonization, protect human rights and advance
economic and social development.
These successes are all founded upon the United
Nations Charter, with the purposes and principles
at its core. As a matter of fact, these fundamental
principles — respect for the independence, sovereign

The severity and complexity of the present
challenges require a determined approach on the part
of the United Nations, particularly its main organs,
including the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, in upholding
the purposes and principles of the Charter. Special
attention must be paid to respect for the unique nature
of each nation in terms of history, culture, politics and
economics.
The peaceful settlement of disputes and the
prevention of conflicts must remain key aspects in the
work of the Organization in order to strengthen regional
and international peace and security. The United
Nations must further promote and assist Member States
in utilizing the applicable means specified in Article 33
of the Charter in the settlement of disputes.
We also believe that the Security Council, as the
body with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security, should prioritize the peaceful means
stipulated in Article 33 and deepen its relationship with
regional and subregional organizations, which play
a significant role in settling these disputes, fostering
conflict prevention and mediation partnerships, in
addition to providing rapid responses to regional
crises. It is also essential to mobilize resources and
develop capabilities for United Nations peacekeeping
operations so as to ensure its readiness, efficiency and
effectiveness.
Viet Nam, as a member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), has worked
tirelessly with our fellow ASEAN members in building

16-0388037/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

15/02/2016

a regional architecture conducive to stability and
prosperity, as well as addressing regional security
challenges through political and security advancements
in the ASEAN community. We are also working with
partners to develop tools for conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the
purpose and principles of the United Nations Charter.

numbers of people fleeing violent conflict, massive
human rights violations and emergencies. Violent
extremism is threatening the social fabric of States
and societies, and climate change is the greatest threat
to many States. No State can tackle these challenges
alone. It is our shared responsibility, and it requires
global, regional and local solutions.

These efforts by ASEAN and its partners are
vital, as the region is faced with increasingly complex
developments in the East Sea, also known as the South
China Sea, especially the ongoing illegal large-scale
land-reclamation and construction activities that have
changed the status of some of its features. These
unilateral activities damage the environment and have
serious implications for peace, stability and security in
the region, raising concerns among ASEAN countries
and others within and outside the region. It is therefore
vital to put an immediate end to all actions that change
the status quo or militarize or further complicate the
situation in the East Sea. We call upon all concerned
parties to settle disputes through peaceful means in
conformity with the United Nations Charter and the
fundamental principles of international law, including
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
respect freedom of navigation and aviation in the
region, and remain committed to the full and strict
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea and the early conclusion
of a code of conduct.

More than 70 years after its adoption, the Charter
of the United Nations stands as an enduring sign of
multilateral cooperation based on respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. We continue to
firmly believe in and support the United Nations in
leading our global collaborative efforts. We believe
that the purposes and principles of the Organization,
as embodied in the Charter, are as important as ever
before. They constitute the bedrock of the rulesbased world order on which our collective peace and
prosperity rest.

History has proved the significance of the United
Nations Charter as a key element in the maintenance of
international peace and stability. We remain committed
and stand ready to work closely with the United Nations
and other partners in our joint efforts to collectively
address the international peace and security challenges
we face now and will face in the coming years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
I would like to start by thanking the Venezuelan
presidency for having organized a debate on a topic that
remains as relevant today as it was when the Charter
was adopted, more than 70 years ago.
Not since the Second World War have we faced such
great challenges as we do today, with unprecedented

38/92

In the area of peace and security, we need to do
far more and far better to live up to the standards set
by the Charter. The Charter calls on States to, first
and foremost, strive to achieve peaceful settlements of
disputes through negotiation, mediation, and judicial
means. History has shown clearly that this is not
only the right thing to do, but the most efficient way
to prevent conflicts. That insight echoes last year’s
important reviews relating to United Nations peace
and security efforts. They put the primacy of politics
and the importance of conflict prevention front and
centre. We must seize this opportunity to implement
the proposed reforms.
Lasting peace is not achieved through military
engagement, but through political solutions and
responsible governance based on the rule of law. Early
warning and the prevention of armed conflict are
among our greatest responsibilities and need much
more investment from all of us at all levels. To lay the
foundations of a sustainable peace, we must deliver
on the promise to create a culture of prevention. This
includes ensuring respect for human rights, which
is essential to prevent conflict. For the Council, that
means taking a broad view of peace, security and
development, and putting the Charter above national
interests.
As forcefully stated by the Secretary-General
in his report for the upcoming World Humanitarian
Summit, we must uphold the norms that safeguard
humankind. The Secretary-General reminds us that the

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

inherent dignity and worth of the human person are the
bedrock of the Charter of the United Nations. Attacks
against civilians, massive and indiscriminate bombing
and shelling of populated areas, and the blocking of
humanitarian assistance are all demonstrations of
flagrant disrespect of international humanitarian law.
The perpetrators of the grave crimes we see committed
every day must be held accountable for their actions in
order to bring justice to the victims and to deter future
crimes.
The founders of the United Nations showed
remarkable foresight in stressing the role of regional
organizations in the prevention and resolution of
conflict. Indeed, the Charter encourages the peaceful
settlement of disputes by regional arrangements before
referring them to the Security Council. These vital and
mutually reinforcing partnerships now need to be made
even stronger and more strategic. The United Nations
needs to not only work alongside regional organizations
in different theatres, but also enable them to share the
burden in accordance with the Charter.
Providing support and resources to the African
Union and to African subregional organizations for
operations authorized by the Security Council is of
particular importance in that regard. The Nordic
countries’ support to African solutions to African
problems is not only a political commitment, but a
practical one, demonstrated by the many strands of
cooperation that exists among us in the field of peace
and security. Let me stress that this is a two-way
street. African States are often the first to deploy their
peacekeepers to theatres where peace is elusive. This
needs to be acknowledged, and lessons need to be
learned from the African experience.
Many speakers today have referred to the opening
words of the Charter: “We the peoples of the United
Nations”. Our pursuit of peace and development is for
the benefit not only of States and communities, but,
most fundamentally, for individual men, women and
children. A world based on the rule of law and respect
for human rights; a world where every individual has a
right to economic, social and cultural development, and
where social progress and better standards of living are
for everyone is a world that is safer for everyone. Allow
me to end with the words of Dag Hammarskjöld:
“The principles of the Charter of the United
Nations are, by far, greater than the Organization
in which they are embodied, and the aims which

S/PV.7621

they are to safeguard are holier than the policies of
any single nation or people.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to welcome
Ms. Delcy Rodríguez Gómez, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the friendly nation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, to this important meeting. We
also wish to congratulate Venezuela on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of February. We shall spare no effort in our
support for Venezuela and its honourable approach to
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
would like to stress the following points.
First, only one parameter should be adopted
in upholding the rule of law at the international
level, maintaining international peace and security,
achieving development and promoting cordial
relationships between Member States. That parameter
is strict respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, at the forefront of which are respect
for the sovereignty territorial integrity of States, equal
sovereignty, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. Any
attempt to impose new concepts and terms without
consensus, and at the expense of the provisions of the
Charter that were adopted by Member States, would
undermine the cumulative legal heritage of Member
States and represent a setback.
Today, we have heard extremely worrying
statements made on behalf of permanent members of
the Security Council, which are supposed to be the
guardians of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
Those statements, calling for interventionist policies,
are a violation of the principle of sovereignty under
various pretexts that leave the door wide open to the
recurrent illegitimate military interventions against
many Member States, which increased instability and
weakened of the United Nations.
The representatives of these permanent members,
Britain and France, have forgotten the suffering that
the policies of their Governments have perpetuated
in recent decades, mainly in the Middle East. They
have forgotten the support they provided to the Israeli
occupation of the occupied Arab territories, and their
frequent use of the veto in support of that ongoing
occupation, in addition to the targeting, destruction and

16-0388039/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

occupation of Iraq and Libya, and attempts to undermine
the legitimate Government of my country, not unlike
what those countries have done in Latin America and
around the world. Such a political ideology undermines
the credibility of international law and will lead to a
repetition of grave mistakes instead of apologies for
previous bloody errors.
Secondly, the seven decades since the establishment
of the United Nations have highlighted the need for
strict adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter and to reform some working methods and
strengthen others in a manner that would allow the
United Nations to fully play its role, and to preserve
its credibility and legitimacy. Throughout its history,
the United Nations has grappled with the attempts of
influential countries to turn it into a tool for serving their
interests and policies in total disregard of the principles
of international law and the purposes of the Charter.
That has been crystal clear since the Organization’s
early years. It has shown itself to be helpless in the
face of such attempts and incapable of taking adequate
measures to implement many internationally legitimate
resolutions in accordance with the Charter, particularly
those calling for an end to the Israeli occupation of
the Syrian Golan, the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, and the remaining occupied lands
of southern Lebanon, and to Israel’s aggression against
the Arab citizens under the yoke of occupation.
That has also been made clear through attempts to
manipulate the provisions of the Charter, use double
standards and invent new concepts and terms, aimed
at circumventing the Charter and the principles of
international law, that are not agreed on by consensus
and have been used to justify bloody military
interventions in countries that have resulted in the
fomenting of terrorism. Libya, for example, has become
a hot spot and a breeding ground for terrorism today.
Thirdly, the United Nations, having defeated
Nazism and fascism, has now once again been called on
to repeat that victory against the onslaught of terrorist
organizations such as Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and
other entities that are active in Syria and linked to
Al-Qaida, including Jaish Al-Islam, Ahrar Al-Sham,
Boko Haram, the East Turkestan Islamic Movement,
Ansar Al-Sharia, Al-Shabaab, Jamaat Al-Islamiyya
and the Caucasus Emirate, as well as many others. In
that regard, my delegation would like to reiterate that
no efforts to combat terrorism can succeed if they
run counter to the provisions of the Charter and the

40/92

15/02/2016

principles of international law, if they are carried out
without prior coordination with the country concerned
and while some countries use terrorism as a foreign
policy tool and the State-sponsored terrorism is ignored.
In that context, we should reaffirm that the
attempts by some Member States to justify their
military intervention in Syria, on the pretext of
combating Da’esh and complying with Article 51 of
the Charter, distort those provisions of the Charter and
constitute a surreal manipulation of international law
that undermines Syrian sovereignty, thus prolonging
the life of terrorism and sheltering its sponsors. The
only effective way to combat terrorism is to establish
a legitimate, proactive international coalition with the
participation of the countries concerned, including the
Syrian Government and State.
The situation in Syria throws the unfortunate state
of the United Nations into relief. Since the earliest
days of the crisis, members of the Organization have
exploited the Security Council in order to interfere
blatantly in Syria’s internal affairs. That has further
inflamed the violence and terrorism, has promoted false
claims and lies, demonized the Syrian Government
and aggravated the crisis, in addition to hindering
efforts to arrive at a peaceful settlement. All of these
are part of efforts to undermine Syria’s stability,
security and national sovereignty and attempting to
change its regime by force. The Governments of the
States concerned fabricated and invented artificial
entities that they promoted as an alternative to Syria’s
legitimate Government, and all of this was carried out
in the context of lies aimed at justifying the invasion of
Syria, a State Member of the United Nations, in order to
change its regime through the use of force.
This was in addition to imposing unilateral coercive
measures depriving the Syrian people of daily needs such
as food, medicine and fuel, along with further inflaming
the situation in order to create false humanitarian
pretexts justifying military intervention — a situation
that also recalls the experience of Libya with a situation
that its entire people, indeed the whole world, is still
suffering from. All of this has occurred without any
apology, awakening of conscience or change in these
countries’ disastrous and shameful policies, which have
only resulted in more bloodshed and suffering.
Matters have not stopped there. The Governments
of States Members of the Organization have gathered
mercenaries, takfiris and foreign terrorist fighters from

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

all over the world. They have armed and funded these
terrorist criminals and sent them to Syria and Iraq,
wrongly terming them jihadis or moderate opposition.
They have been sent to Syria in order to use our country
as a base for their terrorist entities and in order to launch
attacks from Syria on other countries around the world.
Some have thought it wise to use the term “Islamic
caliphate” as a title for Da’esh terrorists, in order to
insinuate that Da’esh terrorism is a State effort. In that
regard, I have to wonder about the commitment those
countries made, when they joined the United Nations,
to peaceful coexistence as good neighbours with other
nations. Where is their respect for the principles of
international law concerning friendly relations, as laid
down in General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) of
1970? How can we interpret the silence in the United
Nations surrounding these Governments’ systematic
violations of resolutions on counter-terrorism such as
resolution 2253 (2015), 2199 (2015), 2178 (2014), 2170
(2014), 1373 (2001) and 1269 (1999)?
Over the past few days, the Turkish Government
has continued its acts of aggression against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Turkey’s armed forces intervened directly
in support of the terrorism the country sponsors. The
regime has repeatedly used mercenaries and foreign
terrorist fighters that it has introduced, in partnership
with other countries, into my country. The forces of
the Erdoğan regime have used heavy artillery to bomb
areas occupied by Syrian Kurds and Syrian Arab army
sites inside Syrian territory. On top of that, dozens of
vehicles carrying machine guns and armed terrorist
mercenaries have been sent to the area of Syria around
A’zaz, besides Turkey allowing extreme terrorist
groups to transit through Turkey to Syria in support of
the Al-Nusra Front or Da’esh inside Syria. In addition
to that, the Turkish regime has given those terrorist
gangs chemical weapons that they can use against
Syrian civilians and Government forces — chemical
attacks that have been used as a pretext for indicting the
Syrian Government. Those efforts have been conducted
in tandem with calls from the Saudi regime for a
military intervention in my country, under the pretext
of combating the terrorism carried out by Da’esh, an
organization founded and sponsored by the Saudi
regime itself.
Despite everything I have just mentioned, the
Council has remained helpless, silent and unable to
put an end to the attacks and aggression, and unable

S/PV.7621

to carry out its main role, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are discussing
tragic facts, and therefore feel great sorrow for the
hundreds of Syrians killed each day while the United
Nations remains helpless and unable to hold the
perpetrators of international terrorism accountable.
The situation has reached unprecedented levels.
Indeed, carelessness has reached unprecedented levels
when Saudi Arabia is entrusted with the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, Qatar is the sponsor of the
Dialogue among Civilizations, Turkey will host the
World Humanitarian Summit and Jordan, before the
end of its mandated term as a Council member, was a
member of the “peace troika” with Saudi Arabia and
Egypt.
The Council President indicated in the concept note
(S/2016/103, annex) that the United Nations remains the
best possible option in confronting the conflicts and
mammoth challenges that are facing humankind. We
agree with that. However, the United Nations must fill
in the gaps — the enormous gaps — and undertake its
responsibilities towards its Member States, according
to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and in fulfilment of the aims of the founding fathers.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): The purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, our
commitments to humanity, are being tested repeatedly
today. It is our shared responsibility to work nationally,
regionally and internationally to uphold them. I wish to
thank Venezuela for providing us with this opportunity
to reflect on this very important issue.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly on behalf of the European Union.
Allow me to share with the Council some of my
country’s priorities.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of conflict
prevention. The various ongoing review processes also
reaffirm that very important issue. Instead of being
stuck in a perpetual crisis-management mode, we should
further prioritize early warning, prevention and conflict
resolution. The Security Council, with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, has a special responsibility in that regard.
We think it should use all of the elements in its toolbox,
including means related to the peaceful settlement of

16-0388041/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

disputes, cooperation with regional organizations, the
adoption of smart targeted sanctions and the referral of
situations to the International Criminal Court (ICC), if
circumstances so warrant.
We believe that preserving peace requires synergy
among the three pillars of the United Nations. We
cannot achieve peace and security without ensuring
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
human dignity and the equal rights of men and women.
The promotion of sustainable development is equally
important. We believe that it is the only way to ensure
long-lasting and more robust solutions, and therefore
the only way we can sustain peace and avoid relapses
into conflict.
The Charter of the United Nations embodies a
vision for a more peaceful, stable and prosperous world
for all. We must protect that for which it stands. We
must protect human dignity. Stopping the violent acts
committed by terrorists, putting an end to widespread
and gross human rights violations and eradicating
various forms of modern slavery all require our joint
and coordinated efforts.
In past years, the Security Council has frequently
referred to the principle of the responsibility to protect.
Hungary believes that, on the tenth anniversary of
that principle, it is high time for the international
community to renew and enhance its enduring
commitment to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
Hungary believes that ensuring accountability for
atrocity crimes is one of the best ways to prevent
their recurrence. States have the primary obligation to
repress violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, and we welcome all initiatives aimed
at enhancing domestic prosecution. At the same time,
we also acknowledge the crucial role played by the ICC
in the battle to end impunity when national criminal
accountability mechanisms are unavailable.
Finally, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, Hungary actively
participated in the elaboration of the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. So far,
110 Member States have signed the code of conduct.
I encourage those that have not yet done so to join
that important initiative, which represents a unique
opportunity to improve the Council’s ability to prevent

42/92

15/02/2016

and respond to atrocities in a timely and decisive
manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the African Union.
Mr. António (spoke in French): On behalf of
the President of the African Union Commission,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, who could not join us
owing to her schedule, allow me to express our warm
congratulations to the friendly country of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of February. I also wish to
welcome the presence here this morning of Ms. Delcy
Eloína Rodríguez Gómez, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Her
noteworthy presence among us demonstrates both the
unwavering attachment on the part of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and its inspirational
determination to provide a significant contribution to
the Council’s work. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his valuable briefing this morning.
It has been 70 years since the creation of the United
Nations, yet the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations can still stand the test of time
and the world’s crises, allowing the Organization to
preserve the foundation guiding its work to achieve
the triptych of peace, human rights and development.
Guided by those fundamental values, the United
Nations has added several accomplishments and many
successes to its credit. Peace and security have been
restored in many parts of the world, people have freed
themselves from the yoke of colonialism in Africa,
Asia and Latin America, and the world has experienced
significant development in recent decades.
Those principles, which are of well-established
legitimacy, must continue to guide United Nations
efforts to address both traditional and new threats to
international peace and security. Those fundamental
values require a new dynamism in order to silence the
weapons in the many areas of conflict around the world,
end colonization and foreign occupation and eliminate
poverty and famine, which, along with new terrorist
threats, violent extremism and organized crime,
make up the greatest challenges facing the United
Nations. We must also work to reaffirm the principle
of complementarity, as stipulated in Chapter VIII of
the Charter. The provisions in that Chapter highlight
the importance of judiciously combining the universal

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

character of the United Nations with the advantages
that regional approaches offer.
In the tradition of its strategic partnership with
the United Nations, the African Union has espoused
the purposes and principles outlined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Article 3 of the Constitutive Act
of the African Union enshrines those objectives and
underlines the need to promote the conditions that
favour international cooperation, taking due account
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
The contribution of the African Union to achieving
the aim of the Charter set out in paragraph 1, Article
1, namely, the maintenance of international peace and
security, is now incontestable. Africa contributes more
than 45 per cent of the peacekeeping personnel around
the world. Since 2003, it has mandated the deployment
of more than 70,000 uniformed personnel and nearly
1,500 civilians in nine operations. The stabilization
efforts undertaken by those missions and the sacrifices
made by their personnel have greatly facilitated the task
of the United Nations missions that have subsequently
taken up the reins.
In parallel to the deployment of peacekeeping
operations on the ground, the African Union has also
worked to build long-term capacity through the African
Standby Force. That Force makes possible an appropriate
response aimed at remedying some of the shortcomings
seen in recent operations led by the African Union,
which relate to planning, force-generation, command,
monitoring and support for missions. However, one of
the major obstacles that the African Union regularly
faces in that context concerns the lack of flexible,
sustained and predictable financing. It is essential
that the peacekeeping operation review process find
an appropriate solution to that issue, bearing in mind
that peacekeeping efforts made at the regional level
also represent a contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The African Union, in a decision of its Assembly of
the Heads of State and Government, has committed to
ensuring that 25 per cent of its budget is designated for
peacekeeping operations.
This year also marks the tenth anniversary of the
annual consultations between the Security Council
and the African Union Council of Peace and Security.
It also marks the end of the 10-year Capacity-building

S/PV.7621

Programme of the African Union. That offers us a
unique opportunity to take stock of the partnership
between our two organizations, to draw the appropriate
lessons from past experience, to recognize both
our successes and our failures and to identify the
ways and means of strengthening our cooperation
with a view to responding better to challenges. That
strategic partnership represents an asset for both
the United Nations and the African Union. It should
be reinforced so as to enable both organizations to
achieve greater consistency in their policies, based on
prior consultation before taking any decisions and on
a common understanding of the issues and a common
definition of shared priorities. In that regard, concrete
steps must be taken to strengthen the effectiveness
of the joint annual consultations, both between the
Security Council and African Union Council of Peace
and Security, and between the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission.
Furthermore, we look forward to the General
Assembly’s efforts to enshrine and give concrete form
to the new United Nations-African Union partnership
on Africa’s integration and development agendas,
which are designed to succeed the 10-year African
Union Capacity-building Programme. The new
programme represents a new vision. It includes specific
recommendations on the nature of the support expected
from the United Nations system in various areas of
activity.
Today’s debate also represents an opportunity to
recall the need to continue the reform of the United
Nations, to adapt its mechanisms and to modernize its
instruments so as to enable it to fulfil its mission with
greater effectiveness. The completion of the process
of revitalizing the General Assembly, as well as the
long-awaited reform of the Security Council, should
end the historical injustice inflicted on Africa. Those
processes remain essential to making the Organization
more effective and more representative of the current
global balance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Head of the Observer Delegation of
the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member State. The
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process

16-0388043/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
We thank the Venezuelan presidency of the Security
Council for providing the Council and the United
Nations as a whole with this opportunity to reflect
on and reaffirm our commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
their continued relevance in the twenty-first century.
More than ever, the Charter needs to be respected and
implemented. This debate also gives us an opportunity
to pay tribute to those who have sacrificed themselves
in the hope of a free, democratic and peaceful world,
established on the basis of the universal values that not
only underlie the United Nations but also inspired the
foundation of the European Union.
As we mark this year, the fiftieth anniversary of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, and look ahead to the seventieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 2018, it is appropriate to recall that the
Charter of the United Nations has provided the bedrock
on which an extensive network of international human
rights obligations and commitments have been built.
In its work, the Security Council has increasingly
embraced the advancement of human rights as a
critical element of promoting peace and security and
preventing conflicts and atrocities. Ranging from its
consideration of country situations to taking forward
the women and peace and security agenda, such efforts
should continue and intensify. The Council also has the
important power to refer situations in which genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes appear to have
been committed to the International Criminal Court, as
well as to decide on targeted sanctions.
The Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front
initiative also draws on the foundational human rights
principles enshrined in the Charter, in the context of
its aspirations to gear the entire United Nations system
towards the advancement of human rights and to seek to
ensure that mass atrocities become a thing of the past.
In paragraph 4, Article 2, the Charter calls on all
Members of the Organization to
“refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State”.

44/92

15/02/2016

It provides that all Member States shall settle their
international disputes by peaceful means and fulfil
in good faith the obligations assumed by them. The
European Union and its member States are deeply
committed to those core principles of the United
Nations. We firmly believe that there is no place in the
twenty-first century for the use of force and coercion to
change internationally recognized borders in Europe or
elsewhere.
In that regard, the European Union recalls General
Assembly resolution 68/262 and remains strongly
committed to upholding the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Similarly,
we are heartened by the positive momentum and the
atmosphere surrounding the intensified unification
talks in Cyprus under United Nations auspices. We
look forward to bringing that process to a successful
conclusion and to reaching a comprehensive settlement
as soon as possible, on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and in line with European Union
principles.
Nowhere are the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations being tested more
severely today than in Syria. That conflict continues
to rage, with disastrous consequences for the Syrian
population, for the neighbouring countries and for the
wider region, including for us in the European Union.
We strongly condemn the use of starvation as a method
of warfare, which most of all affects the weakest and
most vulnerable, in particular women, children, older
persons and persons with disabilities. As Secretary
General Ban Ki-moon recently pointed out, the use of
starvation as a weapon of war is a war crime. In that
regard, it is crucial to reaffirm our firm commitment to
fight impunity.
The indiscriminate bombing of civilian areas is
unacceptable. It has led to mass displacements and
huge refugee flows. It has also encouraged recruitment
by, and the flourishing of, terrorist groups in Syria. The
European Union calls on all parties to cease all attacks
on civilian objects and take all the appropriate steps to
protect civilians, including members of ethnic, religious
and confessional communities, and to grant immediate
access to humanitarian relief operations. They must
fully respect international humanitarian law and
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We also recall that the primary responsibility to protect
its population lies with the Syrian regime. When that

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

responsibility is not fulfilled, the Security Council is
responsible for taking decisive action.
It is indeed urgent to halt the conflict in Syria
and put an end to the suffering of the population. The
European Union fully supports the United Nations
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
his efforts in Geneva to make progress in the Syrian
political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
Allow me, in that context, to also welcome the
outcome of the recent international donors conference
in London convened by the United Kingdom, Germany,
Norway, Kuwait and the United Nations on 4 February,
which managed to raise more than $10 billion. The
EU has mobilized almost €5 billion so far. We already
committed substantial support to Turkey, and are
putting together comprehensive support packages for
Jordan and Lebanon.
Against the background of continued suffering in
Syria and the significant challenges that still remain
elsewhere, including in Libya, where the EU strongly
encourages all parties to fully implement the political
agreement, it is important to highlight that important
progress has been made in the region. Last July, after
years of difficult and complex negotiations coordinated
by the European Union, an agreement was reached on
the Iranian nuclear issue. The adoption of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action in October, endorsed
in resolution 2231 (2015), marked another important
milestone to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme. The proclamation of
implementation day on 16 January marks a further
milestone in that process and demonstrates that
diplomacy and multilateralism deliver effective results
for peace and security. It shows that cooperation can
prevail over confrontation.
The fight against all forms of radicalization,
violent extremism and terrorism continues to be of
paramount importance to the European Union. The
horrific attacks in Istanbul, Paris, Beirut and Garissa
serve as a stark and most egregious reminder of the
unacceptable costs of a collective failure to act swiftly
and effectively. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
plan of action for preventing violent extremism,
which was released in January. We look forward to its
discussion and implementation, and trust that further
preventive action will be taken by the SecretaryGeneral and all bodies of the Organization, including
by the Council, as well as Member States. We also look

S/PV.7621

forward to engage in the upcoming tenth anniversary
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in June 2016. It remains imperative that the
United Nations ensures coherence and coordination of
its actions in supporting Member States to fight this
scourge. The European Union will continue to step up
its efforts at home and with the external partners in
this area, in line with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, as well as in accordance
with international law, particularly human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
welcome the Foreign Minister of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and to congratulate her on
Venezuela’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I would
also like to commend the President for the holding of
this important debate on the issue of respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Unfortunately, its convening coincides with
an absence of peace and stability in the Middle East
due to the conflicts that have erupted, which have led
to further destruction, terrorism, killing and suffering.
The creation of the United Nations was an
attempt to introduce the idea of world governance
by establishing a global forum with the authority to
take important decisions that guarantee respect for
all peoples and nations and the principles of stability,
security and peace, as stipulated in the Charter. The
Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom at the time
stated on 22 November 1945 that he was
“prepared to sit with anyone, party or State, to
establish a Constitution, such as the Constitutions
of great countries, with the aim of establishing a
world council that serves peace and ends war”.
The Security Council and this Organization are
the sole forum to put an end to war and destructive
conflicts and are entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. Achieving peace based
on constructive dialogue and peaceful negotiations and
the principle of respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs have always
been the main purpose for which the Organization
was established. It was founded shortly after the of the
League of Arab States with both organizations united

16-0388045/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

in their ultimate goal, namely, peace. Peace can be
achieved only through dialogue, cooperation, equality
and stability, without conflicts and disagreement. We
need that peace more than ever in the Middle East, it
being the region where conflicts have festered and led
to untold suffering, death and destruction.
For 70 years since the United Nations was established
and its Charter was adopted, thie Organization has
needed to undertake further work to strengthen the
purposes and principles of the Charter. That requires
political will. Membership in this world Organization
makes it incumbent upon its members to be committed
to its Charter and its purposes and principles. Its main
body in charge of the maintenance of international peace
and security, namely the Security Council, should take
the lead, particularly the Permanent Members of the
Council, and should set their selfish interests aside and
work together with a view to achieving the common
purpose.
In that regard, I hope what the Washington Post
has published today will not become reality. If further
fighting happens near Aleppo, it carries the danger of
becoming a world war. We believe that the international
system that we have all agreed to after the Second World
War should prevent such possibilities — 70 years since
international efforts have not been able to achieve the
desired peace in the Middle East.
Instead of settling problems that have lasted for
decades, those problems have been exacerbated. To
date, the Security Council has been unable to find
solutions to those problems and conflicts. That, in
and of itself, increases the dangers to international
peace and security, particularly with the emergence
of so-called non-State actors. The United Nations
has been attempting to find a successful method for
dealing with failed States, but we are afraid that the
further development of non-State actors may result in
the existence of more such States and increase the risk
of the political and legal failure of the international
community.
The Security Council is the only guarantor of
international peace and security in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as it is the only international organ capable of
implementing its resolutions and addressing challenges
and dangers to international peace and security. The
time has come to reconsider the Council’s policies
with regard to dealing with world conflicts and helping

46/92

15/02/2016

peoples in conflict areas to overcome their differences
and face the challenges that threaten the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. Undoubtedly,
any review of those policies would require a review of
the working methods of the Security Council, including
the right of veto.
The implementation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the maintenance
of international peace and security require solidarity
on the part of all international bodies that work in
combating terrorist organizations, with a view to
confronting their extreme ideologies, containing them
and stopping them, instead of watching them spread to
North Africa and potentially to Europe. It has become
necessary to implement Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular paragraph 1, Article
53:
“The Security Council shall, where appropriate,
utilize such regional arrangements or agencies for
enforcement action under its authority”.
If the Security Council has been successful in
that regard in cooperation with the African Union, we
believe that it should also begin to consider doing the
same with the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the League of Arab States, particularly with
regard to establishing joint forces with the League
of Arab States. As a regional Arab organization, the
League of Arab States reiterates its respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and commits to continuing its efforts with a
view to maintaining international peace and security
and promoting the protection of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States members of the League by
protecting them from extreme terrorist organizations.
In accordance with article 6 of the organizational
document of the Arab Peace and Security Council,
we intend to establish an Arab peacekeeping force
and continue our efforts on the ground aimed at the
implementation of Arab League Summit decision 628
of 2015.
In conclusion, the League of Arab States joins
the United Nations and other important regional
organizations in working for the maintenance of
international peace and security and expresses the hope
that the Security Council, the primary organ charged
with maintaining international peace and security,
will be able to put an end to conflicts, instead of just

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

managing them, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and with a view to realizing the
aspirations of peoples and preserving the credibility of
the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to express at the outset our
affectionate and grateful memories of the eternal
Commander Hugo Chávez Frías, Commander of the
Bolivarian Revolution, a champion of love, friendship
and solidarity, and to convey, on behalf of our President,
the Nicaraguan people and our delegation, our warm
greetings to President Nicolás Maduro Moros and our
congratulations on the very valuable and successful
leadership of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I extend our greetings to our brother Rafael
Ramírez Carreño, the Permanent Representative, and
to his delegation for their dedication and commitment
during this presidency.
Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Charter of our Organization, which has just
celebrated its seventieth anniversary, was drafted at a
time when there was a convergence of efforts to “save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war” . Our
Organization presented itself to the world as an entity
that was a facilitator of peace, but, since its founding
to the present day, the stated objectives have been
frustrated. In that regard, allow me share the thoughts
of our President, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra:
“We believe that only when the United Nations is
equitable and democratic, recast, re-created and fit
for the purpose of serving the world and humankind
in the twenty-first century, can we tackle the great
challenges of our time...
“Nicaragua calls for a world of solidarity and
complementarity and a reshaped United Nations
in which everyone’s interests are served and all
Member States can listen and talk to each other on
equal footing. We also call for the United Nations
agencies to play a respectful, responsible and
ethical role, devoid of any form of interference and
intervention in the internal affairs of sovereign
States.” (A/70/PV.23, p. 12).

S/PV.7621

The decisions that the most important organs of
our Organization make must be based on the full and
unconditional respect for the principles and purposes
of the Charter, which, therefore, makes the present
debate more urgent and meaningful. Unfortunately,
in recent years, we have seen decisions taken by the
Security Council that have not been predicated on those
principles. The increasing greed engendered by global
capitalism, particularly in the Middle East and Africa,
have sparked wars and sown insecurity, destruction,
death and the forced and brutal displacement of millions
of refugees, exposing the true nature of war, terrorism
and the conflicts that we are living. Those are all
actions that are unfortunately promoted and supported
by some permanent members of the Security Council.
On the one hand, the Council has found itself
hindered in its efforts to act in the common interest on
several occasions. The most obvious example, in that
regard, is the case of Palestine. On the other hand, the
Council has been misused and manipulated through the
granting of mandates with regard to situations in the
Middle East aimed at promoting regime changes, wars
and the provision of financing to terrorist groups, in
flagrant violation of the principles of international law,
relations of friendship and cooperation among States,
and the Charter of the United Nations. Our country
reaffirms its condemnation of those actions and like
attempts to undermine peace in our America, the only
region that has been declared a zone of peace. We
condemn the coup attempts against our sister Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and the plans to assassinate its
President, Comrade Nicolás Maduro Moros. We also
condemn the maintenance of the inhuman and criminal
blockade against our sister Republic of Cuba.
Nicaragua, as one of the first four States to ratify
the Charter, firmly believes that the maintenance of
international peace and security calls, first of all, for
a sense of community based on the sovereign equality
of its members, the self-determination of peoples and
compliance with international law, where individual
and individualistic interests and the culture of war are
completely eliminated and replaced by a culture of
engagement, dialogue, consensus, peace and solidarity.
That does not entail only the establishment of new codes
of conduct for members of the Council, as some have
suggested, but rather strict respect for the rules that
already exist and the principles that guide the Council
and that are set out in the Charter, which is above any
other instrument, as established in Article 103.

16-0388047/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

Promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes is
a central point in this order of things, and we must
work to eliminate the use or threat of use of force to
resolve disputes. The Charter provides several options
in that regard, one of which is the International Court
of Justice, which deserves special mention, as it is the
principal legal body whose judgments are binding and
are to be complied with immediately. In that regard,
recognition of the jurisdiction of the Court and the
withdrawal of reservations to it is an imperative now
more than ever.
Actions to counter terrorism must be made
collectively within the framework of the Charter and
international law, while ensuring that all Member
States are equal participants in terms of their rights and
respect for their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
With regard to peacekeeping missions, Nicaragua
believes that respect for the empowerment of the
host country is vital to ensuring the legitimacy of the
operations themselves and their success. In that regard,
we reaffirm the need to strengthen the authority of
the General Assembly to address issues relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in situations in which the Council fails
to exercise its primary responsibility in adhering to
the Charter. We call on the international community
to fulfil the objectives that we outlined 70 years ago
to work together in solidarity and with respect and to
eradicate the scourges that continue to be obstacles to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
I conclude with inspiring words from our President,
Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, who said that the
Organization must respond to the challenges of our
time with measures and actions that reflect the best
interests of the peoples, such as respect for others, the
inviolability of sovereignty, acknowledging natural
resources as part of our heritage and the promotion of
security, justice, and peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We commend
the Venezuelan presidency and Ms. Delcy Eloina
Rodríguez Gómez, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, for convening
today’s high-level open debate on the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
govern international relations among Member States.

48/92

15/02/2016

Kazakhstan reaffirms its commitment to upholding
the Charter of the United Nations. The principles of
Kazakhstan’s peaceful and harmonious multisector
foreign policy are inspired by those enshrined in the
Charter. It is the single, internationally recognized
document that provides the architecture for the work
of the United Nations and the Council. The principles
of sovereignty, the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means, refraining from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State and non-interference in the domestic affairs
of other States, as enshrined in the Charter, are all
fundamental and should be respected by all States
Members of the United Nations.
Kazakhstan is seriously concerned about violations
of those fundamental principles and strongly believes
in the need for all Member States to be guided by them.
As we have observed in recent years, such purposes and
principles have not been respected or adhered to fully,
which has lead to the conflicts and human tragedies
that we witness today. In that connection, we refer to
the Security Council’s recent record in not being able
to address the many issues facing us today. That is why
President Nursultan Nazarbayev, at the general debate of
the General Assembly at its seventieth session, proposed
to convene in 2016 a high-level United Nations event
to pledge adherence to the basic tenets of international
law (see A/70/PV.13). In that connection, Kazakhstan
fully supported the adoption of the declaration on the
occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations last September.
The security challenges that we face currently
are far more complex, multifaceted and increasingly
transnational. Kazakhstan therefore attaches the
utmost importance to the security of civilians in
conflict situations, as is evident in its engagement in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Western
Sahara and Cote d’Ivoire. The protection of civilians
has always been a priority for my country, which has
supported Governments in our region and beyond with
assistance aimed at conflict prevention and resolution
and humanitarian assistance, thus making a significant
contribution to regional peace and security. My
delegation is currently active in the gender entity of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and encourages countries to implement resolution 1325
(2000) in particular. Kazakhstan, as a Member State,
has acceded to the code of conduct regarding Security

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council action against genocide and crimes against
humanity or war crimes.
The role of regional organizations has been greatly
enhancwinig to the escalation of the potential for
conflict seen in various regions. Kazakhstan therefore
encourages more vigorous and active cooperation
on the part of the United Nations and its Member
States with regional and subregional organizations in
settling conflicts, as set out in the Charter. My country
has therefore supported activities of United Nations
regional offices, which serve as platforms for preventive
diplomacy. We have proposed the establishment of a
United Nations regional hub for sustainable development
and humanitarian assistance in Almaty. The hub would
complement the work of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in the
vast territory of the Eurasian region and would focus
on early warning, prevention, dialogue, mediation and
post-conflict resolution.
While sanctions play a role in preventing conflicts
and preserving peace, they should only be imposed by
the Security Council with proper assessment of their
impact and should not be imposed unilaterally. The
national interests of Member States must be balanced
with greater objectivity and global perspectives.
According to the Charter, the General Assembly
and the Security Council are paramount bodies of equal
standing. That original intent needs to be restored by the
Security Council, while allowing greater importance
for the General Assembly and learning from the
collective wisdom of Member States. We therefore
encourage closer collaboration among the Presidents
of the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, so as to create a new
global development strategy for peace. We stand ready
to work with the Council and Member States to uphold
the Charter of the United Nations nationally, regionally
and globally.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presidency of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. It is our honour to participate under its
guidance in this debate.
The historical reflection on and firm adherence
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations are essential obligations for all those

S/PV.7621

committed to international peace and security. The
Charter of the Organization, in its Preamble, calls for
saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
practicing tolerance and living together in peace with
one another as good neighbours. The Charter’s first goal
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
a precept that over the years has become an inviolable
right of all peoples and nations. However, its fulfilment
requires the elimination of threats that conspire against
its full realization and the eradication of all violations
of the Charter and all threats to the right to peace, such
as interference in the internal affairs of States, acts of
aggression, wars that seek control of natural resources
and non-conventional wars. In recent years, such wars
have become the most serious attacks against the
exercise of people’s right to self-determination.
We must also oppose the application of unilateral,
coercive measures and the unjust and exclusive
international order that we have today; we must oppose
the inequality and selfishness that result from neoliberal globalization, discrimination and xenophobia,
as well as the growing aggressiveness of the NATO
military doctrine. That also presupposes the unlimited
recognition of the sovereign equality of States, the
peaceful solution of international disputes, respect for
political independence and the political, socioeconomic
and cultural system that nations have freely decided on
for themselves, and the rejection of the threat or use of
threat of force against another State.
The countries of our region clearly understood
those concerns when, at the second Summit of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
held in Havana in January 2014, we formally approved
the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean
as a Zone of Peace. That is a document of transcendental
and historic importance that is fully applicable to
the relations of the countries of the region with other
countries of the world.
While it is true that sustainable development
cannot be achieved without peace and stability, it is
also true that there will not be peace or stability without
development; that is true, yet millions of people continue
to be condemned to hunger, poverty and despair. We
therefore affirm that the prevention of conflicts and the
maintenance of peace require solidarity, cooperation
and international assistance, as well as joint action to
eradicate poverty, unemployment, hunger, inequality
and their underlying causes.

16-0388049/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

We recognize that the Security Council has an
important role to play in the maintenance of international
peace and security by virtue of the responsibility
conferred upon it by the Charter. That is why the
members of the Council must be the first countries to
support peaceful solutions and exercise firm, effective
and clear resistance against the recourse to war and the
violation of the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter. They must be the first countries to exhaust
all possible avenues to preserve life and prevent the
promotion and application of a policy of regime change
and prevent the violation of people’s right to selfdetermination. They must stop abusing the veto in their
attempts to ensure the impunity of the perpetrators of
the serious violations of international law and human
rights that victimize the people of Palestine. They must
be the first countries to reject any attempts to reinterpret
the mandate of the Council and to usurp from it the role
assigned to other principle organs of the Organization,
particularly the General Assembly.
Seventy years have gone by since the founding of
the Organization. It must be strengthened. In particular,
the Security Council must be made democratic in order
to convert it into a model of transparency, democracy
and genuine participation. The General Assembly
must be revitalized so that it can play its central role
in achieving the rights of peoples and of every human
being in a just, democratic and fair international order.
We also understand that peacekeeping operations are
becoming increasingly complex and involved. They
may be indispensable in certain circumstances, but
they cannot be a substitute for the need to address and
resolve the deep-seated causes of conflicts and they
cannot be a replacement for diplomacy and political
dialogue.
Many are saying today that the rule of law at the
international level should become the cornerstone of
relations between States. For Cuba, that means that the
principles set out in the Charter and in international
law must be applied fully and non-selectively across
the board as essential requirements for peaceful
coexistance between nations, sustainble development
and the promotion and protection of the human rights of
all. The rule of law in international relations is therefore
incompatible with unilateralism and economic,
commercial and financial measures and policies that
run counter to international law; with any effort aimed
at subverting the political, economic or social order
freely chosen by a people or aimed at interfering in a

50/92

15/02/2016

country’s internal affairs; and with measures intended
to foment conflict in sovereign States for the benefit
of actions aimed and domination and hegemonic
influence. That is why we firmly reject all actions aimed
at destabilizing the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
which are in flagrant violation of the requirements for
the rule of law in international relations, as well as the
actions aimed at intervening against Ecuador, Bolivia
and other nations of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Cuba would like to reaffirm here in this forum
the unswerving commitment of the Cuban people to
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular to its
purposes and principles. It reiterates its vocation for
peace and unlimited respect for the sovereignty of
States and its commitment to the realization of the
rights of peoples to development, to a just, democratic
and fair international order, to solidarity between
peoples across the world, to a healthy environment,
including one in which everyone can live free of the
ongoing threat posed by nuclear weapons, a threat to
the very existence of the human species.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and its delegation on their leadership of the
work of the Council during the month of February, and
thank them for convening this open debate and for the
concept paper before us (S/2016/103, annex).
In my statement, I shall raise three issues. First,
I reiterate the importance that Colombia attaches
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
Organization. Those purposes and principles are not a
mere listing of general values and aims; they are the
very cement holding the structure together and the
foundation of the Organization, so that Member States
can collectively work to promote a peaceful, prosperous
and fair world.
Sovereignty,
territorial
integrity,
political
independence, non-interference in the internal affairs
of States, the prohibition of the use or threat of use
of force and the peaceful settlement of international
disputes are the fundamental pillars underpinning
international law and international relations. They are
as valid today as they have been over the past seven
decades. My country’s views were expressed by our
representative Alfonso Lopez in the general debate on
30 October 1946,

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

“With that same optimism we felt during all the
initial stages of the organization of the United
Nations... we are now ready to support any initiative
tending to establish once and for all throughout the
world the triumph of reason over force, of right
over arbitrariness, and of liberty over slavery in
any form” (A/PV.43, p.867-868).
The second issue I would like to address is the
Organization’s need for flexibility and adaptability. In
the last 70 years, the world has continuously experienced
the turbulence of events and the undeniable evolution
of, and increase in, conflicts and their complexity.
Those conflicts permanently defy the adaptability and
responsiveness of the United Nations to the new threats
to international peace and security and the growing
need to ensure comprehensive sustainable development
and the protection of human rights.
Finally, I would like to refer to the need to rely
on the tools provided under Chapter VI of the San
Francisco Charter with greater frequency. There is
an old Spanish proverb that “prevention is better than
cure”; and in diplomacy, as in health, identification
and early-warning systems are essential to preventing
the multiplication of conflicts and the increase in
peacekeeping operations authorized under Chapter VII.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and of the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) concur
on the primacy of political authorities responding
adequately and appropriately to situations of conflict
from their initial stages. That approach does not neglect
the proportionate use of force in cases where such is
urgent and unavoidable. However, we must remember
that peace cannot be imposed, but must come from
the players themselves and should respond to the
particularities of each environment and each society so
that it can become truly sustainable.
My country, which has suffered the ravages of a
conflict that has lasted for more than 50 years, has
valiantly chosen to achieve peace. That is why we
highlight the Council’s decision, reflected in resolution
2261 (2016), of 25 January, which establishes a political
mission in Colombia, in which this body expressed its
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes. As
expressed by Foreign Minister María Ángela Holguín
Cuellar on the occasion of the adoption of the resolution,

S/PV.7621

“It is an opportunity for the United Nations and
the international community to enjoy success
as they are being asked for their support in the
implementation of an agreement in a conflict that
is being resolved by national stakeholders through
negotiation and dialogue.
“I would like to convey to the members of the
Council that their willingness to work with
Colombia on this matter will be essential to the
success of the process. We know that by remaining
focused on our mandate we will achieve conclusive
and definitive results for peace in Colombia.”
(S/PV.7609, p. 10).
With that, as 70 years ago at the dawn of the
Organization, and as we have been reiterating since,
Colombia reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Seventy years ago, when
representatives of 50 nations met to establish the
founding vision for the newly formed United Nations,
they were not engaging in a merely academic exercise.
The purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations emerged from a painful confrontation with
the horrors of the Second World War. Nations of the
world understood that, in order to achieve all the lofty
principles outlined in the Charter, the family of nations
would have to stand firm in defence of the Charter’s
first principle, in Article 1, namely,
“[t]o maintain international peace and security, and
to that end: to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to peace”.
Today we confront a new reality that requires learning
that lesson anew. The purposes and principles of
the Charter are only as strong and durable as the
international will to uphold them.
The primary challenge to the founding vision of the
Charter is no longer that of conflict between States, but
the explosion of violence and brutality in failing and
failed States. Nowhere is that more evident than in the
Middle East. the civil war in Syria is approaching its
fifth year, with little hope for an end to the madness.
Yet the international community continues to fail to
respond effectively to the scale of the disaster. News
of the siege and deliberate starvation of the 40,000
residents of Madaya by Hizbullah and Al-Assad forces

16-0388051/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

15/02/2016

only underscores the magnitude of the horrors and the
futility of the international response.

could not bring itself to speak out against Hamas by
name; there was not even a whisper of condemnation.

Of course, Syria is not alone. From Libya to Iraq
and from Somalia to Yemen, insurgencies, proxy wars
and civil wars are transforming those countries into
living nightmares for their inhabitants. In vast stretches
of the Middle East, the promises of the United Nations
Charter have become but a distant dream.

It is tragic that some in the Chamber seem eager to
ignore Hamas’s iron-fisted grip on Gaza and to explain
away their ongoing campaign of terror against Israel.
Just two weeks ago, we reminded the Chamber of the
Council resolution against terrorism, which declares
that

The numerous violent radical extremists who
pose a major challenge to global peace and security
have filled the vacuum of law and order by imposing
their fanatical rule on growing numbers of people
across the world. Terrorist groups such as Da’esh and
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, Hamas and
Hizbullah continue to make a mockery of the values
and principles this institution was founded to uphold.
Those fundamentalist groups represent a fundamental
threat to the world of freedom and dignity envisioned
in the Charter. Yet this institution has failed to draw a
clear line in the sand in defence of the principles of our
founding document.

“any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations, whenever and by
whomsoever committed” (resolution 2249 (2015),
fourth preambular paragraph).

Like many other countries around the world, we
in Israel live with the consequences of this failure on
our own border. Hizbullah has amassed over 100,000
rockets ready to be fired at any Israeli city. In fact,
it has transformed numerous villages in southern
Lebanon into outposts of terror. This is the true face
of Hizbullah — a brutal organization that deliberately
targets Israeli civilians and uses Lebanese civilians as
human shields, which is a double war crime.
Instead of clear and unequivocal condemnations
of the blatant violations of resolution 1701 (2006), the
Security Council has remained silent. Hizbullah’s utter
disregard for the lives of the people of Israel and the
people of Lebanon is in opposition to every principle
this institution stands for. If we are truly committed to
upholding the principles of the Charter, silence is not
an option.
On our southern border, Hamas prepares for the
next round of conflict. The terror group controlling
Gaza continues to stockpile rockets and dig terror
tunnels to threaten Israelis towns in southern Israel and
beyond. Yet when Israel brought clear and indisputable
evidence and facts of these intentions to the attention
of the Security Council, the silence was deafening.
Even when Hamas operatives admitted — actually
boasted — of their preparations for war, the Council

52/92

And yet the Council has not lived up to this commitment
when it comes to terror attacks against Israel. That
wilful disregard for the peace and security of the people
of Israel undermines the credibility of this institution
and casts doubt on its fidelity to the principles of the
Charter. In order to achieve the worthy goals of peace
and reconciliation, it is time to state the reality as it is,
end the politicization and stop singling out Israel.
Yet only this morning we witnessed here in
the Chamber how two members of the Security
Council — Venezuela and Malaysia — proved yet again
that singling out my country and ignoring Palestinian
terror attacks has become a common practice.
Ignoring terror when it is politically convenient only
encourages more brutality and more bloodshed. I call
on the Security Council to condemn by name those who
instigate violence and carry out terror attacks, whether
it is Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh or
Hamas, and hold them accountable.
Ignoring Palestinian accountability and supporting
rejectionist policies towards direct negotiations is
another example of overlooking the true spirit of the
Charter when it comes to Israel. Just this morning, in
a striking rejection of relentless international efforts
to broker peace negotiations, Palestinian Authority
Foreign Minister Riyad Al-Malki said,
“We will never go back and sit again in direct
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.”
This statement leaves no doubt as to the Palestinians’
intention and should be widely condemned.
The commitment of the Council to the purposes
and principles of the Charter will be measured by how
it responds to threats to peace and security and whether
it responds to all such threats. At a time when cruel

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

dictators engage in the mass murder of their own people
and fanatical groups spread their message of hatred and
intolerance by the sword, a united stand against terror
is needed now more than ever.
Millions around the world look to us to defend their
rights and their very lives, and they are losing faith.
We must do more to help them. For the sake of these
men, women and children, let us come together to meet
these crucial challenges and leave the next generation a
legacy equal to the vision of the United Nations Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the European Union and wishes
to add the following remarks in its national capacity.
Last October, at the initiative of Spain, Member
States recommitted themselves to the principles and
the values of the Charter. These principles and values
hold the same relevance today as they did 70 years ago.
They are the bedrock of the effective multilateralism
that the United Nations embodies when we work
together constructively. We must continue to promote
and strengthen these values to address today’s pressing
challenges: from climate change to sustainable
development; from preventing violent extremism to
addressing regional conflicts; and from managing
migration to finding solutions to the unprecedented
number of refugees.
This is how our Organization has been able to
achieve significant results in the past 70 years, lifting
millions out of poverty, promoting the rule of law and
respect for human rights, and advancing fundamental
freedoms. This is how we reached milestone agreements
last year such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
the Paris Agreement. Rest assured of Italy’s continuous
commitment.
At the same time, 70 years have passed, and a fresh
look is needed. Allow me to make some brief points.
First, concerning awareness, we must recognize
that today’s security challenges are different from
those of the past and that the security landscape before
us is rapidly changing. While respecting the different
roles and mandates of the United Nations organs, closer
attention should be paid to broader security issues,
which are a matter of concern for a growing part of
the membership, and closer cooperation between the

S/PV.7621

General Assembly and the Security Council should be
sought. As a best practice, I would point to the open
debate held during the New Zealand presidency of the
Council on the security challenges facing the small
island developing States and also recall the prompt and
efficient response taken by the Council with regard to
the Ebola crisis.
Secondly, with respect to fostering an integrated
approach and addressing the root causes of instability,
I would note that today’s challenges are complex by
nature. Among the merits of Agenda 2030 is the fact
that it introduces an integrated approach to security;
just as the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will
promote peace, so is peace essential to the SDGs. It
is therefore vital to understand and address the root
causes of today’s challenges. The implementation of
the recently adopted Sustainable Development Goals
will also play a critical role in the prevention of violent
extremism and contribute to the effective management
of migrations and of the unprecedented number of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
This leads me to my third point, which is also
my final one: revitalizing the preventive tools at the
disposal of the Council. The rhetorical battle on conflict
prevention has been won. There is broad consensus on
its centrality and on the great risks that can stem from
inaction. Not only is prevention the right choice: it is
also the smart choice.
The emerging broad consensus among the
membership should now be operationalized by
strengthening the tools of preventive diplomacy,
including financially. It is thus important to renew
our collective focus on the peaceful settlement of
disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter and to
develop our partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular with the African Union,
under Chapter VIII.
In the same spirit, Italy believes in closer
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, for instance by inviting
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations to
participate in Council meetings as appropriate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Tesfay (Eritrea): At the outset, I would like
to thank the presidency of the Bolivarian Republic of

16-0388053/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

Venezuela for having organized this open debate under
the theme “Respect for the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations as a key element for
the maintenance of international peace and security”,
which is timely and most appropriate.
Let me also seize this opportunity to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his remarks
this morning.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
establishment of the United Nations, founded to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war and
ensure justice and development for all nations. In this
dynamic and evolving era, maintaining global peace
and security has been and remains one of the cardinal
goals of the United Nations; yet conflicts and wars have
become a constant feature of our lives. Many of these
wars are waged in total disregard for the Charter of the
United Nations and, increasingly, without its mandate.
As a result, collective and coordinated remedial action
is required by all countries, large and small.
The world has changed almost beyond recognition
since 1945. The global demographic, economic,
political and cultural realities of the world and of States
bear little resemblance to the past. And yet the United
Nations, the Organization that supposedly represents
the entire community of nations and the peoples of the
world, remains thoroughly dominated by the few and
has marginalized the overwhelming majority.
The international community has a choice to
make: do we want to see a United Nations that is an
effective multilateral instrument for the maintenance of
international peace and security, or one that continues
to maintain its present archaic nature, with dominant
and powerful countries misusing it to justify their
hostile and hegemonic policies towards nations that
do not dance to their tune? If the choice is the latter,
the confidence of the majority of nations in, and their
support for, the United Nations will be further eroded.
Every Government and nation has been calling
for the revitalization and restructuring of the United
Nations. However, two decades after reform of the
Security Council was formally placed on the agenda
of the United Nations, and despite many extensive and
viable proposals, we are where we were 70 years ago.
It is vital that all nations, small and large, and
peoples as well as political and social forces that stand
for peace, independence, respect for international law,

54/92

15/02/2016

justice, equity and sustainable development, forge
a common front in order to defend the time-tested
principles of the equal sovereignty of nations, respect
for territorial integrity, and peaceful coexistence. The
right of nations to choose their social and economic path
of development must not only be respected but must
be the main principle of the United Nations. Respect
for the dignity and rights of citizens and migrants
and fidelity to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law should also be guiding principles. The
United Nations Charter and its principles must not be
compromised for diplomatic and political expediency.
To underline and understand how those principles
have been compromised and abused, it is appropriate
to mention Eritrea’s historical and current experience
with the United Nations. Eritrea has been and is today
a victim of the hypocritical working methods of the
United Nations, which is fully dominated and controlled
by a few permanent members of the Security Council.
For the geopolitical interests of the major Powers,
and becoming a victim of the Cold War, six decades
ago — in 1952, to be precise — the Eritrean people
were denied their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence by the United Nations. For 30 years,
the Eritrean people were savagely bombed from the
air and on the ground, with the aim of crushing their
just struggle for independence. However, through
sheer determination and a grass-roots participatory
system, the Eritrean people were able to achieve their
independence on 24 May 1991.
Today, once again, the Eritrean people are being
subjected to unfair and illegitimate sanctions by the
Security Council on the basis of fabricated allegations
that have proved to be unfounded. Moreover, the
Security Council continues to neglect the illegal
occupation of our sovereign territory by Ethiopia.
That occupation continues in violation of international
law, several Security Council resolutions and the final
and binding delimitation and demarcation decisions
by the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, the
implementation of which is guaranteed by the United
Nations.
In conclusion, Eritrea endorses the concept note
submitted by the presidency (see S/2016/103, annex).
Eritrea also strongly believes that there is no other
international body better suited than the United Nations
to handle regional and international issues. Yes, it has

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

to be maintained, but it also has to be reinvigorated,
enhanced and reformed.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
At the outset, allow me to congratulate the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on its presidency of
the Security Council this month, as well as for preparing
the concept note (see S/2016/103, annex) for today’s
deliberations on the theme “Respect for the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as a
key element for the maintenance of international peace
and security”.
I speak today as Chair of the second-largest
intergovernmental organization after the United
Nations. The member States of the OIC are bound
by its Charter, the Preamble of which reaffirms the
commitment of its member States to the Charter of
the United Nations and stresses their determination
to contribute to international peace and security,
understanding and dialogue among civilizations,
cultures and religions and to promote and encourage
friendly relations and good neighbourliness, mutual
respect and cooperation. All of those principles are
in harmony with those enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Today’s topic of discussion is
therefore of significance to the member States of the
OIC, as it forms a core pillar of the obligations of their
membership and work within our organization.
The Charter of the United Nations lays a framework
for modern international relations that, if applied and
adhered to, will no doubt lead to the ultimate goal of the
United Nations and of the Security Council, namely,
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Sovereignty, the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means, refraining from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State and non-interference in the domestic affairs of
other States are all lofty principles enshrined in the
Charters of both the United Nations and the OIC.
However, we have witnessed over the years — and
even now as we speak — failures to respect and adhere
to those purposes and principles, which have led to
the conflicts and human suffering that the world is
witnessing today. We can point to the Council’s recent

S/PV.7621

record in addressing the many issues facing us, such as
the question of Palestine, as evidence of the paralysis
in the Council. I cannot but mention the continuing
plight of the Palestinian people and condemn the
illegal policies and practices of Israel, the occupying
Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. The member States of the OIC call for
urgent measures, particularly by the Security Council,
aimed at bringing an end, without delay, to the Israeli
occupation, and at achieving a peaceful settlement that
will guarantee the enjoyment by the Palestinian people
of their inalienable rights.
The most notable evidence of the Council’s paralysis
is the continuing crisis in Syrian. In that regard, we
are appalled by the humanitarian situation in Syria
and the great suffering there. We call on all parties to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions, in
particular resolution 2254 (2015), which call for safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to those in need.
We stress the need for a political solution to the crisis.
That leads me to turn to a matter of importance to
the OIC: the encouragement of regional and subregional
organizations to take an active role in the settlement of
conflicts, which was, rightly, mentioned in the concept
note prepared by the presidency, in line with what is
stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations. The
security challenges that we face today are far more
complex, multifaceted and unconventional than ever
before. No longer are security challenges restricted
within borders; rather, they have become transnational.
No longer can we say that a security threat or challenge
on the other side of the world will not reach us or that
we are immune to it. No longer can we say that we are
protected from such threats by geography, topography,
oceans and distance. Those days are all but gone.
As our world has become more interconnected and
interdependent, so too have the challenges we face,
thus requiring us to enhance our collective efforts
to tackle global threats. However, it is not enough to
tackle security challenges on a country-to-country
level, they must also be tackled at the level of regional
and subregional organizations. Such organizations
can coordinate and cooperate in a concerted effort to
ensure the collective peace and security of our peoples.
The OIC would like to underline a fundamental aspect
of the Charter of the United Nations that ought to be
utilized in a more effective manner, namely, the resort
to regional agencies or arrangements in order to settle

16-0388055/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

disputes, as stipulated in Chapter VIII, on regional
arrangements, and Article 33 of the Charter.
The OIC is an important partner of the United
Nations in peace, security and the fostering of a culture
of peace at the global level. The OIC stands ready to
make meaningful contributions, and reiterates its
wish to cooperate with the United Nations in conflict
prevention and resolution, mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, the promotion of good governance
at the national and international levels, combating
international terrorism, fighting extremism, countering
religious intolerance, including Islamophobia, the
promotion and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, humanitarian assistance
and capacity-building.
Regional organizations, as stipulated in the
Charter, have a significant role to play in the
prevention, management and resolution of crises and
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
It is imperative and incumbent upon us — States and
regional organizations — to work more closely and more
collectively in order to contribute to the promotion of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.
Seventy years ago, on 17 January 1946, the Security
Council convened for the very first time. Horrified
by the destructiveness of the Second World War, 11
nations gathered in London with one all-important goal
in mind — the maintenance of international peace and
security.
Today, that aspiration is as important as ever, as
conflict continues to rear its ugly head across the globe.
Syria is torn by civil war. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham continues to wreak havoc across the Middle
East and beyond. The unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine are at stake. North Korea has allegedly tested
a nuclear device and launched a rocket in defiance
of Security Council resolutions. Territorial disputes
persist around the world. Everywhere we look, conflict
appears to abound.
Yet, let us take courage in the ambitious activities
of the United Nations. Despite the inherent challenges

56/92

15/02/2016

involved, the United Nations has created a crucial
framework for engagement designed to facilitate
international peace and security. It is that system of
collective security — based on the prohibition of the
use or threat of force and the duty to settle disputes
peacefully — that has allowed the United Nations to act
with purpose and resolve. Over the years, the United
Nations has helped end conflicts in dozens of countries.
Moreover, the United Nations has served as the forum for
negotiations to contribute to and consolidate peace. By
providing basic security guarantees and responding to
crises, the United Nations has helped to abate conflicts,
form habits of cooperation, and develop shared norms
and perceptions. Its capacities to assist in restoring,
keeping and consolidating peace deserves, therefore, to
be strengthened further, as do its mechanisms aimed
at preventing gross human rights violations and violent
conflict within and among sovereign States.
As the concept note prepared for this meeting
(S/2016/103, annex) rightly points out, sovereignty and
the sovereign equality of States are, and remain, key
principles set out in the Charter. However, at the 2005
World Summit, United Nations Member States spelled
out the principles of the concept of responsibility to
protect. They declared their willingness
“to take collective action ... through the Security
Council, in accordance with the Charter, including
Chapter VII, on a case-by-case basis ... should
peaceful means be inadequate and national
authorities are manifestly failing to protect their
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.” (General
Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 139)
Germany continues to support the concept of the
responsibility to protect. We also support the initiative
by France and Mexico to limit the use of the veto by
permanent members of the Security Council in cases
of genocide.
While rightly praising the crucial importance of
the United Nations system, we should not lose sight of
the necessity of reforming it, in particular the Security
Council. Security Council reform must include both
expanding the membership of the Council as well as
improving its working methods. A majority of the
Member States has voiced support for adding new
permanent and non-permanent seats to better reflect
the geo-political realities of the twenty-first century.
How can it be, to give but one particularly pertinent

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

example, that no African country is represented
with a permanent seat at the Security Council table?
In addition, improvement of the Council’s working
methods is crucial. However, that cannot be a substitute
for an urgently needed structural reform of this organ.
A more representative, legitimate and effective Security
Council is needed more than ever, while also taking
into account that more Member States have the capacity
and willingness to take on the crucial responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. We,
together with our group of four partners — including
Brazil, India and Japan — stand ready to engage with
all Member States in concrete, text-based negotiations
in the framework of the intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform to arrive at such a
reform — which is long overdue.
In conclusion, let me emphasize again that the
United Nations is indispensable to our mutual peace
and security. Despite its many trials and tribulations,
the United Nations remains essential to the peaceful
resolution of conflict. As long as there are people who
continue to suffer from the scourges of war, Germany
will work tirelessly with the United Nations to end their
pain. For their plight is our plight.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing my delegation to share
its views with the Security Council. Let me start by
congratulating Venezuela on assuming the Security
Council presidency for the month of February, for the
proposed programme of work and for initiating this
important debate. I would like to also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his briefing this morning.
I must underscore that, while the theme of our
debate today is self-explanatory, respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations is clearly an obligation to which everyone must
adhere bona fide. However, we note that political will
retains significant effect in terms of respect of those
principles and their interpretation. Seventy years
after the signing of the Charter of the United Nations,
collectively preventing threats to peace and developing
friendly relations among Member States based on
respect for the principle of the equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples remain purposes and goals to
be sought by all.

S/PV.7621

Since the signing of the Charter, the United
Nations has made a substantial contribution to peace
and security, although many of us continue to expect
more. Numerous peoples have freed themselves from
the scourge of colonialism and have shared their
contributions to global peace and security. Recognition
of the United Nations and adherence to its purposes
and principles was very often — if not always — the
first act undertaken by liberated States in proclaiming
themselves Member States. Needless to say, the purposes
and principles of the Charter are still immensely valid.
Today, we encounter new difficulties in dealing
with threats to international peace and security. The
lack of solutions in prevailing cases of uncertainty,
such as the lingering decolonization cases or longterm conflicts, such as in the Middle East, demand our
renewed and truly effective commitment. If we are to
recognize and respect the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security, we must ensure
equity, transparency, accountability and effectiveness.
The relevance and legitimacy of the work and missions
of the United Nations are at stake. In that regard, we
believe that a reinvigorated General Assembly in a
more responsive environment, exerting its full role and
authority, would significantly contribute to improving
international governance in questions relating to
international peace and security.
It is evident that the Charter must be interpreted in
the light of its purposes and principles. In that context,
allow me to briefly highlight some aspects.
First, the Security Council is primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Nevertheless, in accordance with Articles 11 and 99 of
the Charter, the General Assembly and the SecretaryGeneral each have a respective role in recommending
and bringing to the attention of the Council any matter
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security. That role is not always and not sufficiently
carried out, thus diminishing the effectiveness of the
United Nations.
Second, the founding fathers of the United Nations
were visionary in giving regional organizations — which
lacked importance and even existence in 1945 — a
specific role; under Chapters VI and VIII, they have
a crucial role in connection with the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, the
partnership between the United Nations and regional

16-0388057/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

organizations, including the African Union, should be
articulated in full respect of those provisions, notably
when it comes to the need to support regional efforts in
matters of peace and security.
Third, the cornerstone of our strong attachment to
the United Nations is, and must always be, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and therefore prevention. In
that context, the use of force should always be the last
recourse, when deemed necessary and after obviously
exerting all possibilities for a peaceful settlement. It
must receive United Nations approval, specifically
of the Security Council. The Council and the United
Nations must, in all cases, think, prepare and act for the
day after and the impact of any sanctions, or legal use
of force on the countries and regions affected. The cure
cannot be more harmful than the illness.
Fourth, specific and unexpected threats to
international peace and security, such as those involving
non-State actors and terrorism, should be addressed
according to the Charter. Moreover, we strongly believe
that in such cases the States affected, in particular
Member States in the vicinity of the areas affected,
should be associated accordingly in all decision-making
processes of the Security Council.
Fifth, we strongly believe that respect for human
rights and non-interference in internal affairs are
not incompatible. We cannot accept meddling in the
internal affairs of Member States. And we say very
clearly that we simply cannot stand still before mass
atrocities, regardless of where or by whom they are
committed.
Sixth, we need to look into the issue of United
Nations reform with renewed spirit and resolve. Respect
for the purposes and principles of the Charter today calls
today for an accelerated reform of the United Nations.
It means that, as we strongly advocate in the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and beyond, we should first
reform the Security Council, both structurally and its
working methods — an issue which we have recently
debated here. The specific question of the so-called
veto power is a multifaceted one. But whatever angle
one looks at it from, even historically, it was in no way
meant to impede effective action.
Seventh, and finally, as has been the case with
other open debates on issues of this kind, and in order to
assist in related debates, we fully support the principle
of a summary to be produced by the presidency and
circulated as an official document of the United Nations.

58/92

15/02/2016

We understand that the trail is arduous, but it is
necessary if we really want to preserve the relevance,
efficiency and, beyond that, the legitimacy and respect
that should always accompany the work, missions and
goals of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Pakistan is pleased to see
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela presiding over the
Security Council, and we appreciate its convening of
today’s debate on a subject of fundamental importance.
There is no better way to mark the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations than by renewing our collective
pledge to fully and unequivocally respect its purposes
and principles. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful briefing this morning.
The Charter of the United Nations does not just
collectively bind us to efforts aimed at saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, it is also a shared
commitment to creating a world order based on the rule
of international law. Of course, the Charter’s greatest
success is that for 70 years there has been no general
conflagration. But today we see a world that is hardly
at peace, where conflicts abound, human-rights abuses
remain rampant and humanitarian law is flouted in
open violation of the Charter’s principles. We have yet
to see a world order emerge that is based on justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law and, most critically,
on the purposes and principles of the Charter itself.
Member States solemnly entered into our covenant
in the trust that those principles were immutable. Yet we
see them flouted in pursuit of narrow national interests,
especially by the powerful. We see unilateralism and
arbitrariness in consequential decisions of war and
peace. We see unwarranted foreign adventures, and
then we also see their unforeseen and unintended but
devastating consequences. The statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
whose members represent more than half of the
membership of the United Nations and with which
we fully align ourselves, reflects cracks in the trust
represented by the Charter. That must be remedied if
we are to advance and augment the moral authority of
the United Nations as a just and credible organization
that safeguards the interests of all Member States as
equals, in accordance with international law. I would

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

like to make a few suggestions on how to rebuild that
trust.
First, the management of peace and security must
be based on a genuine consensus forged on the basis
of the principles of the Charter, not on power politics.
A cooperative approach, rather than the imposition of
coercive measures shaped by the interests of powerful
States, should guide our actions.
Secondly, there should be a renewed focus on using
peaceful means to address breaches of international
peace and to settle international disputes, with wider
and more effective use of Chapter VI measures.
Thirdly, it is the Organization’s responsibility to
prevent violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. The use or the threat of the use
of force, which is in contravention of international
law, must be censured and effectively deterred. The
failure to do so has already created the impression that
the United Nations has become an instrument of the
powerful rather than a guardian of the principles of
international law.
Fourthly, the United Nations must uphold the
principle of the sovereign equality of States. Equality
includes the concept of equal opportunity, which is
a safeguard against discriminatory measures and
policies. That should be at the heart of the reform of
any United Nations institution.
Fifthly, the United Nations must fulfil its purpose
of developing friendly relations among nations
predicated on the principles of equal rights and the
self-determination of peoples. It is counter-intuitive to
expect peaceful and friendly relations among nations if
the United Nations cannot guarantee the application of
the fundamental principle of self-determination.
The peoples of the world expect fairness and justice
from the United Nations. It is our responsibility as
Member States to ensure that we abide by the principles
that we agreed to seven decades ago. We agreed on
them because we believed in their utility in promoting
our collective interest. We reaffirm our commitment
to them today because we continue to believe that
adhering to them will save us from the scourge of war.
Let us therefore translate those beliefs, commitments
and statements into action. For, if we are unable to do
so, we will not only endanger the progress achieved
in previous years, we also risk making the institution
appear irrelevant in a world marked by increasing

S/PV.7621

turmoil and trouble, in which insecurity prevails
and injustice persists. That would be a huge price to
pay, especially at a time when so many conflicts are
devastating the lives of millions of people and raising
questions in people’s minds about the relevance and
effectiveness of the United Nations in managing
international peace and security.
Before concluding, let me once again pledge my
country’s commitment to translating our trust in the
Charter of the United Nations into practice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of
the European Union, and I would like to make some
additional comments in my national capacity.
Seventy years have passed since the creation of
the United Nations, and yet millions continue to suffer
from the scourge of war, the number of people displaced
has reached unprecedented levels and the scope of our
humanitarian crises is catastrophic. That is not because
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations are
deficient, but because we have failed to uphold what
we pledged to the generations to come. It is therefore
indeed high time for the international community
to stand up firmly for the principles enshrined in the
Charter. Only through respect for international law,
including obligations arising from treaties, can we
maintain peace and security, provide for the protection
of human rights and create the conditions for social
progress and larger freedoms.
We are deeply distressed by the violent developments
and rapid deterioration of the security situation in the
Middle East. I would like to reiterate Georgia’s strong
condemnation of every despicable act of terrorism and
violence against civilian populations. Terrorist groups
such as Da’esh threaten not just the nations of the Middle
East but every country across the globe, large or small,
primarily because such groups erode the political and
legal foundations of the international system.
Contrary to expectations in the early 1990s, Europe
today is neither free from confrontation nor at peace.
Regional security is being deliberately challenged by
Russia’s ongoing aggression against Georgia. In its bid
to change the geopolitical situation in the so-called
near-abroad, including Ukraine, the Russian Federation
has gone as far as to redraw European borders by using

16-0388059/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

aggression, occupation and annexation, at the cost
of the lives of many innocent people along the way.
Another testament to that fact is the situation in the
occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia.
The aggression against my country that started in
the early 1990s culminated in 2008 in a full-scale
invasion, followed by illegal recognition — by only
three countries — of the so-called independence of the
occupied regions.
For its part, Georgia has continued to dedicate itself
to a peaceful and constructive approach. We have been
consistently committed to diplomacy and a peaceful
resolution of the conflict with the Russian Federation.
We greatly value the international discussions in Geneva
and will continue our constructive participation in that
key format, established for the implementation of the
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008, in good faith.
Over the past few years, we have redoubled our efforts
to normalize relations with Moscow in order to create
an environment conducive to confidence-building and
conflict resolution.
The results, however, have been limited to
economic and humanitarian areas. Despite our
constructive approach, the Russian Federation has
concluded dozens of so-called treaties and agreements
with the occupation regimes, which provide a pretext
for its continued illegal military presence. It has signed
so-called comprehensive alliance treaties, providing
for full mergers in every public domain and the open
delegation of all powers to the Russian Federation,
and installed barbed-wire fences and other artificial
obstacles along the occupation line that divides families
and communities. That chain of events reflects a policy
aimed at the de facto annexation of Georgia’s regions.
The recently adopted so-called laws regulating
the status of foreigners and entry into the regions
constitute yet another discriminatory act against ethnic
Georgians, restricting their fundamental rights and
freedoms and further isolating the occupied regions of
Georgia. Pursuant to those laws, a new wave of so-called
passportization is being carried out that will further
deteriorate conditions for the Georgian population
living in the Gali district, who will not be eligible
for the proper identity documents and will therefore
face hardships regarding their property rights, their
rights to work, their freedom of movement across the
occupation line and residence. This dangerous process
can potentially become the grounds for another wave of
ethnic cleansing against Georgians.

60/92

15/02/2016

In conclusion, let me once again stress that
Georgia remains a strong advocate of the principles
of international law enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. We all should take more tangible and resolute
steps towards the realization of our common goals of
achieving world peace and strengthening international
security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): My delegation thanks
the Venezuelan presidency of the Council for convening
this open debate and for the thought-provoking concept
note (S/2016/103, annex). We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his introductory briefing.
We take this opportunity to reiterate Bangladesh’s
unwavering commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
wish to recall the words of the father of our nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, in his maiden
address to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session on 25 September 1974:
“The noble ideals enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations are the very ideals for which
millions of our people have made the supreme
sacrifice. I know that the souls of our martyrs
join us in pledging that the Bangalee nation fully
commits itself to the building of a world order in
which the aspiration of all men [and women] for
peace and justice will be realized” (A/PV.2243,
para. 2).
True to his words, Bangladesh has consistently
upheld the renunciation of war, respect for the sovereign
equality of States and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States as the cornerstones of its foreign
policy. We have pursued the peaceful settlement
of disputes with our partners through dialogues,
negotiations and arbitration, based on the principle
of mutual respect. The determined leadership shown
by our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, in amicably
resolving the long-pending land and maritime boundary
issues with our neighbours has further reinforced our
commitment to the ideals and values of the Charter of
the United Nations.
We have seen many efforts over the past seven
decades to justify deviations from the core Charter
principles under several theoretical doctrines and

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

concepts. Those concepts have come and gone, mostly
in response to the demands of realpolitik. The Charter
principles have, however, survived the test of time as
the bedrock of the international rule of law.
It would be pragmatic to acknowledge that the
notions of national sovereignty and internal affairs
have evolved over time since the promulgation of the
Charter of the United Nations. The unprecedented level
and scale of engagement of a diverse set of actors in
shaping international affairs and policies have added
layers to the traditional concept of sovereign equality.
The preponderance of internecine strife and violence
has also altered the landscape of armed conflicts
around the world. Under such circumstances, it may
be advisable for the entire United Nations membership
to engage in serious introspection about the possible
implications of the emerging global realities vis-à-vis
the Charter principles.
The Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization could be one of the suitable platforms
for embarking on such reflections and deliberations.
However, the continued impasse in the work of the
Committee does not hold much promise for the
collective willingness of Member States to leverage the
existing possibilities. It is also perhaps symptomatic
that the issue is not being directly approached in the
context of the ongoing discussions on the revitalization
of the General Assembly and Security Council reform.
Respect for the core principles is critical for
preserving the Charter’s primacy on the pacific
settlement of disputes and for resorting to coercive or
enforcement measures only as measures of last resort.
After all, the toughest price for any such measures
are borne by the people in general. For third parties,
sanctions regimes are often couched in legal and
technical complications, creating possibilities for
lapses in compliance. These are further complicated by
unilateral prohibitive measures whose interface with
United Nations sanctions is not always explained in
clear, understandable terms.
In Bangladesh, we have a law giving effect to
Security Council resolution within our domestic
jurisdiction. It is therefore in our obvious interest to
see that the resolutions emerge through a participatory,
consultative and accommodating process within the
Council. The exercise of the veto power needs to be
reviewed for all practical purposes.

S/PV.7621

As underscored by many, the current focus of
the United Nations on ending and resolving conflicts
needs to be more than adequately balanced by its
work on preventing conflicts. The preventive aspect
can encompass a wide range of activities, including
reading the early warning signs of tension or conflicts,
responding to violent extremist trends, promoting
participatory governance and development, investing in
sound and inclusive institutions, and fostering a culture
of peace and non-violence. Enhanced partnerships and
synergies within the relevant regional arrangements or
organizations should bring useful dividends.
The Charter-stipulated measures of mediation,
conciliation and arbitration need to be mainstreamed
through the entire process of conflict prevention and
resolution, and not necessarily in the aftermath of
conflicts. Meaningful and sustained efforts must be
made to resolve protracted conflicts and humanitarian
situations that tend to foment further resentment,
intolerance and radicalization, including across borders
and regions. The nexus between peace and security,
development and human rights should form the basis for
the work of the overall peace and security architecture
of the United Nations.
These are responsibilities that may be shared by the
principal organs of the United Nations, consistent with
their respective mandates. A limited interpretation of
the provisions concerned would only continue to limit
the options for the Organization as a whole to deliver
on its potentials when it comes to effectively preventing
or resolving conflicts. The entire membership should
work towards realizing those potentials.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations represent
the core values of the Organization. As such, they
have stood the test of time, as evidenced both by the
successes and the failures of the United Nations over the
past seven decades. When interpreted holistically and
in good faith, they enable the international community
to respond effectively to the ever-changing challenges
to our international system.
They also serve as the primary benchmark for
the Security Council as the guardian of international
peace and security. In essence, this calls for an active,
decisive Security Council, taking action when the
circumstances so demand. In so doing, the Security

16-0388061/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council must place the people at the centre of its action,
thereby reaffirming in the words of the Preamble of the
Charter,
“faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small”.
Certainly, as this and other debates have illustrated, the
Council can and must do a better job at upholding this
responsibility.
Today’s conflicts are marked by widespread
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Many parties to conflict openly
disrespect human dignity and the most fundamental
rules of international humanitarian law, as evidenced
in the recent attack on the Médecins Sans Frontières
facilities in Syria. The vicious cycle of death and
destruction in that country serves as one of the most
striking examples of the dramatic erosion of respect
for international humanitarian law. And it is human
suffering that serves as a catalyst for ever greater
threats to international peace and security, fostering
radicalization, paving the way for terrorist groups,
motivating foreign fighters and causing violence to
spread far beyond the territory of Syria. We must ask
ourselves: Would a decisive Security Council, placing
the rights of human beings at the centre of its action,
not have done more to end this man-made catastrophe?
Membership in the Council is a privilege that entails
the responsibility to take action when confronted with
mass atrocity crimes. The code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes is an expression of
commitment that, when faced with such situations,
Council member will get their priorities straight. It is a
commitment that they will actively pursue appropriate
Council action aimed at preventing or ending mass
atrocity crimes, and that they will not stand in the
way of credible attempts to do so. One hundred and
ten Member States of the Organization, including the
majority of the members of the Council, have signed on
to the code. We welcome that commitment. We expect
the code to be applied in practice, including on the basis
of information provided by the Secretary-General. We
also encourage all other States Members of the United
Nations, especially Council members and those aspiring
to become members, to join this initiative.
In that respect, we want to address the elected
members of this Council. The elected members ran

62/92

15/02/2016

long campaigns and exerted great efforts to sit at this
table. We are convinced that a way to a more decisive
Council is through their taking greater ownership
of the Council’s work. We are pleased to see that in
recent years elected members have been more proactive
and eager to make a difference. They have our full
support in that endeavour. At a time when differences
among permanent members are growing, elected
members’ engagement and mediation efforts can help
overcome political differences in the Council, promote
compromise, improve transparency and foster the
political will to take effective action.
Finally, complementary to a decisive Security
Council, the International Criminal Court is central
in holding accountable those who manifestly violate
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Among its very first purposes is “the
suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of
the peace. When a State wishes to suppress a behaviour,
it can subject individuals to criminal penalties for that
behaviour — that goes without saying. But since the
Nuremberg trials, which took place 70 years ago, no
international court has been able to hold individuals
accountable for committing what has been called the
supreme international crime — the crime of aggression.
That will change in 2017 when the International
Criminal Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression is activated. Twenty-six States have already
ratified the Kampala Amendments to the Rome Statute
on the crime of aggression. We encourage others to
do the same, as the Amendments simply complement
the prohibition of the illegal use of force, one of the
key principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The effective criminalization of the illegal use of
force will also be an additional tool available to the
Council to effectively prevent armed conflict. We are
all in a position to help contribute to that truly historic
achievement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important and
timely debate on the theme “Respect for the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as a
key element for the maintenance of international peace
and security”. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. The fact that this open debate comes in
the year that marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations is highly significant.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

South Africa wishes to place on record its firm
continued commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter, which remain as valid today as they
were 70 years ago. We believe that the world is better
off because of the United Nations than it would have
been without this Organization. My delegation remains
committed to fostering the development of its bilateral
and multilateral relations on the basis of the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
Since its establishment, the United Nations has
registered remarkable accomplishments in fulfilling
its mandate, including the role it played in the fight
against apartheid and colonialism. The Charter of the
United Nations is the single most important source
of international law, and all Member States have the
responsibility to uphold it.
The United Nations has also demonstrated that it
can be adaptable to new global realities, if the necessary
political will exists within its membership. We will all
agree that today the United Nations is at a crossroads,
requiring our renewed commitment and focus to guide
the Organization into a new phase of its rich history.
One area we have agreed to improve is the way in which
we appoint the Organization’s Secretary-General. Our
joint commitment to make the process more democratic,
inclusive and transparent has to date resulted in a much
improved process.
Nevertheless, other areas remain in desperate need
for change. The most important of which is the longoutstanding reform of the Security Council, which
remains unrepresentative. The status quo is particularly
discomforting because the Council is the principal
organ tasked with the management of the core mandate
of the United Nations, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security. Fundamentally, it is
important to remember that, to achieve lasting peace,
there is always a need to vigorously pursue collective
security through preventive means first, rather than a
reactive approach to conflict resolution.
In that regard the Council has been inconsistent and
selective. The current state of play in the Middle East is
a direct indictment of the Council, as over decades it has
failed to adequately address the question of Palestine.
The Security Council has even failed to enforce its own
decisions — a failure replicated in Western Sahara.
Furthermore, often when it does act, the Council’s
first response is to act under Chapter VII with coercive
measures, ignoring the Charter’s guidance and

S/PV.7621

compulsion for the need to settle differences through
peaceful means.
In Chapter VIII, the Charter recognizes that the
efforts of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security can be improved by
working in cooperation with other organizations. As
emphasized at the 2005 World Summit, the Charter
further recognizes the importance of forging predictable
partnerships and cooperation arrangements between
the United Nations and regional organizations aimed at
addressing international peace and security challenges.
During its non-permanent membership of the
Security Council, South Africa worked tirelessly to
turn that decision into action, specifically as it relates to
the African Union (AU). We believe that it has become
essential to allow the AU to respond to conflicts in a
proactive and rapid manner, with a view to limiting
the escalation of conflict and human suffering. That
applies especially in cases involving the United Nations
because its processes translate into a longer response
time, while the situation on the ground is getting out
of hand.
In conclusion, the Charter underscores the
importance of States Members of the United Nations
working together in dealing with challenges to global
peace and security. The Security Council should
guard against the flouting of international law by
Member States to serve their own self-interests. The
principles of non-interference and the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all Member States should remain
protected by the Charter. South Africa believes that
any intervention should be done in adherence with the
Charter’s principles and Articles and in the framework
of international customary, humanitarian and human
rights law.
I wish to stress that South Africa remains
committed to honouring and respecting the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See.
Monsignor Kassas (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Venezuelan
presidency for bringing this issue to the attention of the
Security Council in an open debate.
As extremist ideologies grow within political
regimes, giving rise to terrorist groups and various

16-0388063/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

non-State actors, it is important that we look closely at
the thoughts and ideas of the founding members of the
United Nations as they were reeling from the devastation
of two world wars in less than half a century. Their
desire to save future generations from the scourge of
war speaks to a moral and ethical value to be highly
esteemed as one integral to human development.
When Pope Francis addressed the General
Assembly, on 25 September 2015, he spoke of the
means by which the hopes enshrined by the founding
Members in the Charter would be realized or frustrated.
He stated,
“When the Charter of the United Nations is respected
and implemented with transparency and sincerity
and without ulterior motives, as an obligatory
point of reference for justice and not as a tool for
concealing false intentions, peace can result. On
the other hand, when a standard is seen simply as
an instrument to be used when it produces the right
results and to be avoided when it does not, we open
a real Pandora’s box of uncontrollable forces that
do serious harm to defenceless populations and to
our cultural and biological environments.” (A/70/
PV.3, p. 5)
In his address to the General Assembly on 2 October
2015 (see A/70/PV.27), His Excellency Archbishop
Paul Gallagher, Secretary of Relations with States
of the Holy See, suggested four areas of reflection,
two of which are especially relevant to the work of
the Council, namely, the responsibility to protect
and respect for international law. What is needed, as
Archbishop Gallagher highlighted, is a genuine and
transparent application of Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations, which established the principle of
non-intervention, excluding all unilateral force against
another Member of the United Nations and demanding
full respect for lawfully constituted and recognized
Governments. Pacta sunt servanda was what he
said in that connection, and Article 2 of the Charter
has definitively banned concepts such as preventive
war under the pretext of a principle of security or
interventions on the part of third-party States in favour
of one side in a situation of civil conflict. Nevertheless,
he added that Article 2 cannot be used as a pretext
to excuse grave violations of human rights. Where
such violations persist, and if further intervention is
considered necessary, there is no other recourse than
to implement the measures set forth in Chapters VI and
VII of the Charter.

64/92

15/02/2016

Hidden beneath the rhetoric against impunity for
war crimes against civilians and the difficulties of
providing humanitarian aid to those suffering is the
harsh reality that the industrial complexes of the world
are providing weapons and munitions, either for money
or, perhaps, as gifts to their clientele. The arms trade
must be suppressed. The proliferation of weapons has
resulted in an increase in deaths and injuries, leading
to waves of fleeing refugees, rather than to peace and
stability. The indiscriminate killing of civilians is a
heinous crime. As technological advances are applied
to weaponry, we may, in the view of my delegation,
know more about killing than we do about providing for
the living. Have the words of the Charter to save future
generations from the scourge of war been fulfilled?
Each one of us in the Chamber knows, at the bottom of
his or her heart, the answer to that question.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Organization of
American States.
Mr. Koncke (Organization of American States)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Organization
of American States (OAS) to participate in this open
debate today.
We are pleased to see that the presidency of
Venezuela has completed a three-month cycle in which
the presidency of the Security Council has been the
responsibility of member States of the Organization
of American States: the United States in December,
Uruguay in January and Venezuela in February. We
want to express our appreciation for the briefing made
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon this morning.
Before entering into the substance of my statement,
my delegation wishes to inform you, Mr. President,
that it will be sending a communication regarding
the modalities for participation in the open debates of
this body by regional organizations. As the regional
organization that obtained permanent observer status
to the United Nations before any other, on 16 October
1948 — with a membership of 35 States from the
Caribbean, South America, Central America and
North America and 70 observers, 9 of which make
up the Security Council — the OAS deems it unfair
that its participation in this type of debate should be
contingent upon the intercession of one of its States
parties. That is especially pertinent when that practice
is not standardized for all regional organizations and
not based on any public or published norm.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Although it has been in existence for over 70 years,
the Charter of the United Nations continues to be the
main normative common denominator for international
society. The purposes and principles set out in Articles
1 and 2 of the Charter have protected humankind from
the catastrophe of another world war, such as those wars
that we lived through during the twentieth century, and
we must pay lasting tribute to the drafters of the Charter
for the work that they achieved. Nevertheless, the
setbacks and failures of the international community to
prevent crises, to calm violence, to end terrorism and
extremism and to build bridges of dialogue have been
and continue to be the cause of suffering and pain for
millions of people on the planet.
Every failed attempt to prevent a conflict, to
mitigate a humanitarian crisis, to bring parties in
conflict closer together or to implement a principle
has resulted in the death, suffering and poverty of
men, women and children. The Secretariat General
of the OAS believes that the recognized principles of
sovereignty, non-intervention and domestic jurisdiction
are fundamental and must be fully respected and
reaffirmed, without entailing any detriment to the
respect for human rights, the protection of civilians
and the responsibilities of international society.
It is incumbent on the United Nations, regional
organizations and the States parties to work to resolve
the apparent tension between the aforementioned
principles and efforts to ensure international peace and
security. In order for the work of the United Nations
and regional organizations to have value, it must have
a direct impact on people’s lives, while improving the
enjoyment of their rights and their quality of life. In that
regard, the Charter of the United Nations recognizes
the role of regional organizations and their contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and conflict prevention.
In its inter-American scope, the work of the OAS is
guided by the Charter of the Organization of American
States and the Inter-American Democratic Charter.
Similarly, the four fundamental pillars of the OAS
constitute the set of principles that define its work and
guide its actions, namely, democracy, human rights,
integral development and multidimensional security.
We believe that the best way to work for people in every
type of situation of crisis, vulnerability and emergency
lies in unconditional compliance with the those guiding
principles, which, in turn, best prevents the repetition
of past mistakes. With the purposes and principles as its

S/PV.7621

guide, the OAS of today has acted in various scenarios
and contexts in compliance with the legal instruments
that underpin its existence.
Without being exhaustive, proof of that can be
seen the recent special mission to Haiti, whose task,
at the request of then President Martelly and with
the consensual approval of the OAS Permanent
Council, was to work together to achieve a Haitianled constitutional and negotiated solution, allowing
for the holding of the second round of elections in a
timely manner. We welcome the agreement achieved
between former President Martelly and the speakers
of both legislative Chambers, as well as the recent
appointment, in the framework of that agreement, of
a transitional President, Jocelerme Privert. We expect
that the second round of the presidential election will
be held, as agreed, on 24 April, and the OAS reiterates
its full support to the Haitian people, political actors
and civil society in cooperating to support the holding
that event.
Likewise, we want to mention the work of the OAS
in Colombia, with its support mission to the peace
process, which has been playing an important role,
as recently reaffirmed by President Santos Calderón
and OAS Secretary General Almagro. In the case
of Honduras, the OAS has worked jointly with the
Government, the opposition, the judiciary, social
actors and the broadest range of participants to create
a support mission to combat corruption and impunity
in Honduras. Another action that could be mentioned
is the mission in the Dominican Republic and Haiti in
response to the migration crisis, which, along with the
efforts of the Dominican Government, led to a reduction
in the level of unrest and number of deportations.
In the case of Venezuela, and in compliance with
the obligations and privileges arising from the Charter
of the OAS and the Inter-American Democratic
Charter, Secretary General Almagro Lemes has made
assessments based on inalienable principles, both in the
process leading to legislative elections on 6 December
and in subsequent aspects of the installation of the
new National Assembly. Again, in this case the OAS
reaffirms its mission to contribute constructively
to necessary dialogue and reiterates its readiness
to collaborate at all potentially relevant levels of
international cooperation.
The relevance of the topic of today’s discussion on
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter

16-0388065/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the United Nations demonstrates the magnitude of
the work ahead. In such efforts, the General Secretariat
of the OAS understands that it must never lose sight of
the interests of the weakest and most vulnerable, whose
only shield is precisely the inalienable, indivisible
and interdependent nature of human rights and the
obligation of countries and international and regional
organizations to ensure that those rights are protected.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank Venezuela for having convened
today’s debate and on its choice of the theme “Respect
for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations as a key element for the maintenance of
international peace and security”. I take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
topic this morning.
I also take this opportunity to condemn in the
strongest terms terrorism in all its forms. Last Friday,
the Kidal camp of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali was the target
of indiscriminate terrorism that claimed the lives of six
peacekeepers and wounded approximately 30 others.
At this painful time for the peacekeeping family, which
includes Morocco, I offer my deepest condolences to the
Secretary-General and to the families of the victims,
and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
On 26 June 1945, the founders, eager to save
succeeding generations from the scrouge of war, signed
the Charter of the United Nations in San Francisco.
The objective of that historic founding document is
to maintain international peace and security, ensure
development and promote human rights. Thus, the
principles and purposes of the Charter were carefully
developed to prevent a recurrence of past tragedies,
restore dignity to humankind and establish the principle
of equality among the States Members of the United
Nations. Although the Charter of the United Nations
has laid the foundation for a new global system, over the
years the United Nations has adapted to the challenges
facing the international community. Thus, each of the
three pillars of the United Nations — peace and security,
development and human rights — developed gradually
to meet the needs of the international environment.
Human rights, which are featured in six Articles
of the Charter, were the first main concern of an
international community anxious not to relive the

66/92

15/02/2016

suffering of two world wars. That is why, in 1948, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights was the first
instrument to be adopted by the United Nations. The
United Nations later developed a robust legal framework
comprised of 18 conventions, covenants and protocols
and over 30 declarations, covering the entire spectrum
of rights and vulnerable groups. The United Nations
has also set up a complete and comprehensive system
of mechanisms to promote and protect human rights.
The development dimension reflected in six
Articles of the Charter was also at the centre of United
Nations action, on the basis of the principle that there
is no peace without development and no development
without peace. The new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1),
the Millennium Development Goals and the United
Nations Development Programme are all elements that
have brought the Organization closer to its Member
States and help them set up sustainable development
structures for their populations.
Peace and security, addressed in one-third of
the Charter’s Articles, has undergone significant
changes, particularly in the approach used. Indeed,
the United Nations, which had focused initially on
decolonization issues in the 1950s and 1960s, has in
recent decades become a body that promotes political
solutions, mediation and dialogue for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, thereby working to maintain
and consolidate peace. Leaving behind the traditional
patterns of conflict management and investing more
in conflict prevention and technical assistance in the
areas of development and promotion of human rights,
the United Nations has been able to adapt to new global
security challenges that are increasingly complex and
cross-border.
The Kingdom of Morocco supports the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, particularly
those relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as outlined in Chapter VI, and strongly supports the
ongoing role of the United Nations as a universal
Organization responsible for resolving and deciding
on matters relating to peacekeeping and international
security, the promotion of human rights and sustainable
development. The Kingdom fully supports efforts
to promote reconciliation and dispute settlement, as
evidenced by the mediation efforts of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI in resolving the crisis in the Mano
River region, our assistance to our Malian brothers in

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

overcoming their crisis, and our support for our Libyan
brothers to help them get back on their feet.
At the request of the Secretary-General, a year ago
His Majesty the King offered the Kingdom of Morocco
as host to the inter-Libyan talks under the auspices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya. Those talks culminated with the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement in Skhirat on 17 December,
and we welcome the formation of the National
Reconciliation Government in Libya.
Moreover, in its tireless efforts to address the
crises in our continent and elsewhere, the Kingdom
of Morocco has been committed since 1960 to United
Nations efforts to maintain international peace and
security, including by participating in peacekeeping
operations in Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and Mali, as well as in operations
of the NATO and the European Union mandated by the
Security Council. Moreover, during its three terms as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council, the
last in 2012 and 2013, the Kingdom of Morocco has
continued to uphold the purposes and principles of the
Charter. Lastly, in the coming weeks the Kingdom of
Morocco will host the Arab Summit, which we hope
will be an opportunity to overcome the challenges
facing the Arab world.
The principles of the Charter must be achieved
through the adoption of a comprehensive and
multidimensional approach that focuses on the rule of law
in all aspects of international relations. That approach
must be based on respect for human rights, democracy,
electoral processes and democratic transitions, the rule
of law and institutions of governance, which are all key
elements established by the United Nations. Finally,
domestic law, which allows States to comply with their
international obligations, must not take precedence
over international law.
The international community is called on to
continue to adapt its approach and method. To that end,
the United Nations must put human beings and their
well-being at the centre of its action. United Nations
action in the areas of humanitarian rights and human
rights must be depoliticized. Obsolete ideologies must
evolve and adapt to the realities of today’s world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.

S/PV.7621

Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I would like to welcome the presence
this morning of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Her Excellency
Ms. Delcy Rodríguez Gómez, and thank Venezuela for
having convened today’s debate on the maintenance
of peace and security and the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing on the topic.
There is no doubt that today, when we discuss the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) as
a relevant theme on our common agenda that seeks
to transform the world, we cannot ignore the fact
that progress will be possible only if we guarantee
a safe world without conflict. The maintenance
of international peace and security, which is the
Organization’s main objective, is the Security Council’s
primary responsibility. The scope of the responsibility
conferred to the Security Council by the 51 founder
Members in 1946, including Panama, is relevant, and
therefore the obligation to generate conditions for a
lasting peace is unavoidable.
The United Nations cannot allow that armed
conflicts continue taking human lives, that civilians,
mainly women and children, should continue to be
exposed to violent extremism and international terrorism
or that humanitarian crises and forced displacements
should persist. The current global situation, which is
significantly different to that of 70 years ago, demands
effective preventive action by the Security Council
as guarantor of peace. It cannot focus only on armed
intervention, the establishment of subsequent peace
operations or when a situation is at breaking point. The
purposes and principles of the Charter continue to be
relevant; we cannot regard them as a norm only. Rather,
we should regard them as a moral obligation that we
States and this Organization have to humankind.
The adoption of effective collective measures to
prevent and elimimate threats to peace, as well as the
resolution of conflicts through peaceful means, is an
obligation of the Security Council that demands actions,
carried out in full responsibility and that must be guided
without exception by those principles. A good example
is the request made by the Colombian Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionaries de Colombia just
a few days ago for the United Nations, through a draft
resolution adopted by the Security Council, to establish
a political mission as an international component

16-0388067/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

following the signing of agreements between the
parties. We fully agree that it is very rare for a country
that seeks the support of the Security Council and
requests its help regarding a peace process.
Panama has been insisting on the need for a
paradigm change, an ethical overhaul that the entity
requires in order to humanize the agendas and the make
actions of all United Nations forums more transparent,
particularly the Security Council, where sadly the
themes in question have faces and numbers that today
are the populations of Syria, Palestine, Yemen and
Burundi, among many others. We must understand that
the need for just and appropriate action is not a matter
for the Organization or to favour specific positions;
rather it is a matter of favouring the 120 million people
who are in need, the 60 million displaced people who
right now, as we debate principles here in the Chamber,
continue to wait for resolute action from the United
Nations. As a current member of the Group of Friends
on the Responsibility to Protect, Panama supports
those who call for and demand the protection of human
beings to prevent them becoming victims of mass
atrocities. Such iniatives as Human Rights Up Front
operationalize that call.
Panama promotes greater transparency within the
working methods of the Security Council and greater
democratization of its decision-making process so
that it can respond to the founding principles of the
Organization, which, I reiterate, are and will continue
to be relevant. With a vision that human rights should
prompt nations to ensure the existence of regional
international peace and security, we are obliged to
adhere to the United Nations Charter because so long
ago, quite rightly, its founders correctly placed the
human being at the centre of the debate. However,
respecting the purposes and principles of the Charter
is to strengthen the inspiration of those who achieved
this purpose after a war, promoting respect for human
beings, the nucleus of all societies, to achieve the
desired firm and sustainable peace.
If it is true that, according to the classic concept
of a State as the main subject of international law, it
is intrinsically linked to the concept of sovereignty,
which for judicial effects rest on two fundamental
principles — the legal equality of States and
non-intervention in internal affairs — principles that
are enshrined in the United Nations Charter. Respect
for human rights is aligned with international law.
Human rights are the direct expression of human

68/92

15/02/2016

dignity of the human being, and the obligation to
protect them derives from various internationally
agreed instruments, including the United Nations
Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties
of Man. Not a single State can hide behind the principle
of non-intervention to justify failure to meet obligations
in the field of human rights, acquired pursuant to
international law, both customary and conventional.
Expressions of concern or disapproval with regard to
any violations of human rights are legitimate in all
circumstances and do not constitute intervention in the
internal affairs of any State.
We face a year of global challenges that coincides
with the selection of a new Secretary-General. We
look forward to a selection process that sets positive
precedents, not just because the particpation of women
was promoted for the first time, but also because of
the transparency of a process whose result will be the
reflection of the higher interests and representation of
the Organization as a whole.
I conclude by stressing the firm link that exists
between development and security. There cannot be
peace without development and, still less, development
without peace, which is why consistency of action by the
Organization in the light of the purposes and principles
that its creation promoted is increasinly pressing.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón Pazmiño (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to convey to you, Mr. President,
how extremely satisfied we are to see Venezuela
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
We would also like to express a special welcome to
Ms. Delcy Rodríguez Gómez, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, on behalf of President Rafael Correa and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Ricardo Patiño Aroca.
We also wish to draw attention to the excellent work
being undertaken by the presidency of Venezuela of the
Council during the month of February, proof of which
is the issue that we debating at today’s meeting, which
undoubtedly constitutes the fundamental support of the
international community. We welcome the proposal
made by Venezuela that a document containing the
statements made by representatives be circulated as an
official document of both the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

For all of those reasons, it could not be more timely
nor more appropriate that we debate, as you, Sir, have
proposed, the need to comply with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in order
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security, given that the various statements delivered here
today ought to be taken as a contribution to efforts to
ensure that the United Nations and the Security Council
in particular be more transparent and democratic. My
country believes that the correct application of the
Charter of the United Nations is clearly the only way of
ensuring international peace and security. The Charter
proclaims them and the Member States must ensure
the implementation of fundamental concepts such as
respect for sovereignty, the equality of States, avoiding
the use or threat of use of force, non-interference
and the ongoing seach for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. There can therefore be no pretext for the
Security Council or any of its members being remiss
and acting against the other purposes and principles set
out in the Charter, such as the need to take collective
and effective measures to prevent and eliminate threats
to peace, non-aggression, the use of peaceful means
in line with the principles of international law, selfdetermination and the need to promote international
cooperation, among other things.
Some Member States of the Security Council tend
to securitize issues of global importance. Bearing
responsibility for issues in a body of the United
Nations that is the only body that issues binding
resolutions, apart from being inappropriate, is entirely
undemocratic, given that it favours inequality. A
group of 15 cannot overrule a group of 193. It is very
important that the Security Council, when it make use
of, and does not abuse, prerogatives under Chapter VII
of the Charter also attach as much importance to what
is set out in Chapters VI and VIII, in keeping with
international law. Furthermore, the democratic deficit
in international organizations that arose in the post-war
period, and which make up the current international
system in general, and the United Nations and the
Security Council in particular, must be corrected in a
definitive way, if we want the Organization to be able
to respond appropriately to the purposes and principles
that constitute its very foundation. We Member States
are responsible for offering to the United Nations the
type of leadership it needs and deserves in order to
carry out its work in an effective way to make our world
a better place, in particular for our future generations,

S/PV.7621

as is set out in the preamble of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) : I thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this timely debate, and
we thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
In order to provide more focused remarks, I will
confine the United Arab Emirates’s comments to
the Middle East region, where there is a profound
perception that the United Nations is failing to
implement its primary purposes as defined in Article
1 of the Charter. As we have already heard today, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other violent
extremist groups are responsible for despicable crimes
throughout our region. There is no question that the
primary responsibility for these crimes lies with the
extremists.
Yet their emergence is also a consequence of the
failure of national Governments and the international
community — through the United Nations — to deal
promptly and effectively, within the international
legal framework, with these non-State actors and their
backers. In large part, this is because the instruments
available to the Security Council have not been able
to adapt rapidly enough to correspond to the specific
nature of the threat. What good are travel bans or asset
freezes when the culprits evade official documentation
such as passports and bank accounts?
This inability to check the rise of non-State
extremist actors means they now constitute an
existential threat to the entire Middle East as we know
it, and specifically to the United Arab Emirates model
of moderation, tolerance and respect for religious
freedom. Increasingly, they also pose a global threat
in the form of the tragic and violent attacks they have
perpetrated worldwide. These threats will continue to
grow and evolve, and the international community’s
response must keep pace or risk becoming ever more
outdated and ineffective.
A further central cause of instability in our region is
the rise in the rampant use of force against the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
States. To be clear, these detrimental acts are taken
by State actors, and we note the growing cynicism at
play — a divergence between what States claim to be in
the international arena and what they actually do. We

16-0388069/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

therefore need a more robust response to State drivers
of instability.
In one example, the United Arab Emirates like
others welcomed the nuclear agreement reached with
Iran last year. However, the hope that the nuclear
agreement promised a more constructive role for Iran
in the region failed to materialize, as demonstrated
by the country’s actions across the Middle East to
date. Iranian forces continue to occupy three islands
in the Arabian Gulf that are part of the United Arab
Emirates, in contravention of Article 2 of the Charter.
In accordance with its obligation to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the United Arab Emirates has
been calling on Iran to resume bilateral negotiations,
refer the matter to the International Court of Justice
or submit to international arbitration. These calls have
gone unheeded so far.
States throughout the region remain alarmed by
the Iranian Constitution, which calls for the export
of its revolution to other countries. The principles
of the sovereign equality of Member States and of
non-intervention as outlined in Article 2 of the Charter
are continually violated by Iran’s successive attempts at
destabilization across the region. Their proxy militias
are provocative, destabilizing and dangerous — yet
they go unchallenged. We believe that Iran must make
a serious commitment to joining the community of
nations as an accountable member and to stopping its
arming, funding and enabling of radical, violent and
extremist entities. We see no censure of such actors at
the United Nations.
In the United Arab Emirates’s view, the legitimacy
and effectiveness of the United Nations can be restored.
Some recommendations for doing so include the
following. First, we call for better implementation of,
and greater efforts to hold States accountable for, their
obligations under existing Security Council resolutions.
In our region, examples include the failure to enforce
resolution 2216 (2015) on Yemen or to implement
numerous resolutions on humanitarian access in Syria,
as well as the large number of resolutions calling for
the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Palestinian
territories. If States fail to uphold these existing
responsibilities, we must question what value further
resolutions might have. The very credibility of the
Security Council is at stake today.
Secondly, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
focus on prevention. The United Nations must expend

70/92

15/02/2016

more and better quality resources on prevention as a
key instrument of peacekeeping, and on mediation,
negotiation, arbitration and judicial settlement, as well
as in support of Chapter VI interventions. Additionally,
greater use by the Secretary-General of the prerogative
under Article 99 of the Charter would be welcomed, not
instead of Council engagement, but alongside it.
Thirdly, the Security Council must coordinate with
regional organizations and affected States earlier and
engage in transparent consultations, especially when
the Council is considering taking action. Not only does
Chapter VIII require the Security Council to encourage
efforts undertaken by regional organizations towards
the peaceful settlement of disputes, it is also in the
strategic interests of the Security Council to do so.
Regional States have the closest history and political
background to the conflicts themselves, as well as
the greatest interest in resolving them. In the face of
intransigence and disunity in the Security Council,
regional actors will be left no choice but to respond
assertively to protect legitimate authority and continue
to guarantee regional stability for their peoples.
Finally, the Security Council must apply a single
standard to all actors, all States and all perpetrators of
occupation, State terrorism and foreign interference.
Efforts must be redoubled to strengthen accountability
by sovereign States, protect those living in conflict and
end injustice.
This is a watershed year for the United Nations.
Nothing will reflect the intention of the Security
Council to reengage with the Middle East more than its
choice of candidate for the next Secretary-General. The
United Arab Emirates, with many other States, hopes
that the Council will take into account the views of the
full membership as it approaches this decision.
I would like to conclude by wishing Venezuela
continued success in its presidency of the Security
Council this month.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): My delegation extends its
appreciation to the Venezuelan presidency for convening
this Security Council open debate on an issue of high
importance in the ongoing evolution of the role and
function of the United Nations in accordance with the
principles and purposes contained in its Charter.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Indonesia remains convinced that just as this
issue was highly pertinent in the past, so it is in the
present and so it will be in the future, in the context of
achieving international peace, security and prosperity.
Furthermore, Indonesia reaffirms the validity of the
principles and purposes of the Charter, which should
remain key elements for maintaining international
peace and security. Yet Indonesia also agrees that the
Organization must undertake new or strengthened
multilateral approaches to implement these principles
and purposes, should it wish to remain relevant and
competent in addressing the multifaceted challenges
that exist today and will likely exist in the future. We
therefore support approaches that would reinforce the
ability of the United Nations to deal effectively with
challenges in the fields of international peace, security
and development. In this regard, my delegation would
like to highlight the following.
First, the imperative to modernize the Organization,
in particular the Security Council, to reflect today’s
reality and plurality is obvious. Reforming the
Council’s structure and the way it fulfils its mandates
and responsibilities is key in this regard. Observing
democratic principles and taking into account the value
of inclusiveness and transparence are highly relevant
to improving the legitimacy and effectiveness of the
Council’s work. There should be a new responsibilitysharing arrangement among States, in particular by
giving emerging powers a greater role commensurate
with their respective capacities and competencies in
contributing to regional and global peace and security.
In this regard, Indonesia remains supportive of the
intergovernmental negotiations process and believes
that incremental progress should be pursued to reform
the Security Council.
Secondly, the Security Council must be bold
and innovative in addressing persistent situations
of concern, in particular protracted conflicts. There
should be a mechanism to deal with problems stemming
from lack of unity among Security Council members,
especially among the permanent five, which until now
has prevented the Council from taking any action.
Thirdly, an arrangement should be developed to
ensure that the Security Council works in a harmonious
and productive manner with the General Assembly
and other main organs while respecting the various
strengths and mandates of each one. Sustainable peace
and security can only be created and nurtured through
an integrated approach to the three United Nations

S/PV.7621

pillars, namely, peace and security, development, and
respect for human rights and the rule of law. Respect
for the rule of law at the national and international
levels is essential to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Fourthly, in the framework of efforts to strengthen
peace and security, greater attention and more resources
must be invested in conflict prevention. Hence
conflict prevention, which also entails pinpointing
early warning, should be a priority. In this process,
the Security Council must leverage the strength of
other relevant organs. While we support the Council’s
resolve to address imminent and ongoing conflicts, a
greater mandate should be given to the Economic and
Social Council to address issues pertaining to the root
causes of conflicts. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
provides a pertinent framework in this regard.
Furthermore, the Council should contribute to the
strengthening and the effective use of all available
means for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Finally, in the context of international peace and
security, the threat posed by nuclear and other weapons
of mass destruction must also be addressed effectively.
For as long as these fatal weapons exist as part of the
defence doctrines of some, the danger and threat to
humanity will remain. Thus, it is vital for the United
Nations to reach a multilaterally agreed decision aimed
at redoubling efforts to accelerate the work of the
multilateral disarmament machinery, in particular to
achieve complete nuclear disarmament. Building on our
collective commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter, we can and must together build a world
that is peaceful, stable and prosperous for everyone.
Indonesia, on its part, is determined to continue playing
its role actively to help realize such a world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Let me begin by expressing
my sincere appreciation to the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela for having convened this debate and for
the comprehensive concept note for today’s discussion
(S/2016/103, annex). I also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is indeed one of the main purposes of the
United Nations, as stipulated in Article 1 of its Charter.
This purpose is first and foremost inseparable from the

16-0388071/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

other three purposes mentioned in the same Article. In
our view, therefore, the maintenance of international
peace and security must go hand in hand with the
development of friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights and
the self-determination of peoples, the achievement
of international cooperation in solving international
problems and the harmonization of the actions of
nations in the attainment of these common ends.
In realizing these purposes, Member States must
strictly abide by international law, in particular those
principles of law enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. Let me highlight four of these basic principles
of law that from Thailand’s perspective are key
elements of the maintenance of peace and security in
this modern world.
First, one cannot attach enough importance to
the principle of the sovereign equality of all United
Nations Members. It is truly sad that 70 years after
the establishment of the United Nations, we are still
witness to several conflicts around the globe where the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States have been
disrespected, undermined and violated.
Secondly, the Kingdom of Thailand strongly
believes that peace and security are best maintained
through peaceful means, in particular through conflict
prevention, preventive diplomacy and the pacific
settlement of disputes. The provisions of Chapter VI
of the Charter rightly reflect this principle, as they
encompass a whole spectrum of measures aiming to
prevent and deter actions that may disturb peace or pose
a threat to security, and to settle any dispute that might
arise therefrom. The recent successful negotiation on
Iran’s nuclear programme and the normalization of
bilateral relations between the United States and Cuba
are good examples of the effective use of measures
under Chapter VI in contemporary world affairs.
Thirdly, the principle of refraining from the threat
or use of force against other States’ territorial integrity
or political independence is today more relevant than
ever. Since the signing of the United Nations Charter,
the use of force by any party has been illegal unless
undertaken in accordance with the Charter’s provisions.
It is the duty of all of us to ensure full observance of
this principle.
The fourth principle is non-interference in any
other State’s domestic affairs. We believe that a State
has primary responsibility for its own domestic matters.

72/92

15/02/2016

The non-interference principle is of fundamental
importance, and no party may intervene in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any State in a manner inconsistent with international
law, including the United Nations Charter and the
many regional organization agreements that recognize
this fundamental principle. In this regard, we urge the
United Nations to enhance cooperation with regional
organizations, which by nature are more informed about
events in their area, in order to effectively maintain
international peace and security in a sustained and
inclusive manner.
The Security Council, as a key United Nations body
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
has a crucial role to play. It is the only body that can
authorize action under Chapter VII. It is important for
the credibility of the Organization that the Security
Council work in strict compliance with the purposes
and principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
Chapter VII is not an end in itself; it needs full and
robust implementation by all parties concerned.
The purposes and principles of the Charter were
set in the aftermath of the deadliest conflict that
mankind had ever known to prevent the recurrence of
such a situation for future generations. Between peace
and war, the Kingdom Thailand has made its choice.
We reaffirm our strong commitment to respect these
purposes and principles as well as to do our utmost,
together with the United Nations and its Member States,
to build and maintain international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the European Union. We
would like to offer some additional remarks from our
national perspective.
First of all, I would like to thank Venezuela
for convening today’s open debate. The seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations provided numerous
opportunities to look at the history of our Organization.
The importance of respecting the United Nations
Charter was emphasized on many occasions. As the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
which was conferred on it by the States Members of the
United Nations, it is very appropriate to place this topic
on the Council’s agenda.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

The principles established by the Charter of the
United Nations, including respect for State sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement of
international disputes and non-interference in other
countries’ internal affairs, make up the foundations
of contemporary international law and international
relations. These principles should be fully respected by
all States. Any attempt to deviate from or deny them
would only result in threats to international peace and
security.
In this regard, we would like to underline once again
what was already said today by the representative of the
European Union: that the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine, our neighbour,
must be fully respected, as reaffirmed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 68/262, of March 2014.
According to the United Nations Charter,
international disputes among countries should be
resolved in a peaceful way. The Security Council should
advocate peaceful solutions to disputes and support, as
a matter of priority, efforts to resolve disputes through
dialogue, negotiations, reconciliation, good offices and
other peaceful means. The role of regional organizations
and local actors is key in this context given the complex
nature of today’s conflicts and the limited resources of
the United Nations. As proved by last year’s agreement
with Iran, such an approach is not that of a dreamer
but can bring concrete benefits to the international
community.
As we reflect today on the application of the
principles of the United Nations Charter, it is important
to stress that there are significant new threats and
challenges to international peace and security that were
unknown to or underestimated by the founders of the
United Nations in 1945.
Terrorism and foreign fighters, violent extremism,
cyberattacks and uncontrolled migration, climate
change, information warfare, as well as transnational
organized crime have all undermined global stability.
While the Security Council strives to address these
challenges, we need more consistency to ensure the
successful completion of the tasks that arise from
the Council’s effort to maintain international peace
and security. In that regard, we welcome the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism presented by the
Secretary-General. It is important to bear in mind that
the scourge of violent extremism is not exclusive to any
religion or nationality.

S/PV.7621

Let me conclude by reaffirming that Poland, as
one of the original Members of the United Nations, is
fully committed to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We believe that these
norms provide a firm foundation for the universal
application of international law to all countries and the
advance of the international rule of law. All countries
are equal members of the international community, and
all countries are entitled to participate in international
affairs on equal footing. Respect for democracy, human
rights and the rule of law in international relations is as
important as it is on a national level. It enhances trust
and faith among participants of international life.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on
its accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February, as well as for convening
this timely debate on the respect for the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as a key
element for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
From the ashes of the Second World War, the
Charter of the United Nations birthed a new vision
and hope for the global community; a promise for
humankind to rise above the devastation and despair
of the past. Though in our seventieth year, we find time
and time again that we, the nations of the world, have
collectively failed to fulfil that promise. The scourge of
war rages on — maybe not between nations on the scales
we have seen before, but within and between States in
terms of proxy wars, in the actions of non-State actors,
in massive humanitarian crises, and in our failure to
protect the Earth, its peoples and its resources for
future generations.
At its most basic level, the Charter is meant
to guarantee sovereignty, the equality of States,
non-interference, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and fundamental respect among the nations of the
world. Enshrined in its Preamble is the assurance that
it will protect the equal rights of men and women and
of nations large and small. But at the very heart of the
Charter of the United Nations, its spirit cries out for
justice and dignity, not just between Member States
but between all peoples — justice embodied in the
opportunity for economic prosperity; justice in the
establishment of social equity; justice as is necessary

16-0388073/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

for the establishment of a peaceful and inclusive society
based on the rule of law. Its spirit calls out for a life of
dignity for all the world’s peoples.
As we walk these hallowed halls, we should
remember that the diplomats, the international civil
servants, the passionate few who have strived to make
the world better have, over 70 years, had milestone
successes. Today, the United Nations feeds over
104 million people in 80 countries, in war zones,
natural disasters and in health emergencies. Everyday,
the United Nations helps 17 million asylum seekers and
refugees. Despite these achievements, the key purposes
and principles, as enshrined in the Charter, are not
always respected and adhered to by Member States
These failures weigh upon our global conscience:
five years of inaction in Syria; half a century of
failure in Palestine; and a late-come awakening to our
responsibilities towards future generations.
That our greatest failures are concentrated in the
Middle East highlights the priorities, or lack thereof,
that have consumed the Organization, and especially
the Council. Our world views must expand in order to
produce real results for those who are most vulnerable
and most in need. The humanitarian consequences
of these conflicts are beyond belief, and the hollow
promises we have made scream our collective shame.
For instance, a recent report published by the Syrian
Centre for Policy Research found that, since March
2011, 11.5 per cent of the Syrian population had either
been killed or injured, with the number of casualties
amounting to 470,000. Furthermore, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
now registered more than 3 million Syrian refugees
and, as of July 2015, there were at least 7.6 million
internally displaced people within Syria alone.
In fact, clocking in at 60 million refugees and
displaced people worldwide, there are more refugees
in the world today than existed following the Second
World War. Though the United Nations was founded
with the goal of addressing such travesties, in that area
the situation has worsened. And yet, if there is more
glaring an example of our collective failure, it is the
emerging threat posed by the existence of Da’esh, the
so-called Islamic State, which represents a clear threat
to international peace and security.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
for the World Humanitarian Summit, entitled One
Humanity, Shared Responsibility” between the late

74/92

15/02/2016

1990s and early 2000s the number of civil wars declined,
before increasing from 4 in 2007 to 11 in 2014. The
report states that one-third of today’s civil wars involve
external actors. Consequently, these wars have become
more deadly and prolonged.
Da’esh is not merely the consequence of conflict,
but instead, is the product of the hatred that has
consumed the region for decades. Violence is the result
of that hatred, fostered by a fear that is consecrated by
fundamental injustices between peoples. Though its
manifestation is ever evident in the atrocities Da’esh
commits across the globe, nowhere are these injustices
more prominent than in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The occupied territories have formalized a system
of apartheid that is inherently unjust and that fosters
fear among both Palestinians and Israelis alike. That
situation has institutionalized hate, creating a cyclical,
self-sustaining system that feeds upon itself and ensures
a vision for the region that consumes all that is light,
good and hopeful.
And yet, those of us who are most committed
to progress and prosperity, find some solace in the
incremental steps the Organization has taken in other
areas envisioned by the spirit of the Charter. In 2007,
the Security Council held a high-level debate on the
relationship between energy, security and climate (see
S/PV.5663). It was the first time the Council addressed
the potential impact of climate change on security. In
2009, the General Assembly held a debate on climate
change and its possible security implications (see A/63/
PV.85), later adopting resolution 63/281, inviting the
relevant organs of the United Nations to intensify their
efforts in considering and addressing climate change.
In 2015, the Council held an open debate on the peace
and security challenges facing small island developing
States (see S/PV.7499), of which none is greater than
the challenges posed by the effects of climate change.
Although the Maldives has been beating that drum
since 1987, it has taken almost three decades for the
Organization to hear the wake-up call.
Our collective late-awakening to the dangers posed
by climate change and the need to protect our world
and its resources for future generations has not come
too late. In the Paris Agreement, we have taken a bold
step forward, but the threats posed to our food security,
water security and, ultimately, our territory and even
our sovereignty need greater and more serious attention.

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Similarly, just a few months ago, we adopted the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) and the Sustainable
Development Goals. It is hoped that the 2030 Agenda,
in its holistic approach to development, will provide
foundations for peaceful, just and inclusive societies,
for it is only with peace that there can be development
and only development that brings lasting peace. The
promise that these recent developments make to leave
no one behind gives us hope for peace and security, as
envisioned in the true spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, as we enter this new era of global development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): Nigeria thanks the delegation
of Venezuela for organizing this debate and for the
concept note (S/2016/103, annex) provided to guide our
deliberations. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
The purposes and principles of the United Nations
are the foundations upon which the Organization
stands. They define the parametres of multilateral
engagement by United Nations Member States and
provide a framework for achieving global peace,
security, stability and prosperity for all. We welcome
the opportunity that this debate provides us to reflect on
the importance of respecting, at all times and without
qualification, the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, as defined in the Charter.
The Charter of the United Nations, over the decades,
has stood the test of time. It is as relevant today as it
was more than 70 years ago when it was adopted. Its
pre-eminence as an international treaty is reinforced
by its Article 103, which places the obligations of
Member States under the Charter over and above their
obligations under any other international treaty. What
this implies is that Member States must at all times
act in accordance with the Charter, and especially the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the Charter define
very clearly the means by which the United Nations,
Member States and regional organizations can promote
international peace and security. Chapter VI calls for
the peaceful settlement of disputes that are likely to
threaten international peace and security. This provision
of the Charter was the basis upon which Nigeria and
Cameroon peacefully resolved their territorial dispute
in the Bakassi peninsula. This and other actions that

S/PV.7621

Nigeria has taken in the interest of international peace
and security, particularly at the regional level in West
Africa, demonstrate our commitment to respect the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We encourage Member States having disputes
to resolve such disputes in the spirit of the Charter.
The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations
displayed profound foresight with the inclusion of
Chapter VIII, which recognizes the role of regional
agencies in the maintenance of international peace
and security. While the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security lies
with the Security Council, regional organizations
have played and continue to play an important role in
addressing threats to peace, especially at the regional
level.
In West Africa, the Economic Community of West
African States has made significant achievements
in resolving conflicts and maintaining peace. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development has
played a key role in the maintenance of peace and
security in East Africa. The Southern African
Development Community has also been effective in
maintaining peace in its sphere of influence. The Lake
Chad Basin Commission member States and Benin are
working together to defeat the Boko Haram terrorist
group. The United Nations is working closely with the
African Union in a win-win partnership that promotes
peace and security in Africa. All these examples point
to the relevance of regional arrangements in the global
security architecture.
Contemporary international relations are growing
in complexity with multiple overlapping dimensions.
This sometimes leads to friction among States.
Against that backdrop, the way to minimize threats
to international peace and security is for all States
to conduct their international affairs at all times in
a manner that is consistent with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, and wishes to make the following
remarks in its national capacity.
We would like to thank the Venezuelan presidency
of the Security Council for giving Member States

16-0388075/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

the opportunity to exchange views on the Charter of
the United Nations 70 years after the Organization’s
foundation. Cyprus attaches the utmost importance to
the Charter of the United Nations and considers it to be
the cornerstone of international law.
In the concept paper (S/2016/103, annex), the
Council presidency recalls some of the significant
achievements of the Organization, most notably
regarding the promotion of human rights, decolonization
and economic and social development. It also stresses,
however, that at certain times the United Nations has
failed to live up to the expectations of the world’s
peoples. We fully share that assessment, based on my
country’s experience. Previous speakers have referred
to several examples of violations of the Charter of the
United Nations in today’s world. I will therefore take
this opportunity to briefly reflect on the case of Cyprus,
which is among the oldest issues on this organ’s agenda.
Cyprus joined the United Nations immediately
after gaining its independence from British colonial
rule in 1960. It has since remained a steadfast
supporter of the Organization and of the international
legal framework it provides, despite having witnessed
first-hand, from the standpoint of the victim, several
violations of the Charter involving international peace
and security and regarding its sovereignty and the
non-use of force. There are several Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions validating those
violations. Notwithstanding the numerous resolutions
and repeated efforts to resolve the Cyprus question
over the years, the situation has remained unchanged
since 1974, with 37 per cent of the island’s territory still
under foreign occupation by Turkey.
We acknowledge the need to look to the future.
In that regard, we remain cautiously optimistic that
the current negotiation process under the auspices of
the good offices mission of the Secretary-General will
finally lead to a successful outcome on the basis of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and in line
with the principles of the European Union, of which
Cyprus is a member. If that successful outcome is to
materialize, however, all parties involved, in particular
those that constitute the source of the problem, need
to acknowledge and assume their responsibilities and
refrain from actions that constitute further violations of
international law. They must realize that unproductive
insistence on colonial era attitudes has no place in
today’s world.

76/92

15/02/2016

The Charter of the United Nations calls, inter alia,
for saving succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, reaffirming fundamental human rights, justice
and respect for international law, promoting better
standards of living and living together in peace. Those
principles should serve as our torch everywhere in the
world where problems continue to exist.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your initiative to convene today’s
important and thought-provoking open debate on
respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations. I thank you for putting this issue
before the Council, which has been greatly debated and
discussed within and outside of the United Nations. My
delegation appreciates your insights into the theme,
as reflected in the concept note (S/2016/103, annex)
circulated earlier.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and for his vision on the topic.
Last year’s debate on the Charter of the United
Nations (see S/PV.7389) and today’s meeting testify to
our strong commitment to the Charter and its continued
relevance, 70 years after its creation. They also represent
an opportunity to reaffirm and reiterate our attachment
to the principles and purposes embodied in the Charter
and our commitment to multilateralism and to the
spirit and requirements of contemporary international
governance. Since its inception, the United Nations
has proved to be a cornerstone of the international
peace and security architecture. While we live in a
totally different world from the one prevailing in the
aftermath of the Second World War, when the United
Nations came into being, the principles and objectives
enshrined in the Charter remain unchanged.
Tunisia has always called for those principles to
be accepted as the cornerstone of relations between
nations, and we have built and shaped our foreign
policy on those parameters. We are witnessing drastic
changes in the international environment and in the
nature of international challenges, in the scope of
regional rivalries and internal conflicts. The increasing
threats to international peace and security posed by
the new global challenges on our agenda, including
the proliferation of terrorist and violent extremist
groups, require us not only to strengthen our concerted
efforts to address them but also to launch a global

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

drive to reaffirm the crucial role that the principles of
the Charter play in enabling us to preserve peace and
stability and tackle any threat that could jeopardize that
peace and our society and humanity.
Today there is an ever-stronger need for enhanced
international cooperation in an ever-more integrated
world, if we are to avoid the eruption of conflicts
through strategies that ensure the peaceful settlement
of disputes. My country strongly supports ensuring that
the Security Council makes use of the tools available to
it under Chapter VI of the Charter and turns to the type
of coercive measures covered in Chapter VII only as a
last resort. We regret the fact, however, that such tools
have not been applied to issues such as the question of
Palestine, which remains unresolved, owing to a lack
of will and determination on the part of the Security
Council and to its paralysis when it comes to putting an
end to the oldest colonial rule in the world.
There is an urgent need to devise a more inclusive
form of global governance if we are to adapt to
evolving global dynamics, and that implies that our
decision-making bodies must reflect the world’s new
realities. The Security Council is a case in point. We
believe that reforming the Council can help to strengthen
international law as a prerequisite for peace, security
and development, and that it will further consolidate the
Council’s position as a central component of effective
global governance capable of promoting concerted
efforts to address today’s challenges.
Our collective efforts to maintain international
peace and security demand that we enhance strategic
partnerships, particularly in the areas of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, with regional organizations such as
the African Union, based on innovative interpretations
of the relevant provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The African Union is playing an ever greater role,
and a costly one, in the peaceful settlement of crises
and conflicts in Africa, and we should strengthen our
support to it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): I would like to thank the
Venezuelan presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s open debate on respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
statement.

S/PV.7621

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
During this seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, we have reflected thoroughly on lessons learned
and on the future of our Organization. Today’s debate
gives us an opportunity to reaffirm the importance
of the foundational treaty of the United Nation, its
Charter, and our respect for its purposes and principles.
The Charter was adopted as a firm response to the
suffering we endured during the Second World War.
Through its signing in San Francisco in 1945, Member
States committed to creating a better world for future
generations, and first and foremost to maintaining
international peace and security by establishing core
principles for the international system that had largely
been missing previously.
The United Nations has not always been able to
prevent conflicts or stop atrocities. Today we are again
living in troubled times, and the ideals and principles
of the Charter are threatened in many ways around the
globe. The ongoing conflicts and violence in many
parts of the world have forced millions to flee their
homes, more than at any time since the end of the
Second World War. Violent extremism is on the rise,
with terrorist groups such as Da’esh displaying new
levels of brutality. The continued subjection of peoples
to atrocity crimes is a stark reminder of the urgent need
for the international community to prevent and respond
to such horrors. Human suffering related to conflict
must not become a new normal. As the world’s only
truly universal organization, the United Nations has a
responsibility to live up to its task to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war
The Security Council, as the main guarantor of
international peace and security, has a particular
responsibility to prevent and stop mass atrocities. In
the case of Syria, it has been unable to prevent the State
from committing crimes against its own population.
Latvia hopes that the renewed sense of responsibility in
the Council for reaching a political solution to a conflict
that has gone on far too long, as demonstrated by
resolution 2254 (2015), will have tangible results, and
we would like to express our support for the continued
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria.
In this twenty-first century, one of the most
important principles of the Charter — that of refraining
from the use of force against the territorial integrity of

16-0388077/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

a sovereign State — has been breached by a permanent
member of the Security Council even as the global
community has kept reiterating how important it
is to restore international legality. Latvia deplores
any violation of our rule-based international system
through the use of force and the annexation of part of
another country. The principles of the Charter apply to
all States Members of the United Nations, because we
are all guardians of the international system and the
Charter. We strongly support Ukraine’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, as well
as its chosen path of democratic reform.
In conclusion, I would like to address the importance
of conflict prevention and early action by the United
Nations in situations of concern. Latvia strongly
believes that respect for human rights, the rule of law
and good governance is key to maintaining peace and
security, and that therefore it is important to act early
and effectively when serious human rights violations
take place. We are pleased to see growing support for
initiatives aimed at improving the Security Council’s
response to mass atrocities. Latvia supports the code of
conduct proposed by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group for all Security Council members
that asks them not to vote against actions designed to
end or prevent mass atrocity crimes. We also support
the French proposal to voluntarily refrain from the use
of the veto in situations involving such crimes. We urge
the permanent members of the Security Council to
use their special privilege, the veto power, only in the
interests of international peace and security.
We all have an obligation to work to overcome
today’s grim challenges and make the world a better
place. Seventy years on, the Charter of the United
Nations gives us a solid basis for the road ahead.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in convening this open debate on respect for
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. My delegation is also grateful for the concept
note (S/2016/103, annex) that has been prepared to
assist our discussions today.
Peru would like to affirm its solemn commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to an international order based on the rule

78/92

15/02/2016

of law, which are indispensable tools for creating a more
peaceful, prosperous and fair world. There can be no
doubt that the establishment of the United Nations has
contributed greatly to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and that thanks to the work of the
Security Council, we have not slid back into war on a
global scale, as was the case during the first half of the
twentieth century.
Despite those achievements, however, my
delegation recognizes that in some instances the
Council has not effectively fulfilled its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, I would like to briefly discuss the importance
of continuing to work to achieve comprehensive reform
of the Security Council, particularly with regard to its
methods of work and specifically the use of the veto.
That is becoming increasingly relevant in view of our
imperative need to prevent atrocity crimes. The fact
is, at times when a State has been unable to fulfil its
sovereign responsibility to protect its people, we have
seen situations in which the international community
has not known how to respond effectively and in
which the Security Council has been unable to fulfil
its primary responsibility. In that regard, I would like
to reiterate that the Government of Peru believes that
the responsibility to protect was not conceived to
undermine, but rather to strengthen, the sovereignty of
States and the principle of sovereign equality enshrined
in the San Francisco Charter.
My delegation also believes that it is necessary
to limit the the unrestricted use of the veto by the
permanent members of the Security Council where it
may impede this organ from taking action on situations
that may involve war crimes and mass atrocities. Peru
therefore joined the political declaration sponsored
by France and Mexico to restrict the use of the veto.
We also endorse the code of conduct promoted by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, of
which we are a member. On the other hand, we call for
the Security Council to make a special effort to shift its
approach from reacting to conflicts to preventing them.
My country believes that strict adherence to
international law and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations is essential for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
underscore the importance we place in the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes. In that regard, we
believe that the establishment of a judicial body with
consultative competence, such as the International

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Court of Justice, is a reflection of the importance
that the Charter attaches to the promotion of the rule
of law at the international level. As a such, by way of
its decisions and advisory opinions, the International
Court of Justice contributes to the promotion and
clarification of international law as a genuine option
for preserving peace.
Although Peru acknowledges the primary role of
the Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security, we also believe it is essential that this
organ utilize all the available tools provided for under
Chapter VIII, concerning cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. Similarly, Peru believes
that Security Council actions authorized in Chapter
VII of the Charter should be adopted only after the
Council has implemented non-coercive measures. In
that connection, Peru reiterates its support for certain
sanctions regimes established by the Council, although
we believe that the working methods of the committees
charged with the application of sanctions should be
improved with a view to making sanctions regimes
more effective.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize Peru’s
commitment to the building of peaceful and inclusive
societies at the domestic and international levels,
to which the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1) will make a contribution. My country will continue
to be a partner in the building of an international
community that promotes the participation of all States
without discrimination and in which international
relations are based on mutual respect, good faith,
cooperation, respect for the rule of international law
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Forging such
an international community is the best guarantee for
maintaining international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the choice of the theme for the
present debate. The full text of our statement will be
shared accordingly.
The history of humankind has indeed been marked
by conflicts, conquests and wars for the control of
areas of influence, as the concept note (S/2016/103,
annex) points out. However, the same history is replete
with examples of the continued struggle of oppressed
peoples for their freedom, self-determination and

S/PV.7621

independence. The Charter of the United Nations was
written by the people and for the people. The doctrine
of the Charter is based on a reaffirmation of the faith in
basic human rights and in the dignity and worth of the
human individual. The Charter bases the development
of friendly relations among nations on respect for the
principles of equal rights and the self-determination
of peoples. It is precisely due to those fundamental
principles of the Charter that 193 States, free nations,
are gathered under the roof of the United Nations.
The Charter does not in any way limit the privilege
of freedom to any people. It would be utterly unfair to
downplay the many achievements of the Organization
in promoting peace and security during the past 70
years. However, we should also admit that there has
been an erosion of trust in the world order, given the
proliferation and intensity of conflicts. Negotiations
on peace agreements often confront fundamental
difficulties, not least because the voices of the affected
people are drowned in the justification and abuse of
the principles of sovereignty, non-interference and
territorial integrity.
Sovereignty entails responsibility. Therefore, when
sovereignty harbours a political culture of repression,
systematic violation of human rights and disregard for
the rule of law, it effectively cultivates conflict. When
a sovereign leader drives the discourse of intolerance
and hatred, he flouts the responsibility of sovereignty.
It is therefore as much about the responsibility of
Government as it is about sovereignty.
The people of Nagorno Karabakh have effectively
won their right to self-determination and freedom out of a
struggle against decades of discrimination — historical
as well as socioeconomic and political injustice. The
continued cultivation of hatred and aggression against
the people of Nagorno Karabakh, the entrenched culture
of systematic violations of human rights in Azerbaijan,
their continued war-mongering and effective refusal
to achieve a swift and negotiated peace agreement
mediated by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk Group co-Chairs
represent an actual physical threat to the people of
Nagorno Karabakh. The consolidated support of the
international community to the negotiating process
within the agreed format is of the utmost importance,
particularly in order to deny the unwilling party the
privilege of procrastination, deviation from agreed
principles of the settlement and forum-shopping.
Once again, Armenia highly values the support by the

16-0388079/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

international community and the United Nations, and
of the Secretary-General in particular, rendered to the
OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship in the peaceful
resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Over the years, the broad concept of prevention
has been gradually and effectively taking centre stage
in the function of the maintenance of international
peace and security. The responsibility of States to build
peaceful and effective societies is a primary guarantee
against conflicts. The evolving agenda of the United
Nations, notably the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
recognizes in no ambiguous terms the interlinkages
among peace, security, development, human rights,
responsible Government and the rule of law. Enhanced
international cooperation to that end is therefore
compelling, not least when viewed strictly through the
prism of the maintenance of international peace.
The requirement of systematic and careful analyses
of information to detect deteriorating situations requires
the sustainability of strengthened and reliable data
sources. The United Nations system, with its multiple
reporting mechanisms and extensive field presence,
is one such important source. Enhanced cooperation
with regional organizations also serves the purpose of
expanding data-gathering. Sources of information are
multiple. However, the affected people whose actual
physical security is at risk are the ultimate voice in
analysing situations. The Secretary-General makes a
cogent argument in his report entitled One Humanity,
Shared Responsibility, in that people want to be safe and
free from violence, persecution, oppression and fear.
They want to be treated with dignity and to know that
their lives matter. Indeed, that is the central tenet of the
Charter. It should also be central to the international
order.
The capacity to channel early signs of deteriorating
situations into the United Nations system, not least to
the Security Council, remains a vital objective. In that
respect, we commend the Secretary-General and the
United Nations system for their continued efforts. We
recall that one such important tool in that respect is the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.
Finally, swift action on early signs, however, remains
a challenge, as it concerns heightened sensitivities to
preventive engagement and compatibility of political
will among Member States. It should also be noted that
deteriorating situations are further exacerbated against

80/92

15/02/2016

a background of the deterioration in the international
political context, in which major international and
regional actors expand the scope of disagreements
among them, and to which smaller States are particularly
vulnerable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guyana.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): Guyana greets you,
Mr. President, as a neighbour and congratulates
Venezuela on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February. We
thank you for convening this open debate and for the
theme, which calls our attention, in the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security, to the
importance of respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations — respect too often
observed in the breach, despite many professions to the
contrary. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing this morning.
For us, as a small developing State, the current
theme permeates our very existence, both as the cradle
of our foreign policy and the standard which we expect
others to observe in their conduct towards us. The
enduring relevance and validity of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations cannot
be overstated. They point to the continuing need for
collective effort and multilateral action in maintaining
international peace and security, developing friendly
relations among nations, achieving international
cooperation and solving global problems, and to the
role of the United Nations in harmonizing our several
options to those ends.
Respect for sovereign equality, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the settlement of international
disputes by peaceful means, refraining from the
threat or use of force in international relations,
non-interference in the affairs of other States and
fulfilment of the obligations assumed by States under
the Charter are among the cardinal underpinnings of
today’s international order. They afford to all States,
in particular the small and vulnerable, the prospect of
protection in the face of a diverse array of threats of
increasing complexity, including climate change, the
vagaries of transnational criminal networks, the illicit
flow of small arms and light weapons and drugs, the
spread of disease and the scourge of terrorism.
The faithful adherence of all to the purposes and
principles of the Charter is essential to effectively

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

promoting peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights in our world. It is incumbent on the
Council, charged with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and by extension its members, to be exemplary in such
adherence and to eschew conduct inimical to the pursuit
of that mandate, thereby providing a basis for enduring
confidence in the efficacy and legitimacy of the actions
of the Council in the eyes of the global community. But
no member of the international community is exempt
from the imperative of similar adherence. The Council
and all Member States should be held accountable for
compliance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We live in a global society that increasingly
charges us to be our brothers’ and sisters’ keeper. To
maintain peace, we must ensure that development
is sustained and human rights are respected, so it
behooves to ensure that peace endures in our societies
and that we not allow discord and violence to spill over
into other societies. In those interlinked pursuits, the
organs of the United Nations —the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council in particular — must work in cooperation and
complementarity, as should Member States. We should
not discount the important role that the SecretaryGeneral can play in upholding respect for the values
of the Organization through the exercise of his good
offices.
We would do well to be constantly mindful that the
Charter is but a framework of values to be actualized by
the actions countries take or decline to take in relation
to it. It is the cornerstone of the rule of international
law, the promotion of which is integral to the promotion
of respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, the International
Court of Justice, set up as one of the pillars of the
international system in 1945, has a significant role
to play in contributing to ensuring respect for the
Charter’s precepts, affording recourse to the peaceful
settlement of disputes and controversies where they
exist and facilitating the peace of the civilized.
Similarly, on the foundations of the regulatory
framework of the Charter the world has built monumental
legal frameworks as complementary instruments that
further codify the rights and responsibilities of States, in
keeping with Charter principles. One such framework,
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea — the so-called constitution of the oceans — is one

S/PV.7621

of the great achievements of the United Nations and is
subscribed to by the vast majority of the world’s nations.
The Convention, including the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea established thereunder, has
made and continues to make an important contribution
to international cooperation, dispute resolution and
peace. In that connection, Guyana also calls attention
to the importance of respect for the sanctity of treaties,
without which the world falls apart.
In conclusion, my country, as one of the smallest
countries of our hemisphere, looks to the United Nations
for protection from all who would do us harm or in any
way threaten the sovereignty and territorial integrity
with which we have been endowed. The Charter is not
only for large countries; it is for small States like mine.
Its purposes and principles are not only for the rich and
powerful, but for the poor and the powerless. It is the
weak who need it most and whose adherence to it is
often truest.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica congratulates you, Mr. President,
and all your team on your work in the Security Council
presidency and on having proposed three important
debates during your term. Holding an open debate on the
purposes and principles of our Charter helps us return
to our roots and the basic criteria of our Organization,
and to confirm that, yesterday as today, they remain
relevant. We, the peoples of the United Nations, must
redesign the institutional architecture on the basis of
those building blocks in order to address the challenges
of the new millennium.
Let me refer to two aspects of the purposes and
principles of the Charter that Costa Rica considers
important and can help the ongoing discussion.
The first is the relationship between the principle
of non-intervention and the responsibility to protect.
Costa Rica, as a small country with no military that has
placed its security and the defence of its sovereignty
in the hands of the international multilateral system,
upholds the principle of non-intervention. That principle,
however, is not unlimited, not only in situations that call
for the implementation of Chapter VII of the Charter
but also when States should be responsible and the
guarantors of the security and welfare of their citizens.
Sovereignty confers responsibility.

16-0388081/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

That is why our country upholds another principle
that has evolved on the basis of the need to take action in
the event of grave human rights violations and violations
of international humanitarian law. I refer here to the
responsibility to protect and its application in situations
of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
ethnic cleansing. In cases where States lack sufficient
capacity to exercise their responsibility to protect, the
action of the international community is paramount.
Intrinsic human dignity and fundamental rights are not
dependent solely on States, whose legitimacy should
be based on their service to and protection of their
people. In that sense, the protection of human dignity is
a legitimate universal concern that transcends borders
and calls on the international community to act.
While important progress has been made in the
past decade in terms of that principle in reports and
resolutions of the bodies of the United Nations, it is
important to continue stepping up efforts to enhance
its recognition, development and implementation in
the proceedings of the Organization. It is vital to move
forward as an Organization to assist States in fulfilling
their responsibility to protect, as well as in efforts to
help the international community to respond effectively
and rapidly, in a timely and adequate manner, when
collective action to protect is called for.
The second aspect that we wish to address has to
do with the provisions of Article 99 of the Charter.
This Article authorizes the Secretary-General to draw
the attention of the Security Council to any matter that
may threaten the maintenance of international peace
and security. Obviously, it refers to new cases that are
not currently being discussed and have not been placed
on the agenda by any other country. As the SecretaryGeneral clearly indicated this morning, unfortunately
this tool has been used only in exceptional circumstances
over the past 70 years. That mechanism is a vital tool
for conflict prevention and entails an independent
political role given to the Secretary-General that he
himself must exercise when circumstances require it.
Through that mechanism, the Secretary-General can
intervene in a timely manner to seek respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter, especially with
a view to preventing conflicts and eliminating threats to
international peace and security. But that early warning
prerogative granted by the Charter is also an obligation
and a responsibility. The Secretary-General has access
to privileged information, such as that provided by
observers in the field and the personnel necessary for

82/92

15/02/2016

carrying out political analyses that are required. He is
therefore placed in a strategic position to make make
those warnings in a timely manner so that the Security
Council can take the take appropriate measures, and
preferably preventive measures, which can also play an
important role to ensure the responsibility to protect.
Given the very complex landscape that we face in
terms of new conflicts and unprecedented humanitarian
crises, we must use of existing mechanisms such as
early warning, as well as new principles such as the
responsibility to protect, so that we can take preventive
action to safeguard international peace and human
rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey):Let me begin by expressing our
gratitude to the Venezuelan presidency for organizing
this debate, as well as to the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
The system created by the Charter of the United
Nations 70 years ago has prevented numerous conflicts
from turning into another world war and paved the
way for today’s achievements in social and economic
development as well as human rights. On the other
hand, the history of the United Nations is full of
examples of non-compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and the United Nations failure
to ensure such compliance. That not only results in
direct consequences, such as the loss of many lives, but
also undermines the credibility of the Organization.
We need to devise sustainable solutions to make
the Organization fit for its purpose, taking into
account new challenges. On many occasions, the
Security Council has failed to find timely and lasting
solutions to problems, such as the decades-long IsraeliPalestinian conflict and the tragedy in Syria. There
is no accountability mechanism for inaction by the
Council, which mostly results from the threat or the
use of the right to the veto. That inaction is the main
factor that encourages those who do not refrain from
constantly breaching the provisions of the Charter to
wage war against their own people. Therefore, the quest
for a reformed Council is more than rhetoric and is the
key to the paradigm shift that is urgently needed to put
an end to such impunity.
That unfortunate reality brings me to our second
point, that is, the importance of intensifying our efforts

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

to prevent conflicts before they occur. Societies in
which policies are crafted on the basis of the dignity
of their people, inclusivity and social justice, as well
as on good governance, are less prone to conflicts.
Therefore, only policies that address the root causes
of conflicts will have sustainable results. We hope that
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) will
have direct consequences in that respect. Also, polices
aimed at enhancing fundamental rights and freedoms
and promoting intercultural dialogue will have longlasting results. The Alliance of Civilizations is a tool
designed to that effect.
Thirdly, in the face of a potential conflict, priority
should be given to the effective use of the tools
enumerated in Chapter VI. The guiding principles of
mediation, such as the consent of local parties, the
impartiality of the mediators, the inclusivity of the
mediation process and national ownership, are all
consistent with the principles of the Charter.
My fourth point pertains to the protection of
civilians during conflicts. An immediate end to all
attacks against civilians, including indiscriminate aerial
bombardments — as we have observed in Syria — is not
only a moral necessity but also a clear obligation under
international law. We also strongly condemn the use of
starvation as a method of warfare, which constitutes a
war crime. They Syrian regime continues to resort to
all means to prolong its grip on power. It continues to
use all sorts of force and violence — whether chemical
weapons, barrel bombs, ballistic missiles, targeted
killings, arbitrary detention, torture, systematic abuse,
starvation or forced displacement. Those brutal policies
pursued by the regime against its own people represent
gross violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. They also exacerbate terrorism
in Syria. In that regard, the representative of such a
regime, which is also responsible for the emergence
of Da’esh, is not in a position to lecture anybody on
adherence to the principles of the Charter.
As we share a long border with Syria, developments
in that country have affected Turkey signicantly. We
have been facing national security threats and attacks
emanating from Syria since the start of the conflict,
including from terrorist organizations there. Over
the course of the past few days, Turkish armed forces
have taken retaliatory measures, in comformity with
established rules of engagement and international law,
in response to attacks against Turkey from Syrian soil.

S/PV.7621

On the other hand, the mass human suffering by
the intensified aerial bombardments targeting civilians
in Syria is of the utmost concern. In the past 24 hours
alone, air strikes by the Russian Federation have
targeted education and health facilities, including a
hospital supported by Doctors Without Borders, taking
scores of lives, including children. The same member
of the Council recently caused a new wave of massive
displacement due to its continuing aerial bombardment,
especially in the north and north-west of Syria. Those
responsible for such abhorrent violations of international
law are not in a position to lecture anyone.
The ongoing review processes on peace operations,
peacebuilding and gender come into play as historic
opportunities that might transform the current system
into a more responsive, efficient and transparent one.
Today, the world faces new and unprecedented
challenges that require concerted efforts to find
innovative solutions.
First, terrorism and violent extremism in all forms
remain one of the gravest threats. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s plan of action, particularly the
view that the international community needs to adopt
a comprehensive approach that encompasses not only
security-based counter-terrorism measures, but also
systematic measures that address the drivers of violent
extremism.
Secondly, we now face the largest humanitarian
crisis since the Second World War. We must exert
every effort to strengthen our common commitment to
respect for international humanitarian law. The firstever World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in May
in Istanbul, will be a timely opportunity to address
those challenges. Inclusive policies for migrants, as
well as combating racism and xenophobia, takes on
more importance than ever, given the unprecedented
mobility.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the concept of
responsibility to protect in relation to our discussion
today. We believe that the responsibility to protect should
not be restricted to those facing trouble in turbulent
countries. The situation of populations escaping from
these crimes to neighbouring countries should also
be taken into consideration. With an understanding of
burden-sharing, its scope should also cover the needs
and the protection of such populations.

16-0388083/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

As the largest refugee-hosting country in the world
today, Turkey has been a safe refuge for over 2.5 million
Syrians who had to flee Syria for their lives and has
also ensured that cross-border humanitarian assistance
reaches millions of people in dire need on the Syrian
side of the border, in conformity with its international
obligations and in support of the United Nations. We
believe that this major effort is a concrete example
demonstrating that responsibility to protect can also be
served by humanitarian assistance.
The Charter provides the necessary principles and
means to maintain international peace and security.
Our political will to abide by its letter and spirit and
to work collectively on occasions of non-compliance is
the key to success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on assuming the
presidency this month, and to thank you for organizing
today’s open debate. Let me also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his compelling remarks
delivered this morning.
Twenty-five years ago, when the Republic of
Korea was admitted to the United Nations along with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, both
Koreas pledged to accept and to uphold the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, as laid out in its
Charter. During the past 25 years, my country has been
a strong advocate and defender of the Charter of the
United Nations. As my President stated in her address
to the General Assembly last September,
“The values and ideals upheld by the United
Nations — global peace, the promotion of human
rights and shared prosperity — have embodied the
vision of the Republic of Korea itself” (A/70/PV.13,
p.28).
Unfortunately, however, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has consistently breached that solemn
pledge. Over the past 10 years, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has conducted four nuclear tests and
six long-range missile tests. These are all in violation
of its international obligations, including under four
separate resolutions of the Security Council. The latest
show of disregard for the United Nations Charter by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea took place

84/92

15/02/2016

in the course of the past six weeks with its nuclear test
on 6 January, followed by the launch of a long-range
ballistic missile on 7 February. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s nuclear test and missile launch are
a clear threat to international peace and security and a
blatant challenge to the international community.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the
only country in the world that has conducted nuclear
tests in the twenty-first century; developed nuclear
weapons programmes as a signatory to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and then announced its withdrawal from both the
NPT and the International Atomic Energy Agency;
officially declared itself a nuclear-armed State in its
Constitution; and been subjected to weapons of mass
destruction-related sanctions imposed by the Security
Council.
By repeatedly violating Security Council
resolutions, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has shown contempt and disregard for the functions
and powers of the Security Council. To address such
continued violations, the Security Council expressed
its determination, through its resolution 2094 (2013),
to take further significant measures in the event of
a further launch or nuclear test by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The Security Council also
reaffirmed that commitment in its press statement of
7 February (SC/12234), and its intent to expeditiously
adopt a new resolution with such measures in response
to such dangerous and serious violations.
In that regard, the Security Council should adopt
a robust and comprehensive resolution so as not to let
the leadership of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea make a mockery of it by continuing to develop
nuclear weapons. If we go on business-as-usual vis-à-vis
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s repeated
nuclear tests and missile launches, the entire world
could fall prey to nuclear blackmail by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. An extraordinary threat
requires an extraordinary response. The Security
Council, through its tough and effective sanctions,
must make clear to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea that it will no longer tolerate its nuclear weapons
development.
Twenty-five years ago, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea solemnly pledged to comply with
its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
as a new Member. But during the past decade, the

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has persistently
violated all Security Council resolutions related to it.
That is not only a direct challenge to the authority of
the Security Council, but also a contradiction to both
the letter and spirit of the pledge it made. This breach
of obligations by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea calls into question its qualification as a Member
of the United Nations.
Once again, I assure you, Sir, that the Republic of
Korea remains faithful to all provisions of the United
Nations Charter. We express our unyielding willingness
to defend its purposes and principles as key elements
for ensuring international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Nina (Albania): Allow me first to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and for the interesting concept note prepared
for it (S/2016/103, annex).
Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
make the following remarks in my national capacity.
As rightly provided pointed out in the concept
note, the United Nations emerged from the ashes of
the Second World War with a firm promise. Nothing
indeed could have been nobler in 1945, as they are
today, than the common ideals enshrined in the
Charter of the Organization, including, notably, “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow
to mankind”. We further concur with your assessment,
Sir, that throughout its history the United Nations has
registered significant achievements as regards peace,
security and international cooperation. Indeed, there
has been immense progress during the seven decades
of the United Nations existence — progress that has
brought real change.
Undeniably, the United Nations has worked for and
greatly contributed to the transformed, better world we
live in today. It has brought to life, inter alia, the vast
issue of human rights, enshrined in the Preamble to the
Charter —
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small”

S/PV.7621

— which was almost inexistent before the founding of
the United Nations. It represents the basis of the very
important core treaties whose fiftieth anniversary we
mark this year: the International Covenants on Civil
and Political Rights and Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights.
The failure to fulfil the so-called firm promise of
the United Nations to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war has also been constant. The solemn
pledge of “never again” has been repeated too often, and
man-made tragedies keep recurring, challenging the
belief in humankind’s capacity to learn from its failures.
Over the past 70 years, the Charter has not always been
implemented in the manner that a literal reading of the
text might suggest, even though, since the end of the
Cold War, we have seen its reinvigoration. Millions of
people across the world have had no other choice than
to water down their illusions faced with wars, atrocities
and massive human rights violations from which the
United Nations has solemnly pledged to save succeeding
generations. Important recommendations on several
situations from the General Assembly and other United
Nations mechanisms have, most regrettably, not been
referred to the International Criminal Court.
We have entered an era in which armed conflicts
are greater in complexity and numbers of actors,
broader in tactics and weapons used and, above all,
more atrocious in the human suffering they cause. The
response of the international community should also be
adapted to the new reality and the challenges we face.
Increasingly, the international system is beginning
to reach the more remote areas of social and political
change, but the United Nations mechanisms were not
originally designed to focus on them. It is therefore
imperative to adapt the United Nations to allow a more
active response to political and humanitarian abuses.
In 2005, 60 years after its founding, the United
Nations World Summit provided an opportunity to
reform the United Nations to meet the challenges of the
twenty-first century. The responsibility to protect, in
particular, has catalysed important developments during
the past 10 years. Progress has been made in building a
global political consensus around the responsibility to
protect as a very practical and effective framework for
preventing mass atrocity crimes.
Developing the norm alone does not provide
for prevention or protection. The growing support
for the normative framework should be matched by

16-0388085/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

the necessary political will and, most importantly,
resources to prevent atrocity crimes. The rise of violent
extremism and non-State armed groups perpetrating
atrocities, particularly against ethnic and religious
minorities, continues to be one of the most pressing
challenges, and it must be defeated.
Only recently, on the occasion of attaining 60 years
of United Nations membership, Albania reaffirmed
once again its full commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and its
firm belief in effective multilateralism and international
cooperation as the best means to respond to old and
new threats and the challenges of our time. The
Charter has tasked the Security Council, as the organ
responsible for maintaining peace and security, to act
swiftly and resolutely when countries are confronted
with situations of mass atrocity and grave human rights
violations, and when States are at risk of experiencing
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
ethnic cleansing.
We, unfortunately, know only too well what happens
when the Council fails to live up to its responsibilities.
The use of the veto in such cases betrays the trust of
millions of people for whom the United Nations is
the only hope. It openly disregards the victims, it
empowers dictators and other human rights violators,
and undermines international efforts to end impunity.
In this respect, Albania wishes to reiterate its strong
supports for the French proposal and the efforts of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group to
draft a code of conduct regarding the non-use of the
veto in situations of genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
In concluding, allow me to go back to where it
all began — to the noble idea of saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war — in order to recall
that the authority and legitimacy vested in the Security
Council to maintain or restore international peace and
security has no precedent in international relations,
and that the Council must be up to its responsibility
and justify world confidence in fully upholding the
principles enshrined in the Charter. Discussions this
year on the draft text on the responsibility to protect will
offer us yet again an opportunity to renew and further
the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

86/92

15/02/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by thanking
the Venezuelan presidency for organizing this open
debate on the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. I wish to express appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
In spite of so many challenges and shortcomings,
the United Nations has been and continues to be an
indispensable organization. Its Charter principles
and purposes also remain as relevant today as they
were 70 years ago in safeguarding international peace
and security, promoting respect fo human rights, and
ensuring sustainable development for all. The issue is
how we can apply them, in a manner that is consistent
with the realities of our time, to meet the needs and
aspirations of current and future generations.
We are indeed living in an increasingly
interconnected and interdependent world, and what
happens in one corner of the world — be it terrorism,
climate change or a health pandemic — can easily affect
us all. No one can be immune from these problems, nor
can anyone can claim to have the panacea to address
them alone. We can do so only if we collectively work
together, but that is easier said than done.
That is why we are yet to take full advantage of
what the United Nations can offer to help us overcome
the constraints of self-defeating policies based on
narrow national interest calculations, which ipso facto
lead to double standards, which in turn undermine
the credibility of the United Nations as a custodian
of international law concerning principles governing
inter-State relations. Here, the most critical matter
is to be forthright in our fidelity to the principle of
the sovereign equality of nations without allowing
the principles to be used as a shield — as often
happens — against actions aimed at addressing gross
human rights violations.
As we have witnessed recently, it is indeed possible
to find common ground in addressing some of the most
pressing challenges of our time through dialogue and
negotiation, in line with the principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations. All States, big
or small, have responsibility in that regard. The
Iranian nuclear deal, the Paris Climate Agreement, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda on financing for sustainable development — all

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

achieved through painstaking negotiations — no doubt
represent the triumph of the United Nations and
multilateral diplomacy. However, we should not only
draw lessons from our achievements, but also have the
courage to admit our shortcomings and make all the
necessary efforts to redress them.
I wish to conclude my remarks by quoting the
address delivered by Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia
to the General Assembly in October 1963. He stated the
following:
“The Charter of the United Nations expresses the
noblest aspirations of man: abjuration of force in
the settlement of disputes between States [and] the
safeguarding of international peace and security.
“But these, too, as were the phrases of the
Covenant [of the League of Nations], are only
words; their value depends wholly on our will to
observe and honour them and give them content
and meaning....This Organization and each
of its Members bear a crushing and awesome
responsibility: to absorb the wisdom of history and
to apply it to the problems of the present, in order
that future generations may be born, and live, and
die, in peace.” (A/PV.1229, paras. 5 and 6)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I should like
to thank the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for
convening this debate and acknowledge the very useful
concept note (S/2016/103, annex). We appreciate the
briefing given by the Secretary-General.
My delegation endorses the statement delivered by
the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and Kuwait on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Azerbaijan subscribes to the centrality of the
United Nations, which has enabled the development of
norms governing contemporary international relations
and provided for a stable international order. In the
face of diverse and complex challenges, the Charter
of the United Nations should continue to be a guiding
framework. The principles enshrined in the Charter
reflect fundamental values. The principles of sovereign
equality, the non-use of force, non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, and respect for territorial
integrity are prerequisites for peaceful coexistence
among nations, sustainable development and the

S/PV.7621

promotion and protection of all human rights. The
maintenance of international peace and security
requires Member States to work collectively in order to
achieve those objectives with great efficiency.
On its part, the Security Council, as the custodian
of international peace and security, should enforce
measures of collective security more effectively. In
its conduct, the Security Council should take the lead
in safeguarding respect for and application of the
principles and purposes of the Charter. We fully agree
with the view that there is a need to eliminate double
standards in addressing violations of the Charter, as
well as the selective application of rules and concepts.
The Council’s inaction against persistent threats is a
serious deviation from its responsibilities under the
Charter.
The growing complexity and cost of crises reinforce
our conviction that the role and responsibility of the
Security Council is not limited to the formal adoption
of resolutions. It is far more important that the Council
operate more consistently than it has heretofore in
enforcing its own resolutions, thereby adhering to and
upholding the rule of law.
One of the main challenges threatening
international peace and security remains international
conflicts. The ongoing armed conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan continues to pose a serious
threat to international and regional peace and security.
For more than 20 years, Armenia has been using force
to undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan in blatant disregard of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It has occupied around one-fifth of the territory of
Azerbaijan and has carried out ethnic cleansing against
almost 1 million Azerbaijanis. As a result, there is not
a single Azerbaijani remaining in Armenia nor in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. At present, the front
line extends far beyond the Nagorno Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan, reaching the Fizuli and Agdam districts.
Continued occupation of a large portion of the
territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan by the armed
forces of the Republic of Armenia is the main obstacle
to the settlement of the conflict between Azerbaijan
and Armenia, and the only source of the escalation and
recurrence of hostilities and casualties.
It is therefore ironic that the representative
of Armenia, the country that bears the primary
responsibility for unleashing the war against

16-0388087/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

Azerbaijan, for committing other serious crimes during
the conflict and for failing to comply with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, goes so far as to
lecture Member States about such notions as peace,
security and human rights. In practice, the successive
Governments of Armenia have established a notorious
pattern of complete disrespect for the generally accepted
norms and principles of international law. Committing
war crimes and crimes against humanity, sponsoring
terrorism, adhering to dubious ethnoreligious ideologies
and raising territorial claims against its neighbours
have become a sort of norm of conduct for Armenia.
Armenia policies have nothing in common with
the realization of the right of self-determination. The
entity that Armenia tries to present as independent, the
so-called Nagorno Karabakh Republic, is nothing more
than a puppet regime under the occupation and direct
control of the Government of Armenia. All key figures
of the puppet regime illegally established by Armenia
in the occupied Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan
are in fact actors in the political system of Armenia,
including the incumbent President of Armenia, Serzh
Sargsyan.
The conflict can be resolved only on the basis of
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan within its internationally recognized
borders. Armenia must withdraw its armed forces from
the Nagorno Karabakh and other occupied territories
of Azerbaijan, constructively engage in the conflict
settlement process and comply with its international
obligations.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Azerbaijan’s
support for the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the collective work undertaken
to advance international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela for organizing today’s debate. We are
also grateful for the briefing by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Guatemala agrees with the approach set forth in the
concept note to guide this debate (S/2016/103, annex), in

88/92

15/02/2016

the sense that this Organization throughout its history
has made significant achievements in various areas,
such as peace, security, international cooperation,
human rights, decolonization and economic and social
development. In accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
has, since its inception, been entrusted with the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, with the aim, inter alia, of not
repeating the mistakes committed before the founding
of the Organization.
To achieve that, it was recognized that there was a
need for a set of mechanisms and tools to be applied,
depending on the situation and circumstances of each
particular case. In most cases, unfortunately, those
tools have been used to stop conflicts already under
way rather than to prevent them before they burst
out, with devastating consequences, especially for the
civilian population. Furthermore, on prevention, it is
important to promote the responsibility of States in
protecting their civilian populations.
In addition, Guatemala has supported the
traditional view that the Security Council must
continue to customize its mandates after analysing the
situation in question. The Council can have a strong
influence on events on the ground, but ultimately
peace can be preserved — or recovered — only by the
parties to a conflict, whether the conflict is between
States or within a State. In matters of war and peace,
the international community can play a critical role, but
the internal stakeholders are the masters of their own
destiny.
With respect to the current situation in some African
and Middle Eastern States, the Security Council needs
to take a close look at its own role with regard to certain
situations. The conflict in Syria, for example, which
has resulted in and continues to give rise to violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
and where the Council’s failure to perform has had
devastating consequences for the Syrian civilians. The
use of the veto or the threat of use does not encourage
or promote unity in the search for understanding, and
the abuse of the use of the veto and the threat of its use
has prevented the Council from fulfilling its mandate.
Far from favouring the defence of shared interests with
arguments that would facilitate consensus, the veto has
obstructed and undermined the common interest and,
as has been proven, is divisive among members of the
Council. All of that requires us to evaluate both the

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

internal dynamics of the Council and the adequacy of
the instruments available to the Council and the means
to apply them.
As a country that has benefited from a Security
Council mandate to verify its peace process, we can
share our unique experience in everything related to
peacebuilding and, as a country contributing troops to
different missions, in the area of peacekeeping. In that
regard, we take the opportunity to welcome resolution
2261 (2016), adopted by the Council on 25 January,
where, taking into account the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Colombia,
a special political mission was established to verify and
monitor the ceasefire in Colombia and the surrender of
weapons.
As we have previously stated before in the Council,
the circumstances of the reality on the ground are
subject to change at any time and for various reasons.
In order for a judicious mix of Council policies to have
the ability to prevent conflicts or to influence trends,
we need a proactive Security Council. However, despite
the Security Council’s exceptional failures to live up to
its mandate, the United Nations remains the best option
we have for meeting the current challenges facing
humankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands would like to thank the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for convening today’s debate and
for providing the Member States with the opportunity
to re-emphasize the importance of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
comments at the outset of our discussion today. I align
myself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union earlier.
In my statement, I will focus on three issues that,
in our view, lie at the heart of the maintenance of
peace and security: the peaceful settlement of disputes,
human rights and peacekeeping missions.
First, on the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
international legal order is the foundation upon which
friendly and lasting relations between States are built.
International law is even more important when disputes
occur. The peaceful settlement of disputes, recognized
as one of the purposes of the Charter of the United

S/PV.7621

Nations, makes an invaluable contribution to a more
just and secure world.
In The Hague in the Netherlands, we host both
the International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration. And to emphasize the importance
we attach to those institutions in The Hague, let me
highlight the presence in my delegation of the mayor
of The Hague, Mr. Van Aartsen, who is present in the
Chamber today. Both institutions I mentioned — the
International Court of Justice and the Permanent Court
of Arbitration —fulfil a crucial role in realizing the
ambitions of Article 33 of the Charter on the pacific
settlement of conflicts. The upcoming seventieth
anniversary of the International Court of Justice in
April will be a good occasion to reiterate the value and
achievements of that institution. As the host country
of that principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
we encourage all States to recognize the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.
My second point is on human rights. The promotion
of human rights is a cornerstone of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, the current reality in the world shows
that we must do much more to realize our ambitions.
Large-scale violations of human rights, happening on a
daily basis in Syria as we speak, deserve action by the
international community. The principles of the Charter
and international humanitarian law need to be upheld
at all times. We condemn situations where the civilian
infrastructure, especially hospitals and schools,
are systematically targeted by parties to conflict.
Sovereignty should never be used as a shield by States
to prevent mass atrocities from being addressed.
As former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
stated, sovereignty was never meant as a license for
Governments to trample on human rights and human
dignity. The international community has been standing
by while people suffer horribly. The concept of the
responsibility to protect provides guidance on what we
could and what we should do. We urge the permanent
members of the Security Council to refrain from using
their vetoes in cases of mass atrocities and to use all
means at their disposal to increase their interaction
with human rights actors and improve the situation at
hand.
My third point concerns peacekeeping missions.
In order to maintain international peace and security,
the Charter of the United Nations allows for collective
measures. By accepting the Charter, all Member States

16-0388089/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

promise to give the United Nations assistance in any
action it takes. As Member States, we must fulfil that
promise, especially when it comes to peacekeeping.
Over the years, peacekeeping missions have been
deployed in more and more complex situations. Our
military, police and civilians experience that on a daily
basis in the Missions in which we are active, such
as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We also work together with
other countries, especially in Africa, to train their
peacekeeping units and we call upon all Member
States to contribute to peacekeeping missions
with high-quality capabilities, in order to improve
the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions. The
effectiveness of peacekeeping should furthermore be
enhanced by implementing the recommendations of the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446).
In conclusion, as the Dutch philosopher Spinoza
said, peace is not an absence of war; it is a virtue, a
state of mind, a disposition for benevolence, confidence
and justice. As I have stated before, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands is the United Nations partner for peace,
justice and development. We will continue to work
together with all Member States until those goals have
been attained for the peoples and nations of the world.
For we believe those goals together embody the core
values of the Charter of the United Nations, which were
codified to address the needs and desires of humankind
on his journey towards a better future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I understand
that several delegations have requested the floor to
make further statements. It is my intention to accede to
those requests; however, I would ask each delegation to
limit itself to the one additional statement.
I give the floor to the representative of Syria.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to apologize for taking the floor
again. My country’s delegation would like to respond to
the statement made by the delegation of Turkey. I also
want to underscore the content of the statement delivered
at midday today by the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic. In particular, I want to stress
the role of the Turkish regime in supporting terrorism
and as a threat to international and regional peace and
security. It is something that everyone is aware of.

90/92

15/02/2016

Numerous delegations have addressed the subject
of terrorism and described that phenomenon as the
greatest danger and threat to international peace and
security. It is also a threat to the stability and sovereignty
of States. In that regard, we want to stress the fact that
the various terrorist groups, such as Da’esh, Al-Nusra
Front, as well as the various foreign terrorist fighters,
would not have been able to pose such a threat had they
and other groups linked to Al-Qaida not received such
significant support from many United Nations Member
States, in particular the Government of Turkey.
Various United Nations reports have mentioned
the presence of over 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters,
who have come from over 60 per cent of Member
States — in other words 150 Member States — to the
territory of my country, Syria, and who basically have
been able to carry out criminal terrorist acts. None of
that could have happened in the Syrian territory without
the multidimensional support provided by the Turkish
regime. That support, which Turkey has also granted
to numerous terrorist organizations that are active in
the region of the Middle East and in North Africa, as
well as in Libya, Tunisia, Egypt and other countries, is
something everybody knows about.
The Turkish regime has not stopped there. It has
pursued its illegal relations with Da’esh, in particular
when it comes to commerce and the oil trade and the
pillaging of various antiquities and other assets as
well. Recently there was direct and repeated military
intervention by that regime when it saw that its terrorist
friends had failed in their mission. That is how the
Turkish agenda is developing in the region and how
Erdoğan is seeking to see the recreate the Ottoman
Sultanate in order to once again hold the title of
Ottoman Sultan.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation reiterates
its demand that the Security Council reject those acts
of aggression by Turkey and put an end to the atrocities
committed by Turkey, which run counter to all the
values of the Charter of the United Nations. Those acts
are a threat to international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Armenia has requested the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): There was nothing
new in the statement made by the representative of
Azerbaijan: Armenia-phobia has become standard

16-03880

15/02/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

practice in this Chamber. Although I will not engage in
that meaningless exercise, I will make several remarks.
First, the representative of Azerbaijan spoke
at length about selectivity and double standards.
That is exactly what Azerbaijan is practicing. In her
statement, she referred to a number of the principles
of international law. Let me recall that no one is in a
position to hierarchize the principles of international
law. No one principle takes precedence over the other,
in particular the principle of self-determination, which
was missing from the statement of Azerbaijan. Thanks
to that very principle, Azerbaijan is here as a Member of
the United Nations. Indeed, the overwhelming majority
of the members of the United Nations are here thanks
to that principle.
Secondly, she referred to the Security Council
resolutions. I would remind the representative of
Azerbaijan that the key element of those resolutions is
the establishment and observance of a ceasefire. That
is something that is violated by Azerbaijan on a daily
basis, with casualties on both sides. Armenia and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Group — the main format for negotiations on the
conflict — call for the establishment and observance of
a ceasefire, the establishment of an inquiry mechanism
and the withdrawal of snipers. The observance of the
ceasefire has been refused unilaterally by Azerbaijan.
Thirdly, the representative of Azerbaijan referred
to the incumbent Armenian President, Serzh Sargsyan.
It is ironic that Azerbaijan should refer to the Armenian
leadership. In the 24 years of independence, not one
President in Armenia out of the three, including the
incumbent, has served more than two terms of office.
Meanwhile, if one were to, out of curiosity, have a look
at the leadership of Azerbaijan, they would come to a
very simple conclusion: for almost half a century just
one family has led that country — and Azerbaijan is
not a monarchy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Azerbaijan has requested the floor to
make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): Once again,
we have witnessed a futile attempt by Armenia to
whitewash its ongoing aggression against Azerbaijan.
Armenia’s allegation of the non-compliance of
Azerbaijan with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council is yet another attempt to present a distorted
view of the fundamental documents pertaining to the

S/PV.7621

settlement of the conflict. In contrast to the assertions
of the Armenian representative, in its resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993), and 884 (1993), the
Security Council reaffirms the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Azerbaijan, including
the Nagorno Karabakh region. They recognize and
condemn the invasion and demand the immediate,
complete and unconditional withdrawal of the
occupying Armenian forces. To refresh the memory of
the Armenian representative, it should be noted that it
was the Armenian side that rejected the timetable for
the implementation of those resolutions.
Armenia’s military provocations, aimed at
violating the ceasefire regime, are regular aggressive
acts against the Republic of Azerbaijan, and are
deliberately concealed. By distributing its so-called
ceasefire violation reports here in the United Nations,
and speaking now about the joint investigative
mechanism, Armenia seeks to justify its own continued
illegal military presence and the use of force against
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country.
It tries to camouflage the fact that at present the front
line extends far beyond the Nagorno Karabakh region,
reaching the Aghdam and Fizuli districts, and that
Armenian soldiers are deployed on those and other
occupied territories of my country. Throughout 2015
alone, as a result of Armenia’s illegal occupation and
ceasefire violations, a number of Azerbaijani army
servicemen were killed. Azerbaijani soldiers are being
killed, maimed and wounded defending Azerbaijan’s
territorial integrity, sovereignty and State borders. In
contrast, Armenian soldiers are on Azerbaijani land.
Without using evasive terminology, therefore, I would
like to ask my Armenian colleague what the Armenian
soldiers are doing in Aghdam. What are they doing
in Fizuli? What are they doing in Kelbjar? Those are
districts of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
While continuing to deny its involvement and role in
the conflict, the Government of Armenia openly claims
its ownership, and exercises effective control over the
Nagorno Karabakh region of my country. In its national
security strategy of 2007, Armenia claims “to act as
a guarantor of the security of Nagorno-Karabakh”. No
explanation is provided, however, as to how those
guarantees, which affect a portion of the territory of
Azerbaijan, fit into international law.
As a self-proclaimed champion of democracy and
human rights, Armenia should recall its President’s own
words about his role in the massacres committed against

16-0388091/92

S/PV.7621

Maintenance of international peace and security

Azerbaijani civilians during the conflict. When asked
whether he had any regrets about the death of thousands
of people as a result of the Armenian attacks against
Azerbaijani civilians, he said frankly, “I have absolutely
no regrets,” since “such upheavals are necessary, even
if thousands have to die”. Another notorious example,
again from the President of Armenia, then Defence
Minister of Armenia:
“The most important thing is not the territory.
It is that one ethnic group is left in Armenia. In
Vardenis and other regions, Azerbaijanis used to be
70 per cent of the population. Our cultures are not
compatible. We can live side by side but not wihin
each other.”
Another notorious example is also self explanatory:
“Before Khojali, the Azerbaijanis thought .that the
Armenians were people who could not raise their
hand against the civilian population. We were able
to break that stereotype.”
Those words come from the person who holds
the highest political and military post in Armenia.
They speak for themselves, making any statement on
behalf of the Armenian Government in the United
Nations irrelevant and absurd, and providing yet
another example of so-called democracy and respect in
Armenia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of China has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
its statement this morning, a certain country mentioned
changed status quo and land reclamation. The Charter
of the United Nations and the provisions of international
law speak very clearly to this question. If a country
illegally occupies another country’s territory and
engages in large-scale construction, then that status
quo is in violation of the Charter and international law,
and is illegal. With regard to that illegal status quo,
not only should it not it be accepted, it should also be
stopped, and the status that existed prior to the illegal
occupation restored.

92/92

15/02/2016

If a country engages in construction on its own
territorial islands and complies with the requirements
of international law, such as environmental protection,
then such construction and changed status quo fall
within the sovereignty of the country, and are in
line with the Charter and international law. They are
therefore beyond reproach. The Nansha islands are
Chinese territories. The so-called status created by
other countries illegally occupying China’s Nansha
islands is in violation of China’s legitimate rights and
interests. It is therefore illegal and invalid.
The construction on China’s Nansha islands is
within China’s sovereignty. It is not targeted at any
country. It does not affect the freedom of navigation
or flights over the South China Sea. It will not damage
the ecological environment of the South China Sea.
It is therefore legitimate, just, reasonable and beyond
reproach.
In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, China has every right to
maintain its sovereignty, rights and interests. We have
every right to stop any illegal activity that encroaches
upon our legitimate rights and interests.
Maintaining peace and stability within our territory
is in China’s interest. China would never want to see
any chaos created in the South China Sea, and we will
never take the initiative in creating chaos.
While maintaining our territorial sovereignty and
rights on the high seas, we will continue to maintain
peace and stability in the South China Sea. We will
continue using talks and negotiation as the fundamental
paths towards resolving the relevant issues. We will
adhere to the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in
the South China Sea. We will promote the drafting of
guidelines regarding the South China Sea as the toolkit
to manage disputes.
We will adhere to the practice of joint exploration
and development and cooperation on the sea. This
policy of China will never change.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

16-03880
