United Nations

S/PV.6708

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6708th meeting
Thursday, 26 January 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sangqu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Eick
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Twenty-ninth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2011/807*)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-21574 (E)

*1221574*

S/PV.6708

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

steps towards reclaiming its historical role as a pillar of
stability and prosperity in the subregion.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Twenty-ninth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2011/807*)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Albert
Koenders, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/807*, which contains the twentyninth progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Mr. Koenders.
Mr. Koenders: Mr. President, let me start by
stating that it is a great honour and pleasure to address
you in person in my capacity as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Côte
d’Ivoire since October last year. The first three months
of my mission have, of course, focused on the
legislative elections, but I would like to start by putting
the situation in Côte d’Ivoire into a slightly broader
perspective.
Remarkable progress has been registered in Côte
d’Ivoire towards restoring normalcy since the end of
the violent post-election crisis last year. The security
situation is stabilizing, those displaced have started to
return, the economy is starting to show resilience, and
the legislative elections were held successfully and, I
think, most importantly, after last year’s crisis, in
relative peace, although the final results have yet to be
proclaimed and certified. President Ouattara has
undertaken important steps to strengthen subregional
cooperation, and I think that Côte d’Ivoire is taking

2

That
important
progress
notwithstanding,
significant challenges remain. Côte d’Ivoire is still
struggling to recover from the devastating crisis, which
took a heavy toll on the country and its people, while
many national capacities have been destroyed. The root
causes of instability and potential triggers of violence
have remained. Important challenges and issues
relating to security and national reconciliation should
not be underestimated and require, in my view, the
political attention of the Council.
The priorities identified by the President and his
Government in areas where the United Nations is
mandated to provide support remain valid and relevant.
The support of United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) is essential to help the Government
stabilize the security situation, which includes the
reconstitution and reform of security and rule-of-law
institutions; the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants; the protection of
civilians; facilitating the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons; and fostering the crucial
process of national reconciliation, early recovery and
the promotion and protection of human rights.
The holding of the legislative elections without
delay and in a relatively peaceful atmosphere is, in our
view, a significant achievement that marked a major
step forward in the restoration of constitutional order,
more inclusive governance, and the completion of a
key unfinished aspect of the peace process. UNOCI
worked actively with the Government and all political
stakeholders, including the Facilitator, to help ensure
that the legislative elections proceeded in a manner that
contributes to securing lasting stability in Côte
d’Ivoire.
Although voter participation was lower than
during the 2010 presidential elections, the turnout,
approximately 36 percent, was similar during previous
legislative polls in the country, in 1990 and 1995.
UNOCI played an important role across the country in
support of the authorities which were responsible for
the organization and conduct of the polls, while
providing the same level of technical and logistical
support to the Independent Electoral Commission as
was the case during the presidential elections. I would
also highlight the fact that the Ivorian security agencies
provided effective security, in concert with UNOCI.

12-21574

S/PV.6708

The mission and the United Nations country team
provided the same level of technical and logistical
support to the Independent Electoral Commission as
was the case during the presidential elections.
In keeping with the mandate given to me by the
Council to certify that all stages of the electoral
process were held in accordance with international
standards, I will yet have to certify these important
elections, and I will do so after the national institutions
have evaluated the process. The Constitutional
Council, which is currently examining 110 electoral
complaints filed by candidates, has announced its
decisions on the appeals filed by a number of
candidates; their proclamation is expected in early
February.
Now that the legislative elections have taken
place, it is important to focus attention on some other
priority areas, including national reconciliation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform and consolidation of the security
situation, particularly in Abidjan, the west and the
border areas. It is, in my view, equally important to
focus on addressing the root causes of the Ivorian
crisis, including issues such as access to land and
imbalanced development. The question of impunity
also remains an important concern; it is essential that
all those who are responsible for gross violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law be
held accountable, regardless of their political affiliation
or camp.
The overall security situation in Côte d’Ivoire has
remained relatively calm. However, insecurity in the
west, including criminal activities, and the threat of
cross-border movements of armed groups and weapons
has continued to pose a major challenge. A large
number of weapons remain in circulation in Abidjan
and throughout the country, a situation which has
contributed to the high levels of crime and security
incidents involving armed elements. The Government
has begun to take measures to address security-related
challenges, and we are currently discussing with the
Ivorian authorities a concrete set of support measures
that the international community could provide in this
regard.
Let me conclude by saying that Côte d’Ivoire has
made significant progress towards restoring normalcy.
Legislative elections mark the completion of a key
aspect of the peace process and the implementation of

12-21574

the
Ouagadougou
Political
Agreement.
Notwithstanding the progress made in the past months,
Côte d’Ivoire is still struggling to recover from the
post-electoral crisis and will continue to need the
Council’s support in addition to that provided by other
international and regional partners. I can assure the
Council that the United Nations, through UNOCI,
continues to make every effort to support the
Government in addressing key challenges and to help
the Government to materialize its vision towards
reclaiming its historical role as a pillar of stability and
prosperity in the subregion.
The President: I thank Mr. Koenders for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by wishing you, Sir, and the other
representatives present good health, happiness and
peace throughout 2012. I also take this opportunity to
convey my delegation’s warmest congratulations to
you on your accession to the presidency of the Council
this month.
My delegation thanks the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Albert
Koenders, for his excellent briefing on the situation in
Côte d’Ivoire, which accurately portrayed the reality
on the ground. I also congratulate him on his
outstanding work and on the perfect understanding of
the situation he has demonstrated in his brief tenure.
It has been nine months since the post-electoral
crisis in Côte d’Ivoire came to en end. The toll in
human lives, estimated at approximately 3,000, would
have been higher without the decisive involvement of
the United Nations in protecting the civilian
population. Indeed, acting under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter and in keeping with the
mandate defined in resolution 1975 (2011), the United
Nations saved an untold number of lives. In hindsight,
we can better grasp the entire scope of the United
Nations intervention in Côte d’Ivoire and the full
meaning it gives to the concept of the responsibility to
protect. We must clearly state that we were on the
verge of genocide in Côte d’Ivoire during the
post-electoral crisis.
We are therefore in a good position to echo the
Secretary-General’s statement to the conference on the

3

S/PV.6708

responsibility to protect convened on 18 January by the
Stanley Foundation in New York. The SecretaryGeneral said that the principle of the responsibility to
protect is a fundamental humanitarian principle that is
here to stay. My delegation commends the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to instruct his Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect to consider ways to make
effective use of the provisions of Articles VI, VII and
VIII of the United Nations Charter with a view to
better operationalizing that principle. We look forward
eagerly to the results of his study.
My delegation notes the excellent report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) contained in document
S/2011/807*, and of course endorses the conclusions
contained therein. The report correctly notes the
significant progress that has been achieved in a number
of areas, including the peaceful legislative elections
held on 11 December 2011. The report also
underscores, however, some significant challenges
ahead. I should like to make a few brief remarks on
issues that my delegation deems to be critical.
I turn first to the stabilization of the security
situation, which is manageable in Abdijan but also
requires considerable resources. This is due to the high
number of light weapons in circulation and the
presence of numerous common criminals who escaped
detention during the crisis. The security situation in the
western part of the countries remains a source of
ongoing concern owing to the recurrent activities of
mercenaries and militias, especially on the border with
Liberia, which is densely forested and difficult to
control. My delegation believes that the optimization
of the military resources of UNOCI and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia in the context of intermission cooperation has been a successful experiment
that should be pursued, as it provides a deterrent to
potential or real threats of stabilization.
The subregional aspect of the security situation in
the border zone actually extends to the entire Mano
River region and encompasses such cross-border
threats as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, drug
trafficking, money-laundering and the terrorist threats
posed by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Boko
Haram, as well as the influx of weapons from Libya.
The issue must therefore be addressed in the context of
a collective security system that includes Côte d’Ivoire,
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. Indeed, that was the
purpose behind the meeting of the Chiefs of Staff of

4

the four countries that was held from 22 to 25 January
in Freetown, Sierra Leone.
In this regard, my delegation commends South
Africa’s initiative to convene on 12 January a highlevel debate of the Security Council (see S/PV.6702),
personally presided by President Zuma, on the critical
cooperation, under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States, in the prevention, management and resolution
of regional crises.
Secondly, with respect to security sector reform
(SSR), my delegation believes that it is a key element
of the entire post-crisis normalization process
inasmuch as it forges a direct, positive link to national
reconciliation that triggers a virtuous chain reaction in
other areas of the post-conflict architecture. However,
national ownership is essential to the SSR process, as
was recognized in the conclusions reached last year in
the Security Council debate (see S/PV.6630) held under
the Nigerian presidency, to which we pay tribute.
Côte d’Ivoire intends to secure national
ownership of SSR through the holding of public
hearings on security and defence, which will include
the convening of a national dialogue between the
people and the army. We seek an interactive exchange
in which the people’s perspective enriches the reform
process. Our goal is for the people in all their aspects,
including soldiers and the army, to assume ownership
of the reform and ultimately for the army to be
reconciled with the population. Once national
consensus has been achieved, SSR must be geared to
creating a reunified, professional, disciplined
republican army subject to civilian executive authority,
respectful of the rule of law and mindful of human
rights.
Thirdly,
with
respect
to
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), I note that our
experience of this process over several years has led us
to conclude that the cantonment of former combatants
in recruitment centres was counterproductive. We
therefore feel that vetting is key to the process. Indeed,
accurate vetting will allow us to select those who
should remain in the new army and ensure that those
who are not selected will be directed forthwith to
technical centres where they will receive practical
training to assist their reintegration into working life.

12-21574

S/PV.6708

Moreover, we are planning innovative approaches,
concerning the establishment of a reserve force to
undertake non-military activities, in particular civil
construction and agricultural projects.
Fourthly, with respect to humanitarian assistance,
let us recall that, at the height of the post-electoral
crisis a year ago, we had 1 million internally displaced
persons and 500,000 refugees in neighbouring
countries. Today, there are no more than 185,000
internally displaced persons and 161,000 refugees in
neighbouring countries. We are pursuing our efforts to
bring all Ivorians home. We want that to take place on
a voluntary basis and in the context of a tripartite
agreement framework between Côte d’Ivoire, the host
country and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Four such agreements have been
concluded — with Liberia, Ghana, Togo and Guinea.
Based on our experience as part of that process, all
indications are that the pace of return would increase if
people had confidence in assurances with regard to
living conditions and security. In that regard, there is a
need to build 17,000 housing units and 100 health
centres.
My delegation welcomes the $8 million provided
by the Central Emergency Response Fund to address
dire situations. We also welcome the recent trip to Côte
d’Ivoire by Ms. Catherine Bragg, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, during which she
launched the 2012 consolidated appeal intended to
raise $173 million, which is the level of resources
needed by the humanitarian sector to address the needs
of more than 2 million vulnerable people.
Also on the humanitarian front, it is worth noting
the growing awareness on the issue of gender, in
particular with regard to sexual violence. Rape victims
are increasingly being informed of the treatment
available to them and are being encouraged to take
advantage of their legal rights. The Minister for
Families, Women and Children has been responsible
for significant progress in that area.
With regard to health, the President’s free health
care initiative, which has been in place for a year, will
end this month. A system for participatory medical
coverage will then be put in place, following a study
currently under way. In the meantime, free treatment
will continue to be provided for the most
disadvantaged sectors of the population, in particular

12-21574

children under the age of six and pregnant women
without means, who will be provided free birthing kits.
Fifthly, with regard to national reconciliation and
the pursuit of political dialogue, the Commission on
Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation is now fully
operational, is expanding consultations and appears to
be setting up its functions for the long term, as
reconciliation is not a time-bound event but, instead, a
process that takes time.
Pursuing a political process is an inescapable
requirement in that context — a process that makes it
possible for all of the country’s political stakeholders
to develop political maturity and to exercise their
constitutional rights. It is for that reason that we should
acknowledge — without self-satisfaction — that the
holding of peaceful legislative elections in Côte
d’Ivoire just seven months after emerging from the
crisis is an outcome that merits being highlighted. In
addition, while we regret that the party formerly in
power did not participate, we hope that, for the sake of
the upcoming municipal and regional elections, the
Front populaire ivoirien will take advantage of the
opportunity to participate, which will only benefit Côte
d’Ivoire’s democracy. My delegation will soon submit
to the United Nations an official request for assistance
for those elections.
Lastly, I would like to say that in order to
overcome all the challenges to which I have referred,
my country more than ever needs the invaluable
support of the international community, first and
foremost that of the United Nations — and in particular
that of its leading organ, the Security Council.
My Government will soon submit a formal
request for a reconsideration of the sanctions regime on
Côte d’Ivoire established by resolution 1572 (2002),
with a view to the partial or full lifting of the embargo
currently in place.
Peace and stability are slowly but surely making
progress in Côte d’Ivoire. My Government would
therefore officially like to invite the Security Council
to visit Côte d’Ivoire from 22 to 30 March, in order
that its members can have an opportunity to genuinely
see the progress that has been achieved on the ground.
Côte d’Ivoire is a country open to the outside
world, and it intends to once again pursue its natural
calling. It is for that reason that, soon after being sworn
in, His Excellency President Alassane Ouattara carried

5

S/PV.6708

out numerous State visits, beginning with his partners
in neighbouring countries and in the subregion. As I
speak, President Ouattara is on an official visit to
France. Two weeks ago, he met with Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton of the United States. And, at the
beginning of the year, he received China’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs in the course of his official visit to
Côte d’Ivoire.
The African Development Bank is preparing to
bring its headquarters to Côte d’Ivoire.

6

In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire is returning to the
international stage, ready to once again take up its role
as an anchor of stability and growth in the service of
international peace, security and cooperation.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

12-21574
