S/PV.8024

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8024th meeting

Tuesday, 15 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-25798 (E)
*1725798*

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane: It is my pleasure to address the Security
Council and to provide a briefing on the activities of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force,
including on its operationalization, as well as on the
challenges encountered and possible measures for
further consideration, as requested by the Council in
resolution 2359 (2017), two months after it welcomed
the creation of the joint force.
The cross-border dimension of the terrorist threat
in the Sahel region, as well as the serious challenges
posed by transnational organized crime and its links
with terrorism, continue to pose a serious threat to
stability, prosperity and growth in the Sahel region. In
Mali, attacks by violent extremist groups on national
security forces, international forces and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) remain a sad reality and
hamper the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, one of the key elements for
the stabilization efforts in the region. Their activities
know no borders, and time and again we have seen
vicious attacks also in neighbouring countries and in
the broader region. This past weekend was marked by
the heinous attacks in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, and
on MINUSMA camps in Douenza and Timbuktu.
Worst of all, however, are the consequences
borne by the civilian population, which suffers from
intimidation and violence and bears the brunt of
inadequate or non-existing social services, which this
2/18

15/08/2017

insecurity negatively affects. In Mali, the number
of State officials present in the northern part of the
country has decreased by 10 per cent compared with last
year; persistent threats by extremist groups targeting
schoolteachers, students and parents resulted in the
closure of 178 secular schools. This erosion of State
authority provides a fertile breeding ground for violent
extremist and terrorist groups. The countless numbers
of young people in the Sahel facing job insecurity and
even chronic poverty could all too easily fall prey to
these groups. The situation is dire, and time to identify
and implement solutions is, unfortunately, running out.
Allow me here to acknowledge and value the
contribution and sacrifices made by so many African
countries to peace operations on the continent. The
countries of the G-5 Sahel are undertaking tremendous
efforts, in multiple theatres across vast and inhospitable
terrains and with limited resources, to improve security
in the Sahel and to counter violent extremism and drug
and arms smuggling, including in the fight against
Boko Haram, and elsewhere in the region.
Against this backdrop, the strong determination and
commitment of the G-5 Sahel member States to share
the responsibility to collectively tackle these challenges
head on and to protect civilians in their respective
territories, as underlined in resolution 2359 (2017), is
commendable. The creation of a joint force to address
terrorism and transnational organized crime threats,
including through the conduct of cross-border joint
military operations, demonstrates regional ownership
of regional challenges and is an acknowledgment
that these will require collective action and unity of
purpose. As such, it bears the potential of significantly
contributing to the stabilization of the Sahel region,
and in turn facilitating MINUSMA’s implementation of
its mandate.
Since the decision taken by the G-5 Sahel Heads of
State in February to create a joint force of 5,000 military,
as well as police and civilian personnel, important steps
towards its implementation have been undertaken. I
should like in particular to highlight the following.
First, efforts aimed at the development of the
normative framework that would allow a swift
operationalization of the joint force have been made.
Key strategic documents — such as the concept of
operations, the command architecture, a preliminary
budget and a memorandum of understanding on
extraterritoriality — have been adopted by the G-5
17-25798

15/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Sahel Comité de défense et de securité and endorsed
by the African Union Peace and Security Council, and
the scale and scope of the force and its operations have
been further defined.
Secondly, a two-phased approach has been agreed.
The joint force is set to initially conduct cross-border
operations in three strategic sectors, and subsequently
to consolidate and enhance bilateral and multilateral
cooperation among the G-5 Sahel member States.
Thirdly, in terms of staffing, General Didier Dacko
of Mali was appointed Force Commander of the G-5
Sahel force in June, and has begun assembling his team
in the force’s provisional headquarters in Bamako.
Fourthly, the force’s permanent headquarters in
Sévaré is currently being equipped and is projected to
attain initial operational capability by the end of August.
Fifthly, immediate priority in terms of operations
will be given to the Central Sector, along Mali’s borders
with the Niger and Burkina Faso, where the force is
planning to conduct coordinated operations in October.
These operations will build on existing trilateral efforts
of Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger in the LiptakoGourma triangle. The operationalization and force
generation for Sectors East and West headquarters,
including the deployment of one company per sector
to attain initial operational capability, is scheduled for
spring 2018.
Sixthly, the generation of 105 provost police officers,
who are expected to fulfil judicial policing functions
and to contribute to addressing transnational organized
crime, as well as of a small civilian component, which
is expected to be composed of three advisers to the
Force Commander on human rights, humanitarian and
development issues, is ongoing.
Lastly, the budgetary requirements to fund both the
start-up of the joint force, including initial investments
in infrastructure, staffing and operations in the first
year were set at €423 million. Out of this amount,
approximately €234 million are projected for initial
investments, €110 million for operational costs and
€83 million for personnel-related costs. As Council
members will recall, resolution 2359 (2017) bestows the
primary responsibility for resource mobilization on the
G-5 Sahel member States. In this light, I should like
to applaud the commitment of the G-5 Sahel member
States to pooling their resources and contributing
€10 million each to the budget.

S/PV. 8024

Given the domestic economic challenges facing
the G-5 Sahel countries, these pledges are particularly
laudable. Their joint contribution of €50 million,
in conjunction with the European Union’s pledged
contribution of €50 million, as announced by
Commissioner Mogherini during her visit to Bamako in
June, and France’s logistical and financial contribution
to the force worth €8 million, brings the total to
€108 million, or 25 per cent of total requirements as
currently defined the amount of money needed for the
force to be fully operational. The G-5 Sahel countries,
with the support of international partners, have
undertaken a technical review of resource requirements,
which may lead to a better delineation and fine-tuning
of the initially projected financial needs. The planned
meeting, to be hosted by the German and French
Defence Ministers in Berlin in September, will provide
an opportunity to further explore options for the
support of the start-up of the joint force, to be followed
by a planning conference, as requested in resolution
2359 (2017), later this year.
While generating pledges and contributions to
meet the requirements of the joint force will be critical,
the setting up of transparent, coordinated and effective
funding will be equally as important. We understand
that, in terms of what was pledged by the European
Union, efforts in this respect are already under way.
I also urge G-5 Sahel member States to swiftly make
good on these pledges so that they can be utilized for
the further operationalization of the joint force.
Given the complexity of the issues to be addressed
and the multitude of stakeholders in the region,
resolutions 2359 (2017) and 2364 (2017) urge the joint
force, MINUSMA and the international forces to
ensure adequate coordination and information-sharing
on their operations, within their respective mandates.
Allow me here to highlight a few additional points.
First, MINUSMA is currently prioritizing the
establishment of a common post in Mopti, in line with
its political and security mandated tasks in Central
Mali, which will also allow close coordination with the
first focus area of the G-5 Sahel, starting in October.
Secondly, in addition, existing coordination
mechanisms between MINUSMA, the French forces,
the Malian defence and security forces, the European
Union (EU) Training Mission in Mali and EUCAP Sahel
Niger will be adapted to accommodate the joint force in
order to facilitate information-sharing. The Mission is

17-257983/18

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

also preparing the deployment of liaison officers to and
from the G-5 Sahel.
Thirdly, further and as per resolution 2359 (2017),
MINUSMA is providing logistical and strategic
support, within existing resources, to the Malian
defence and security forces with a view to accelerating
their redeployment to the northern and central parts
of Mali. In that connection, the Mission is finalizing
a protocol with the Malian defence and security forces
to define the modalities and scope of this support and
the coordination of operations in the north and centre
of Mali.
Fourthly, these measures, in conjunction with
MINUSMA’s core mandated tasks in support of
the extension of State authority across Mali, will
be a further contribution to enable the Malian
authorities to proactively address security challenges,
including through G-5 Sahel force, as well as to
enhance governance mechanisms and accelerate the
implementation of the peace agreement.
(spoke in French)
Although the developments I just referred to attest
to the political will of the States members of the G-5 for
the Sahel to operationalize the joint force, significant
challenges remain and a number of issues need to
be addressed.
First of all, it is important to respond to the
enormous needs, not only in terms of funding and
funding mechanisms but also with regard to force
generation, training and equipment, tactical support,
intelligence and communications technologies, medical
evacuation capabilities and providing protection for the
force as well as the camps.
Secondly, the potential impact of force-generation
efforts on subsequent operations and on MINUSMA’s
posture must also be considered carefully.
Thirdly, certain aspects of the legal framework,
such as modalities pertaining to the right of pursuit
beyond the limits of each each zone, must be better
defined and require additional agreements among the
States members of the G-5 Sahel.
Fourthly, with regard to the rules of engagement,
it should be noted that the success of the force will
depend upon the support of the people. It is therefore
essential to ensure strict compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
4/18

15/08/2017

implementing measures to mitigate the impact of
military operations on civilians. Among other things,
the latter implies the establishment of appropriate
mechanisms for the handing over to the competent
authorities of persons arrested by the joint force,
including minors, and the sharing of information on
arrests and detentions.
The G-5 Sahel joint force presents a unique
opportunity to respond to regional challenges through
a regional approach. In order to fully take advantage
of that opportunity, it is important that other aspects
of the causes of instability in Mali and in the region
be addressed simultaneously. Addressing the root
causes of instability in the Sahel requires going beyond
military action and tackling the governance gap,
chronic poverty and unemployment, climate change
and financing for development; it is also necessary to
address cross-border crime.
I should also like to emphasize the primacy of
politics and the need for a political strategy to guide the
activities of the joint force so as to ensure that they are
aligned with the Malian peace process and other regional
initiatives. Resolution 2359 (2017) calls for the prompt
and effective implementation of regional strategies by
the States members of the G-5 for the Sahel and their
international partners. The joint force can make a
significant contribution to the stabilization of the Sahel
region, in synergy with other existing initiatives.
In order to better coordinate and refocus the
attention of the United Nations system on the Sahel, the
Secretary-General recently established an Executive
Committee working group on the Sahel, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General, which has already begun
to meet.
Lastly, in order to better support and promote
regional ownership, it is important that the deployment
of the joint force be part of the African Union’s Peace
and Security Architecture. The Nouakchott process
could be an effective tool to that end. We hope that,
as the force’s concept of operations matures, it will
receive the support and cooperation of other countries
in the region.
The establishment of the G-5 Sahel foint force
has the potential to make a significant contribution to
the efforts already under way to stabilize the region.
Once again, I congratulate the member States of the
G-5 for the Sahel for the considerable efforts they are
making. The success of the force will depend upon
17-25798

15/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

both the deepening of this regional partnership and the
relevant political framework, and the determination
of the G-5 for the Sahel member States to achieve its
operationalization, as well as the unflagging support of
of their international partners. The United Nations will
remain ready to contribute to that partnership and to
efforts aimed at supporting this initiative. We welcome
the proposal to submit a written report on those efforts
in October, as called for in resolution 2359 (2017).
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Wane
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane for his very
illuminating briefing.
I would like to begin my statement by reiterating
France’s full solidarity with Burkina Faso in the
aftermath of the terrorist attack on a restaurant in
Ouagadougou, which led to the deaths of 18 people.
Our condolences go also to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and to Togo and Mali following the
death yesterday of a Togolese peacekeeper and seven
Malian civilian and military personnel during attacks
against MINUSMA camps. Those attacks, sadly,
remind us of the intensity of the terrorist threat faced
by the countries of the Sahel today, as well as the need
for an urgent response.
The terrorist threat in the Sahel not only
jeopardizes the stability of the countries of the region;
it also has a direct impact on the security of many other
countries — in Europe and throughout the rest of the
world. It calls for mobilization by the entire international
community in support of the efforts of the countries of
the region, while not neglecting any dimension of the
crisis. France is fully playing its part in that effort by
deploying to the field the 4,000 soldiers of Operation
Barkhane, who are carrying out counter-terrorist
actions in the region at the request and in support of
the countries of the Sahel. Twenty of them gave their
lives doing so. In addition, during the Summit of the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
held in Bamako on 2 July, President Macron launched
an alliance for the Sahel aimed at addressing the deeprooted causes of terrorism in the G-5 Sahel countries,
including projects in the areas of education, agriculture

S/PV. 8024

and renewable energy, as Assistant Secretary-General
Wane just mentioned to us.
Moreover, the security situation in the Sahel
remains directly linked to the situation in Mali. In that
regard, it is crucial that the Malian parties speed up the
concrete implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, without which there will be
no lasting peace or stability in the Sahel.
The specific modus operandi of terrorist groups
in the Sahel, which take advantage of borders and
sustain themselves on trafficking of all sorts, especially
in drugs and human beings, requires us to provide a
concerted and comprehensive response. It is precisely
with that goal in mind that the G-5 Sahel countries
set up the joint force, which is intended to provide a
coordinated response on the security and economic
fronts, as well as at the humanitarian and developmental
levels. Their initiative was endorsed by the African
Union and by the Security Council, with the Council
providing clear and unanimous political support in the
framework of resolution 2359 (2017). The establishment
of the joint force is also fully in line — and this must
be pointed out — with the Council’s views in favour
of establishing an African security architecture
bringing together the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the framework of a
partnership approach.
The G-5 Sahel joint force will support and
complement MINUSMA’s efforts in Mali by conducting
counter-terrorist activities in the Sahel region as a whole
that are outside the mandate and geographic scope of
MINUSMA. That will enable MINUSMA to focus
on its priority tasks and implement its mandate more
quickly. The joint force will also act in coordination
with the French forces of Operation Barkhane, which
supports its operationalization. It will be important
that the force’s operations take place fully in line with
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as set out in its concept of operations.
We welcome the determination and the
concrete actions taken by the G-5 Sahel countries to
operationalize the joint force as soon as possible, with
the aim of carrying out by October initial operations
in the Liptako-Gourma priority zone, located in
the shared border area between Mali, the Niger and
Burkina Faso. The finalization in the coming days of
the construction works at the Sévaré central command
post is an important first step in that direction. The

17-257985/18

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

commitment of the G-5 Sahel countries each to allocate
$10 million annually for the financing of the force, in
addition to their current contributions to peacekeeping
in the region, also reflects the high priority they attach
to this issue. We must support their efforts.
While it is the G-5 Sahel countries’ responsibility
to take a leading role in establishing the joint force,
we also believe that the international community has a
moral and political duty to support the African States
in the region that have joined together to fight terrorism
by supplying resources to complement the Council’s
peacekeeping operations. We are therefore pleased
that the European Union has already announced a
contribution of €50 million intended in part to finance
the operations of the joint force’s command structures.
France is also making a national contribution of major
material assistance amounting to more than €8 million,
in addition to Operation Barkhane’s engagement on
the ground.
Lastly, along with our European partners, we will
continue to support the G-5 Sahel countries in mobilizing
the backing of international donors. After a first such
event, held in Paris in June, Germany and France will
hold a second workshop in Berlin on 18 September,
in order to solicit European countries’ contributions
in support of the force’s initial deployment. Beyond
that, the donor conference to be held in December and
provided for in resolution 2359 (2017) will pool the
entire international community’s contributions, this
time with the goal of enabling the joint force to reach
full operating capacity by March.
However, France, together with a large majority
of Council members, still firmly believes that United
Nations support to the G-5 Sahel joint force is essential.
To start with, on the political front, it is an irreplaceable
guarantee that lends international legitimacy and
legality to the G-5 Sahel countries’ commendable
efforts to fight terrorism and its underlying causes.
Operationally, it is also the best way to ensure, first, that
the actors involved in combating terrorism in the region
are well coordinated; secondly, that our resources are
being used as effectively as possible; and thirdly, that
the joint force will receive the invaluable logistical,
medical and mechanical support from international
forces that it needs in a complicated situation. We
should understand that without that support, the joint
force’s operations will have a very limited scope.
6/18

15/08/2017

Lastly, France will continue to work to ensure that
the Council follows up diligently on this issue, which
affects the security of us all. In that regard, we will
soon propose sending a Security Council mission to the
Sahel with, among other things, the aim of assessing
how far the joint force is operationalized on the
ground. During France’s presidency of the Council, our
Minister for European and Foreign Affairs will also
convene a ministerial-level meeting on the G-5 Sahel
that will enable us to continue our consideration of the
international community’s modalities of support to the
joint force in the follow-up to resolution 2359 (2017) and
the Secretary-General’s report on the subject, which is
due in October.
The G-5 Sahel States have courageously shouldered
their responsibilities by uniting in their effort to combat
terrorism, which concerns us all. The establishment of
their joint force is giving rise to great expectations on
the part of the Governments and peoples of the region
who want to see terrorism and its causes eradicated.
The Council’s responsibility is to ensure that those
expectations are not disappointed and to live up to the
commitment of the G-5 Sahel and its duty to maintain
international peace and security. It can count on
France’s determination and involvement in that.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane
for his very detailed and focused briefing.
Today the Sahel region is dealing with a number of
major security challenges, including terrorism, illegal
trafficking and transnational crime, which have effects
that extend well beyond its borders and are a threat to
the region, to Africa and to Europe as well. The recent
tragic events affecting Burkina Faso and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have reminded us how
serious the situation is, and we offer our condolences to
the families of the victims.
In the Mediterranean, Italy is witness daily to the
effects of instability in the Sahel in its continuing efforts
to combat the threats of terrorism, illegal trafficking in
human beings and the criminal networks that manage
them. Destroying these criminal organizations and
stabilizing the region as a whole are top priorities
for Italy. In that context, we believe firmly that close
cooperation with the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) is crucial if we are to deal effectively with the
issue, which is why Italy has ramped up its initiatives
17-25798

15/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

in the region. My country warmly welcomed the G-5
Sahel countries’ decision to establish a joint force with
the help of the African Union. We are pleased that we
can count on them as partners in our shared concerns.
Their efforts have also been acknowledged by the
Security Council, which supported the joint force’s
establishment through its adoption of resolution 2359
(2017) and has encouraged the international community
to back it as well. Italy will continue its support both
bilaterally and within the framework of its action
through the European Union and the Council.
I would like to focus on three aspects that we
consider priorities for cooperation with the G-5 Sahel,
and especially ones that we in New York are in a
position to pursue further.
First, I would like to emphasize the issue of
coordinating our cooperation. I think it is vital to ensure
that the G-5 Sahel joint force is harmonized both with
existing regional initiatives such as MINUSMA and
with international stakeholders in the Sahel such as, for
instance, the European Union, which has been involved
in the region for many years. In that regard, we urge the
G-5 Sahel countries to engage fully in deepening their
dialogue with the African Union.
Secondly, we need a political strategy for tackling
the region’s problems. In that regard, I believe that
conceptually, the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel will continue to be a very useful tool, even
if its implementation has been lacking so far. In our
view, the Security Council should work to relaunch it
and include the G-5 Sahel in that effort, since their goals
and those of the Strategy are identical — governance,
security, resilience and development.
Thirdly, we think it is important to consider the G-5
Sahel joint force’s financing. Their work deserves the
Council’s full support, because they align perfectly with
the United Nations effort already under way through
MINUSMA. The European Union has already shown
its willingness to support the G-5 Sahel countries,
and in our view the United Nations should support
African countries’ operations on both the financial and
political fronts.
Resolution 2359 (2017) marked a new stage in the
process of increasing the effectiveness of the interaction
between the United Nations and African regional and
subregional organizations in peacekeeping. We believe
that the concept of African ownership continues to be
a crucial element in this and we stand ready to pursue

S/PV. 8024

a dialogue with the other members of the Council on
the subject of United Nations support to the G-5 Sahel
joint force.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
thorough briefing.
I would like to express Uruguay’s heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of
Burkina Faso, Mali and Togo for the cowardly attacks
of 13 August in Ouagadougou and yesterday in
Douentza and Timbuktu. Such irreparable loss of life
is once again the painful, sad result of such despicable
attacks on innocent civilians and those who risk their
lives to help restore and strengthen peace in conflict
zones. Events such as the tragic experiences of the past
two days show that there that the Sahel still has a long,
hard road to travel before it reaches the peace it has
desired for so long.
Uruguay commends Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger for the significant step they
have taken towards achieving stability in the region.
Their initiative in establishing a joint force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is the result of their
laudable joint efforts to combat terrorism and establish
full State authority in their lands.
The terrorist threat in the Sahel region knows
no political borders. That is why we applaud the
G-5 Sahel countries’ regional and multidimensional
approach to the challenges. The implementation of
the G-5 Sahel joint force is a clear example of national
ownership by countries facing those challenges. That
initiative demonstrates clear political will that ought
to be recognized internationally, as the proliferation of
terrorism in the Sahel region is a global problem that
affects the entire international community.
In that regard, we believe that the international
community must act as partners to support the national
efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries. Let us not forget
that the G-5 Sahel initiative was conceived originally
as an institutional and follow-up framework for the
drafting of development policies for the five member
countries. More recently, and in the face of the growing
threat of terrorism, radicalism and transnational
organized crime, it has needed to be supplemented
by the creation, this year, of a multinational force of
5,000 troops. Undoubtedly, the deployment of the
G-5 Sahel force will be another major stabilization

17-257987/18

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

effort in the region, including the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and Operation Barkhane.
However, as the latest developments demonstrate,
the situations in Mali and Burkina Faso continue to
deteriorate. In Mali, since the signing of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in 2015, the country’s
stability has certainly improved, but for several months
the efforts seem to have collapsed. We encourage the
Government, which is responsible for ensuring stability
in the country, to seek alternative solutions based on
lessons learned from efforts made to date. In Burkina
Faso, there was yet another terrorist attack, which
claimed the lives of many innocent civilians in an
attempt to destabilize the country and the region.
Uruguay stresses the importance of the G-5 Sahel
joint force in implementing measures to mitigate the
impact of military operations on the civilian population,
particularly women and children. It is also essential
to train troops on protecting the most vulnerable
populations — women and children.
Moreover, the implementation of the strategies of
the joint force of the G-5 Sahel should incorporate a
gender perspective and recognize women’s important
role in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. Additionally, the countries of the
region have a fundamental responsibility to protect
and assist children who have been released by terrorist
organizations and organized transnational criminal
groups. Children who have been traumatized by being
torn from their families and communities, and who have
been robbed of their childhood and forced to live and
act in certain ways, often in the most abject conditions,
should be considered victims rather than perpetrators.
It is therefore necessary to work proactively to ensure
their effective reintegration into society.
In conclusion, I would like to encourage the G-5
Sahel countries and the international community to
continue fostering stability in the region, which is the
only way to achieve lasting results.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane for his briefing.
Please allow me to begin by expressing my deepest
condolences to the families and friends of the victims
of Sunday night’s atrocious terrorist attack in central
Ouagadougou. Let me also express my condolences for
the loss of a peacekeeper, alongside a Malian soldier,
8/18

15/08/2017

in Douentza yesterday, and for the loss of lives of
employees of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the Malian gendarmerie during the attack in
Timbuktu yesterday. Our thoughts go out to the families
of the victims and we hope for the speedy recovery of
those injured.
Those tragedies and heinous attacks are stark
reminders of the challenges facing the Sahel countries.
In that regard, I commend the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries’ collective efforts to move
towards the full operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
joint force. In order to respond to those challenges
and the regional implications of terrorism, we need
regional, multidimensional and coordinated solutions.
The G-5 Sahel joint force is one part of that response.
A sustainable solution will, however, also require
continued and increased attention to the root causes of
instability. We must ensure that the young women and
men of the Sahel envision a future without having to
migrate or join criminal or extremist networks.
I agree with colleagues who state that while the
primary responsibility for the operationalization of the
force lies with the States members of the G-5 Sahel, the
support of the international community and the United
Nations is needed on the basis of a clearly defined
catalogue of capability gaps and needs. Let me therefore
also highlight some issues that we believe remain to
be clarified, in order to ensure the full efficiency and
success of the G-5 Sahel joint force.
First of all, an overarching political framework
and a coherent strategy should guide the force’s
activities. Command and control structures must also
be well defined. Similarly, and considering the amount
of stakeholders and security actors in the Sahel, it is
crucial to ensure coordination both on the ground — not
least with MINUSMA and European Union capacitybuilding missions in the region — and on a political
level. Embedment within the African Union peace and
security architecture is desirable, as is consideration of
other regional initiatives.
Secondly, while the general concept of operations
of the joint force includes references to human rights,
protection of civilians with particular attention to
women and children, gender, respect for international
humanitarian law and the right of pursuit across
borders, we welcome and Mr. Wane’s view that those
aspects must be further developed and clarified, not
17-25798

15/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

least in the light of the important role of women in
peacebuilding, as highlighted in resolution 2359 (2017).
We therefore ask for further details on how the joint
force aims to take those perspectives into account in the
implementation of its mandate.
Lastly, and related, the civilian component is
paramount to the success of the joint force. We would
ask actors to clarify its structure, size and function as a
matter of urgency.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the challenges of
the Sahel concern all of us and require multidimensional
and coordinated investments in both security and
development throughout the region. Sweden remains
fully committed to supporting those efforts.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia expresses its deepest condolences to the people
and the Government of Burkina Faso for the tragic
events last Sunday, We extend our condolences to
France, Turkey, the Niger, Kuwait and Ethiopia, which
lost countrymen in the attack.
We likewise deplore the attack on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali that took place yesterday in Mali,
which resulted in the death of a Togolese humanitarian
worker. Bolivia strongly condemns all terrorist acts
as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, committed wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever. We reaffirm the need for all States to
fight it, pursuant the Charter of United Nations and
other obligations under international law.
We welcome Assistant Secretary-General Wane’s
briefing on peace operations and the situation in the
Sahel and thank the Egyptian presidency for having
convened this session on such an important sub-region
of the African continent. Bolivia highlights the
commendable efforts of the regional bodies led by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union. We
are confident that the strategic concept of the joint force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the
deployment of the forces in order to address the impact
of terrorism and transnational organized crime through
multidimensional operations in border areas is a suitable
tool that complements the work of United Nations
peacekeeping forces in the region. We commend the
efforts of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger in the deployment and operationalization of their
forces in the field. We believe that it is the obligation

S/PV. 8024

of the Council to actively contribute to this initiative,
which benefits the stabilization process in the region.
We would also highlight the efforts of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in
implementing the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, which is in line with the African Union’s
Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security
cooperation and the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan
region. The G-5 Sahel is the clearest example of the
contribution of African countries to strengthening
security capacities in the region.
Currently, the Sahel poses major challenges both for
local Governments and for the international community.
The issues of peace, security and development, the
exploitation of natural resources and climate change
are determining factors that seriously endanger the
institutional structure of the countries of the area and,
consequently, their population, which counts some
150 million inhabitants.
One of the countries of the Sahel, Mali — which,
after a peaceful transfer of power in 2002, maintained
political stability and economic growth, and is a country
rich in history and natural resources — is now suffering
from a volatile and complex situation that includes
asymmetrical threats that endanger the political peace
process, the civilian population and members of the
United Nations peacekeeping mission. Mali not only
faces the consequences of armed group violence, but
must also repel the threat of terrorist groups such as
Al-Qaida, Ansar Eddine and Jama’at Nusrat, as well as
the threat of transnational delinquency and organized
crime, which rely on the crimes of trafficking in
persons and migrants, and drug and arms trafficking
networks, among others.
Furthermore, according to the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2017/478),
published in June, the humanitarian situation in central
and northern Mali has continued to deteriorate. A total
of 3.8 million people are at risk of food insecurity as
a result of drought and persistent violence. Moreover,
about 1.2 million people have been identified as having
limited access to water and basic services. Insecurity
has led to an increase in the number of displaced
persons in the latest reporting period of the SecretaryGeneral, from approximately 45,000 to 59,000 people.
It is also important to analyse the causes of the
conflict, which have influenced the volatile security

17-257989/18

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

situation in the subregion. We highlight with great
concern the consequences of interventionism and
regime change policies since, after the 2011 conflict in
Libya, one of the side effects was the destabilization
of the Sahel, bringing with it chaos, terrorism and
militarization, with regrettable consequences that
continue to this day. The movement of armed groups
from Libya to the countries of the Sahel has also
made possible the transfer of large-calibre weapons,
such as portable air-defence systems, anti-tank
missiles, mortars, heavy machine guns, assault rifles,
improvised explosive devices, antipersonnel mines
and others, which were used in the Libyan civil war
and which are now being used now to carry out attacks
against national security forces, civilians and members
of peacekeeping missions on the ground.
Moreover, we cannot ignore the issue of exploitation
of natural resources. The countries of the subregion,
such as Mauritania, Mali and the Niger, are considerably
rich in minerals, while Chad is rich in hydrocarbons.
In the case of the Sahel and Africa in general, illegal
exploitation by armed groups and the growing presence
of transnational corporations that take most of the wealth
and profits, leaving minimal income for the countries
where they operate, make the situation more difficult
and hinders socioeconomic development. Controlling
areas that are rich in natural resources and effective
border surveillance initiatives are tasks that should be
based on an institutional strategy and framework, with
the support of the international community. Bolivia
firmly believes in the need to establish the future basis
for peace and coexistence, joining efforts and means
for the proper management of natural resources, with
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all States.
In addition, my delegation wishes to highlight once
again that it is the duty of the Security Council not only
to analyse the state of affairs in conflict zones, but also
to address the causes that triggered or caused them, and
keep them current.
In conclusion, we encourage the African Union
and the international community to continue to
provide technical support, economic and humanitarian
cooperation to all efforts aimed at achieving stability
and lasting peace in the Sahel subregion.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane for his extensive briefing. We
10/18

15/08/2017

are grateful for this important update on the joint force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
I would like to take a moment to express Japan’s
heartfelt condolences to the families and Governments
of all victims of Sunday’s heinous terrorist attack in
Burkina Faso, as well as yesterday’s attack on the camp
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission (MINUSMA) in Mopti, Mali,
and its headquarters in Timbuktu. These incidents
clearly demonstrate the deepening threat facing all
Sahel countries. With that in mind, Japan would like
to underline a few priority areas for the joint force, in
particular regarding cooperation with MINUSMA.
The first area is ownership. We commend the
committed efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries to
operationalize the joint force and restore peace and
security in the region. This is a prime example of
regional ownership, which will be a critical factor in
the success of the G-5 Sahel.
The second priority area is the pursuit of common
efforts in support of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The persistent delays in its
implementation are compounded by violations of the
terms of the Peace Agreement and sporadic terrorist
attacks. The joint force’s unique role of supporting
effective implementation by isolating armed terrorist
groups is thus especially important. A central focus
on the Peace Agreement at this stage is critical. To
that end, we underscore the importance of enhanced
coordination among the joint force, MINUSMA and
French forces.
Finally, I would like to emphasize partnership. The
scale of the challenges facing the G-5 Sahel countries is
vast and wide ranging. Continued partnership with the
international community will be essential to restoring
stability and addressing deep-rooted vulnerabilities.
The Sahel’s large youth population requires inclusive
and sustainable livelihoods, which can prevent their
radicalization and underpin social stability in the region.
Together with youth, the role of women in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding is
also critical. We believe that supporting G-5 Sahel
countries through the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is also crucial.
We must work hand in hand with G-5 Sahel
countries to comprehensively address these areas. Japan
looks forward to determined and good faith efforts by
the G-5 Sahel in this joint endeavour.
17-25798

15/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Wane for his briefing on
activities that have been undertaken over the past two
months since the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017)
to operationalize the joint force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). As usual, it was a very
comprehensive, lucid and helpful briefing.
Let me take this opportunity to condemn in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack in Ouagadougou,
as well as that in Mali against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. We express our sympathy to and solidarity
with the families of the victims of these attacks, and
we hope that the perpetrators of these heinous attacks
will be held to account. We fully support the press
statement issued by the Council yesterday (SC/12955).
This most recent attack again serves to underscore the
importance of the G-5 Sahel joint force and the need
for its speedy operationalization to combat the threat
of terrorism and violent extremism faced by countries
of the Sahel region, including Burkina Faso and Mali.
In that regard, we welcome the official launching of the
G-5 Sahel joint force on 2 July and take note of the
efforts being made to fully operationalize it before the
end of this year.
The G-5 Sahel countries have demonstrated their
commitment to fighting terrorism and transnational
organized crime by mobilizing their forces and
resources, but they need more financial and logistical
support to fully operationalize the joint force. We note
the commitment made by some bilateral and multilateral
partners in financing the joint force, but what has so far
been pledged falls far short of what is needed to cover
the preliminary budget required to sustain the force for
one year
The funding gap will be a major challenge
hampering the full operationalization of the joint
force, and there is an urgent need to exert more effort
to mobilize international support for the force. In that
context, we note the plan by France and Germany to
organize a conference in Berlin in mid-September to
secure more support for logistics and training for the
G-5 Sahel joint force. Without adequate financial and
logistical support, it would be extremely difficult to
fully operationalize the force, let alone sustain it. That
is why the issue requires serious attention. We hope
that bilateral and multilateral partners will enhance
their support to the joint force.

S/PV. 8024

We believe the holding of the planning conference
in line with resolution 2359 (2017) could be instrumental
in mobilizing the international community in support
of the G-5 Sahel countries. It is indeed vital that the
Council support that regional initiative. We believe
that it is in line with the global regional partnership
that was advocated by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations and the Secretary-General’s
implementation report (S/2015/682). It is obvious that
the United Nations does not have the capacity to fight
terrorism. It is therefore only appropriate that it provides
the necessary support to those regional organizations
and arrangements that are ready and willing to carry
out such operations.
That should be seen for what it is, namely, a
contribution of global significance, although, on the
surface, it looks local and regional. As the representative
of France stated earlier, that is why the international
community has a moral responsibility to contribute
to the efforts being made by the G-5 Sahel countries.
In fact, when one looks at the genesis of the whole
crisis, one can argue that the international community
also has a political responsibility. Of course, the
multi-faceted challenge facing the Sahel region can be
effectively addressed only through a comprehensive
strategy that encompasses security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Therefore, as called for in resolution 2359 (2017),
the rapid and effective implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is critical. We
hope that the countries of the region, in cooperation
with bilateral and multilateral partners, will redouble
their efforts in implementing the Strategy. No doubt,
as the representative of Sweden stated, the question
of coordination is an issue that should be given very
high priority.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane for his insightful briefing.
First of all, I would like to express our deepest
condolences and solidarity to the people and the
Government of Burkina Faso and to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) following the recent terrorist attack,
which claimed the life of Togolese peacekeepers and a
number of civilians in Burkina Faso.
The situation in the Sahel remains fragile due to
the threat from Boko Haram, the Islamic State and
other terrorists, violent extremists and organized crime

17-2579811/18

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

groups. We therefore welcome the formal launch of the
joint force at the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
Heads of State Summit in Bamako on 2 July. We fully
support the decision in order to better combat terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Such a force will
positively contribute to maintaining stability in the
region and complement the efforts of MINUSMA and
Operation Barkhane.
The provision of steady financial support continues
to be the main challenge due to a significant gap
in funding the force. We commend and encourage
the continuation of the commitment of the G-5
Sahel countries, as well as the support provided by
European Union and France. We encourage countries
and international organizations to make considerable
pledges at the donors’ conference to be held in Berlin
in September, with a view to mobilizing adequate
resources for the force to achieve its goals.
At the same time, it is unlikely that a strictly military
approach will be enough to address instability in the
region. Instability is the result of the sedimentation of
problems of which violent extremism is only the most
recent layer. For us, an important threat therefore is the
challenge to the legitimacy of the State and competition
between pastoralists and crop growers, which results in
clashes among the various communities.
There is a need to focus on the root causes of the
conflict and on promoting development. Kazakhstan
is convinced that a subregional and comprehensive
approach that links security, development and
humanitarian efforts is the most efficient way to achieve
peace and prosperity. Those goals will be achieved only
through more effective implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Addressing
impunity and corruption, advancing structural reforms
in the areas of security, justice and the rule of law,
promoting human rights, increasing resilience and the
engagement of women and young people are equally
important parts of the Strategy
We also welcome the announcement of the alliance
for the Sahel — a joint initiative by France, Germany
and the European Union to improve development
cooperation in the region and promote innovative
initiatives among the European Union, the World Bank
Group, the African Development Bank and the United
Nations. We should strive for initiatives that complement
current efforts to address the many underlying causes of
instability in the region. Concerted efforts to promote
12/18

15/08/2017

a strong policy on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, with long-term funding for its effective
implementation, are also vital for ensuring peace in
West Africa and the Sahel.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Wane for today’s
important update.
Countering violent extremism and terror across
the globe is very important for us all. As others have
noted today, the recent attacks in Burkina Faso and
Mali clearly serve to drive that point home. The United
States understands the seriousness of the threats in
the Sahel region and we were proud to extend a strong
message of support from the Security Council to the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force — a
noble and important regional effort — by co-sponsoring
resolution 2359 (2017) in June.
We also recognize the fundamental importance of
achieving political solutions to long-lasting conflicts
in order to better guarantee peace and security in the
region, especially in Mali, where signatory parties are
not keeping their end of the bargain. We commend the
G-5 Sahel countries for their sacrifices in countering
terrorism in the Sahel and we thank France for its
continued leadership on this vital work and for its
own sacrifices. We believe that deeper cooperation
among the G-5 Sahel countries has the potential to
improve their security and complement the efforts of the
peacekeeping Mission in Mali. To that end, the United
States will continue its long-standing bilateral support
for developing and building the capacity of the G-5
Sahel members’ security forces. We will work closely
with our partners to find ways to help the G-5 Sahel
joint force be effective, well coordinated with other
counter-terrorism efforts in the region and, ultimately,
sustainable.
The United States is eager to take advantage of
other opportunities to further coordinate with other
donors in the countries of the Sahel. We look forward
to the holding of a donors’ planning conference, at
which we hope to identify, coordinate and synchronize
assistance aimed at operationalizing the joint force.
We believe that approach will result in greater security
and, ultimately, the freedom from terror sought by the
peoples of the region. The United States will continue
to work closely with regional stakeholders and partners
to make sure that the combined international response
to this threat is the right one.
17-25798

15/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our strong
support for the G-5 Sahel countries’ undertaking. We
will continue to stand with them.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, and Assistant Secretary-General Wane for his
important briefing. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Mali to today’s meeting.
We condemn the terrorist attacks in Burkina
Faso on 13 August and yesterday on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and we would like to
express our sincere condolences to the Governments
of the countries concerned and to the families of the
victims. Such attacks show that the security situation
in the Sahel remains very difficult. Terrorist and
extremist organizations’ activities are spreading, and
transnational organized crime is a major problem. If
peace and security are to be restored in the Sahel, it is
important to ensure that the countries of the region and
the international community continue to step up their
efforts and take an integrated approach. The decision
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to set
up a joint force to deal with the region’s problems
has been approved by the African Union and reflects
African countries’ willingness to work together and
contribute significantly to peace and security in Africa
and around the world. Resolution 2359 (2017), which
the Council adopted on 21 June, commended the G-5
Sahel countries’ decision to establish a joint force,
thereby demonstrating the support of the international
community. In early July, the G-5 Sahel countries
officially launched the implementation of the force.
We welcome those developments and commend the
efforts and significant contributions of the countries
of the region in combating terrorism and maintaining
peace in the Sahel. We hope that the joint force will play
an important role in the restoration of peace and security
in the region. The international community should
fully respect and give full play to Africa’s leading role
when it comes to solving African problems, and should
support the efforts of countries in the region to defend
peace and security in the Sahel. In the current situation,
it is important for the international community to
carefully examine the circumstances under which the
force will carry out its mandate. In particular, with
regard to the difficulties faced by the force in logistics
and funding, we will have to consider practical steps
that can be taken, provide assistance that is targeted

S/PV. 8024

accordingly and improve the joint force’s capacity to
carry out its mandate. China hopes that the joint force
will seek synergy by coordinating its actions with those
of MINUSMA and others. We will work together with
the international community in order to continue to
play a constructive role in building peace, security and
development in the Sahel and in Africa generally.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s briefing, and Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for the helpful briefing he has just given us on the
establishment of the joint force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
to the delegation of Sahel Member States — represented
here today by the Permanent Representative of Mali
and joined by the representatives of Chad, the Niger,
Mauritania and Burkina Faso — the deep condolences
and sympathies that the delegation of Senegal expressed
following the despicable terrorist attacks on 13 and
14 August in Ouagadougou and Mali. Our condolences
also go to every country whose citizens died in those
cowardly terrorist attacks, including two from Senegal.
We should therefore firmly condemn terrorism and
violent extremism in all their forms and manifestations,
regardless of motive or perpetrator.
The despicable attacks in Ouagadougou and
Douentza are a tragic reminder of the intensity of this
threat and its rampant spread in West Africa and the
Sahel. That is why, as the Security Council did in its
adoption on 21 June of resolution 2359 (2017), Senegal
once again welcomes the establishment of the joint
force for the Sahel, which Assistant Secretary-General
Wane has just described to us with details not only of its
launch but also of its expected coordination with other
missions such as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and Operation
Barkhane. Senegal therefore calls the international
community to put its solidarity into action by giving
broad, rapid support to the G-5 Sahel in terms of
financial, logistical and human resources so that it can
be operationalized as soon as possible. It is urgent that
we ensure that together with the Multinational Joint
Task Force of the Lake Chad basin and the support
of organizations such as the Economic Community
of West African States, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel and the African Union, and
of bilateral and multilateral partners, the G-5 Sahel can

17-2579813/18

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

become operational in mobilizing against terrorism
in general, in full respect for the spirit and indeed the
letter of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel — because it goes without saying that military
efforts alone cannot eradicate these terrorists and
must therefore be part of a comprehensive approach
whose focus includes combating organized crime and
trafficking in arms, drugs and human beings, but also
encompasses improving education and strengthening
resilience to the multiple effects of climate change.
In conclusion, I would like to echo the delegations
of France and Ethiopia in saying that the international
community must be committed to taking on its moral
and political responsibilities on this issue. We believe
that the effective implementation of the alliance
for the Sahel just announced will be a major step in
that direction.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his substantial briefing.
Russia supports a speedy and appropriate response
by the international community to the challenges and
threats facing the African continent generally and
the Sahelo-Saharan region in particular. We have
consistently supported a united international effort
that will enable us to agree on specific approaches to
combating the threat of terrorism, with an emphasis
on cooperation with the countries of the region in
strengthening their anti-terrorist activities. However,
we believe that in order to achieve lasting peace in
Africa, the role of the Africans themselves is becoming
increasingly important. In that regard, we welcome
the establishment by the countries of the region of
the Group of Five for the Sahel joint force to counter
terrorism, and we support resolution 2359 (2017), which
approved its deployment.
The full-scale deployment of the joint force on the
ground will help to deal with a number of challenges,
not just combating the terrorist threat. Terrorists work
closely with various criminal groups, pirates and
smugglers. They exploit national and transnational
security gaps to carry out their illicit activities. In
essence, they capitalize on chaos, instability and the
suffering of civilians. They provide material support
to terrorists, and, as a result, drug and weapons
smuggling as well as uncontrolled and illicit migration
flourish in the region. The serious nature of the ongoing
14/18

15/08/2017

danger posed by terrorist groups in the Sahel region
was once again made clear by the 13 August attack
on a hotel in Burkina Faso and on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali unit and Malian soldiers yesterday. We strongly
condemn these bloody attacks against civilians and
peacekeepers. We extend our condolences to the
families and friends of those who died and wish the
victims a speedy recovery. Without a victory over the
terrorist hydra, it will be impossible to achieve political
stabilization or to make significant progress in solving
social and economic problems.
At the same time, military measures alone cannot
solve these problems. In order to counter extremist
ideology, its breeding ground needs to be eliminated by
better tackling pressing social and economic problems
and by strengthening Government institutions in that
part of the African continent.
In that regard, the consistent implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is now
more pertinent than ever. There is a need to increase
the return from its mechanism. What is crucial in these
efforts is the coordinating role of the United Nations
and its close cooperation with African structures and
different States. Furthermore, their opinion is a priority
in this process.
For the international community, the SaheloSaharan region is facing a lot of work in terms of
assistance regarding the approaches developed by the
African countries themselves, and Russia is prepared
to continue supporting them. It is also important for
external assistance not to devolve into the imposition of
one-size-fits-all solutions that include elements foreign
to African States. It was precisely external interference
and the destruction of statehood in Libya that led to the
wholesale destabilization of the country and the Sahel
region as a whole.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I want to begin by
offering my condolences to all of those affected by the
attacks in Burkina Faso and Mali in recent days. The
United Kingdom condemns in the strongest possible
terms the violent actions of those intent on undermining
stability in the region. They will not succeed. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane
for his briefing today.
The United Kingdom has consistently welcomed
the creation of a Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) joint force and its objectives to tackle terrorism,
17-25798

15/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

organized crime, people-smuggling and human
trafficking. We are encouraged by the early progress
that has been made since the adoption of resolution
2359 (2017) and look forward to the joint force
mobilizing and implementing its operations. We echo
the importance, spelled out in resolution 2359 (2017), of
the protection of civilians, respect for human rights and
the integration of a gender perspective.
In his briefing, Assistant Secretary-General
Wane described the resource challenges faced by the
G-5 Sahel joint force. It is important that its needs be
clearly set out, so that the international community
can explore supporting its operations and finances,
including through the donor conference that we heard
about today. The United Kingdom is offering training
support, including through the European Union, and we
continue to explore what more we can do.
We welcome the recent announcement by France
and Germany of the new Sahel alliance and fully
support this initiative. We urge all Council members to
examine how they can provide further assistance, as we
ourselves are doing.
We were reminded again in recent days of the
security challenges facing the region. The international
community is committed to confronting these problems,
and the United Kingdom believes that the joint force is
an important regional component of these efforts.
In addition to military efforts, however, we need
to tackle the political challenges. We welcome the
progress that has been made, but we urge all Malian
parties to speed up the implementation of the peace
agreement and to continue their dialogue. Important
steps have been taken in recent months, and we hope
and believe that these will continue.
May I conclude on a personal note by thanking you,
Mr. President, and colleagues around the table for your
welcome to me here today and to say how much I am
looking forward to working with all Council members.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Wane for his update.
Ukraine is extremely concerned by the scale of
terrorist activities in the Sahel region. We strongly
condemn the terrorist attack in Burkina Faso’s capital,
Ouagadougou, on Sunday. My delegation expresses
sincere condolences to our colleagues from France and
Senegal in connection with the loss of their citizens in
this attack. Similarly, we condemn the attack against

S/PV. 8024

the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and mourn
the death of a Togolese peacekeeper. This and other
recent militant strikes in the region illustrate the fact
that the threat of terrorism continues to loom over most
of the Sahel.
The ongoing instability in Mali remains one
of the main factors causing a spillover of violence
into neighbouring countries. In that regard, we are
convinced that the deployment of the Malian defence
and security forces throughout the country to combat
violent extremists and maintain law and order is
urgently needed.
However, given the scope of the security challenges
in the Sahel, it is apparent that Mali cannot fight
terrorism alone. The international community and the
region in particular must continue consolidating their
efforts to battle this scourge.
As we learned today, the deployment of the
Group of Five for the Sahel joint force is under way.
We understand that funding remains a challenge. In
that context, we hope that the conference scheduled
for mid-September in Berlin as well as other relevant
initiatives will help to cover existing financial gaps.
There is information to suggest that Mali and
Burkina Faso were on alert about the planned attack that
occurred on Sunday. Even though it was not prevented,
this shows that MINUSMA’s intelligence-gathering
operation is bearing fruit. In that context, we believe
that intelligence-sharing between MINUSMA and the
joint force, once it is fully operational, should be one of
the priority areas of cooperation.
Finally, we look forward to the October report of
the Secretary-General on this issue and are ready to
engage constructively in considering its findings.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Wane for
his important briefing. I should like also to express
our condolences to the Government and the people of
Burkina Faso in connection with yesterday’s terrorist
attack, and to the Government and the people of Mali,
as well as to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, for the victims
of the attacks that took place yesterday.

17-2579815/18

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

Egypt believes that adoption of resolution 2359
(2017) represents a necessary message of support to the
regional efforts of the countries of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to address the phenomena of
terrorism and organized crime, even though the content
of the resolution did not meet the aspirations of those
States in terms of going beyond statements of political
support and making an international commitment to
providing effective assistance for the efforts of the G-5
Sahel joint force on the ground. However, we joined the
consensus since the resolution represents a step forward
on which we can build in future.
The briefing given by Mr. Wane and the facts on the
ground have served to highlight the scope and magnitude
of the challenges and risks confronting the States of the
G-5 Sahel and of the Sahel as a whole. Those risks extend
to neighbouring regions. It is important to address this
matter in a realistic way that recognizes the threat and
works to provide real and appropriate solutions that
are commensurate with the scope of the threat. The
diverging views on the role of the Security Council and
the United Nations in providing such support must not
prevent the drawing up of a comprehensive approach
that takes into consideration the fact that a failure to
provide sustainable and practical support could double
the humanitarian, economic and military cost of any
attempt to contain the deterioration of the situation
in future.
Egypt therefore believes that supporting African
solutions to African problems is the optimal and
highest-yielding investment. Supporting regional
initiatives is the only way to reach sustainable solutions.
Failure to do so would send the wrong message about
the credibility of repeated statements concerning the
importance of cooperation and partnership with the
African Union. Egypt also stresses that we need to find
comprehensive solutions to the challenges confronting
the Sahel region, and therefore stresses yet again the
need to revitalize the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
In conclusion, Egypt stresses that it will spare no
effort to support its brothers and sisters in the G-5 Sahel
States, be it through its contribution to Security Council
discussions of the situation in Mali and the Sahel in
general or by enhancing current joint cooperation
programmes at the bilateral and regional levels. Such
programmes are subject to ongoing improvement in
accordance with stated needs and in consultation with
the States of the region. Egypt recently pledged to
16/18

15/08/2017

allocate 1,000 military scholarships to commissioned
and non-commissioned officers of the Sahel and
Sahara States.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
in New York, I would first like to congratulate you,
Sir, on the accession of your country, Egypt, to the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also commend the outstanding manner in which
you have been conducting the Council’s work. And I
thank you for organizing this Council briefing on the
operationalization process of the G-5 Sahel joint force,
pursuant to resolution 2359 (2017), a force which has
been endorsed by the African Union.
I wish to begin by paying tribute to the victims
of the cowardly and barbaric attack on the CaféRestaurant Aziz-Istanbul in Ouagadougou on 13 August
2017, which left 18 people dead and injured others. I
also wish to pay tribute to the victims of yesterday’s
terrorist attacks in Douentza and Timbuktu in Mali,
which unfortunately also killed and injured people
in the ranks of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the civilian and military forces of Mali. These
criminal acts underscore the importance and urgency
of operationalizing the G-5 Sahel joint force with the
support of the international community. They also
serve to strengthen the shared determination of our
States to continue to work together to eradicate the
terrorist threat in our shared area.
I would now like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his
unwavering support and for the excellent quality of
the briefing just made to the Council by Assistant
Secretary-General Wane.
Before going further, I would like to convey to the
Council once again the thanks of the President of the
Republic of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, President-in-Office of G-5 Sahel, on behalf
of his counterparts from Burkina Faso, Mauritania,
the Niger and Chad, for the special attention that the
Council continues to pay to the security situation in the
countries of the Sahel, in particular the five countries
dealt with in today’s meeting.
17-25798

15/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Since the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017), on
21 June 2017, our Heads of State have been working
tirelessly and with the support of friendly countries
and partner organizations to operationalize swiftly
and effectively the G-5 Sahel joint force. Considerable
progress has been made in that regard. Following
the appointment of Major General Didier Dacko as
Force Commander, the rehabilitation of the joint
force’s headquarters in Sévaré, in the Mopti region,
was undertaken and will soon be completed. Its
official inauguration should take place shortly. The
headquarters for the central zone, which consists of
Burkina Faso, the Niger and Mali, located in Niamey,
has already been rehabilitated, and the force support
team is being set up at the staff level, again with the
support of our partners. The first units will be deployed
in October 2017, and all battalions should be in place
by March 2018. The short-term operational priorities
mainly involve cross-border military operations, the
first of which is also scheduled for October 2017.
With regard to the force’s budget, while the budget
for initially establishing the force and maintaining
it for a year has been set at €423 million, it is still
being fine-tuned. To date, financial and material
contributions pledged come to a total of €108 million,
of which €50 million will be borne by the G-5 Sahel
countries, €50 million by the European Union, and
€8 million by France, by the end of 2017, as has just
been explained. Furthermore, Mali and the Niger
are making contributions to develop command-post
infrastructure, namely, the initial command post in
Bamako, the central command post in Sévaré and
the central zone command post based in Niamey, the
Niger. I welcome the commitment of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, and that of its member States
and its institutions, including the Islamic Development
Bank, which have expressed their willingness to
contribute to the financing of the joint force.
I would also like to assure the Council that the
resources allocated to the force will be managed with
full transparency and accountability. We are open to all
kinds of support from our partners to help us to better
manage the joint force’s resources. The G-5 Sahel
is already working with the European Union along
those lines.
The progress that I have just explained to the
Council in no way hides the challenges facing the
operationalization process and the sustainable, viable
and effective functioning of the joint force. Among

S/PV. 8024

those challenges, we would highlight the mobilization
of the full funding of the force. This is therefore an
opportunity for me to renew our appeal to all friendly
countries and international partner organizations to
help us secure the budget so as to ensure the rapid
and effective deployment of the force. In that regard,
I welcome the prospect of holding an international
planning conference in December of next year in
Brussels, pursuant to resolution 2359 (2017).
I also welcome the establishment of the alliance for
the Sahel, the first high-level meeting of which is to
be held in Washington, D.C., in October. The alliance
for the Sahel aims to help development actors to find
innovative mechanisms to enhance the effectiveness of
actions carried out with their partners throughout the
Sahel. It will address the most important aspect, one
that will give hope to our youth, our women and our
children — development.
We also have immediate needs in the areas of
battalion equipment, support for the tactical mobility
of the deployed units and the reinforcement of their
logistical and protection capacities in the areas of
operation. We also require the setting up of a suitable
communication network to link the units operating in
one area and the joint force headquarters to the three
command posts I have mentioned. Finally, we need
assistance in the areas of emergency medical evacuation
and improvised explosive devices.
On the question of coordinating the work of the
joint force with that of the other forces already present
in our space, I stress that the deployment of the joint
force will not adversely affect the action of the national
forces of the member States nor the presence of partner
forces — MINUSMA and the French Operation
Barkhane — or that of any other friendly organization
operating in the G-5 Sahel space. Instead, the joint force
provides a framework for coordinating and enhancing
joint efforts to increase its impact.
The cooperation and liaison mechanism of the
joint force, Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA will
be based on a mechanism already in place among
MINUSMA, the Malian armed forces and Operation
Barkhane. That mechanism, which will be enlarged
to include the joint force, is a coordinating body for
mutual operational and logistical support, intelligence
sharing and the coordination of operations.
Accordingly, it is expected that the G-5 Sahel joint
force headquarters in Sévaré, Mopti, will include liaison

17-2579817/18

S/PV.8024

Peace and security in Africa

officers from bilateral and multilateral partners as
needed. Other relevant additional arrangements relating
to the proper coordination of cooperation among the
joint force, MINUSMA and the French forces, within
their respective mandates, remain a possibility.
In the context of cooperation with other States, the
strategic concept of operations of the G-5 Sahel joint
force reaffirms the force’s adherence to the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture. It also takes
into account the previous decisions of the Nouakchott
process, the African Union Strategy for the Sahel
Region, and the Joint Military Staff Committee of the
Sahel Region, which includes Algeria, Mali, Mauritania
and the Niger.

18/18

15/08/2017

Finally, I can assure the Council that the operations
of the joint force will be respectful of gender, human
rights and international humanitarian law. A civilian
component will be deployed within the force to ensure
strict compliance with those standards. I renew the
commitment of the G-5 Sahel Heads of State to the
effective operationalization and effective functioning
of the joint force. In that regard, we greatly appreciate
the equally decisive support of our bilateral and
multilateral partners and we sincerely hope that this
critical support, both material and logistical, will
enable the joint force to be fully operational.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

17-25798
