II.

Resolution~ adopted without reference to a Main Committ_ee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

2. Invites Member States, as well as organs and subsidiary bodies of the United Nations, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, educational, scientific,
cultural and research institutions and the communication
media to commemorate the International Year of Peace in
the most appropriate form, highlighting, inter alia, the role
of the United Nations in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security;
3. Decides to convene a second pledging conference
during the first quarter of 1986 so that Member States
which have not yet announced their contributions may
have an opportunity to do so;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
Voluntary Fund for the Programme of the International
Year of Peace, to assist in the commemoration of the Year
and to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information about the Year and its objectives;
5. Emphasizes the importance of continuing the coordination and co-operation established among United
Nations programmes and activities related to the promotion of the International Year of Peace;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the programme of the International Year of Peace;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "International Year of
Peace".
70th plenary meeting
I I November 1985

40/11. Right of peoples to peace
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the year 1986 was proclaimed the
International Year of Peace,
Reca//ing that the principal aim of establishing the
United Nations forty years ago, as enshrined in the Charter, was to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war,

Reaffirming the strong resolve of peoples to maintain
and strengthen international peace and security,
Reca//ing its Declaration on the Right of Peoples to
Peace, approved on 12 November 1984, 21
Reca//ing further that, pursuant to the Declaration, all
States and international organizations are urged to do their
utmost to contribute to the implementation of the right of
peoples to peace,
Bearing in mind that peace is an inalienable right of
every human being and that, in the Proclamation of the
International Year of Peace approved on 24 October
1985, 18 the General Assembly, having reaffirmed that
peace constitutes a universal ideal, called upon all peoples
to join with the United Nations in resolute efforts to safeguard peace and the future of humanity,
Taking note of the programme for the International
Year of Peace, 22
I. Calls upon all States and international organizations
to do their utmost to implement the provisions of the Declaration on the Right of Peoples to Peace;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting
his report on the implementation of the programme for the
International Year of Peace, to report on the measures
taken by Member States and international organizations in
21 Resolution 39/ 11, annex.
22 A/40/669 and Add. I, annex I.

21

the implementation of the Declaration on the Right of
Peoples to Peace.
70th plenary meeting
I l November 1985

40/12.

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security

The General Assemb{v.
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security",
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980, 35/
37 of 20 November 1980, 36/34 of 18 November 1981,
37/37 of29 November 1982, 38/29 of23 November 1983
and 39/ 13 of 15 November 1984,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the obligation of all States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the sovereignty, territo1ial integrity
and political independence of any State,
Reaffirming further the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose
their own economic, political and social system free from
outside intervention, subversion. coercion or constraint of
any kind whatsoever,
Gravelv concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention ·in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principles, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Noting the increasing concern of the international community over the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and over the magnitude of social and economic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the presence on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the
continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,23 and
the status of the diplomatic process initiated by him,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political
solution of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
I. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful
solution of the problem:
2. Reaffirms the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any
kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan:
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work for the
urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution, and the creation of the necessary Cllnditions which would enable the
Afghan refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in
safety and honour:
5. Renews its appeal to all States and national and
international organizations to continue to extend humanitarian relief assistance with a view to alleviating the hardBA- 4ll 709-S' 17527. For ihe printed text. see Otfi,:ia/ Record., oj tire
Se, umr ( ·ouncil. Fortieth l'rnr. Supp/emenr r,,, Oc1ober. NcJl'embcr and
f)er("t,0! 1 : "

!'18'. documC'nl S

..,'i~.,.
