United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.3

General Assembly

Official Records

Tenth Emergency Special Session

3rd plenary meeting
Friday, 25 April 1997, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Razali Ismail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Minoves-Triquell
(Andorra), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 3 of the provisional agenda (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/ES-10/5)
The Acting President: The draft resolution
recommended by the Credentials Committee in paragraph
12 of its report (A/ES-10/5) was adopted without a vote in
the Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution ES/10-1).
Agenda item 5 of the provisional agenda (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territories
(A/ES-10/L.1)
The Acting President: I call on the representative of
Indonesia to introduce draft resolution A/ES-10/L.1.

97-85490 (E)

Mr. Sriwidjaja (Indonesia): I deem it a distinct
honour and privilege to introduce, on behalf of the
sponsors — Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, the
Comoros, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kuwait,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yemen and
Zimbabwe — the draft resolution contained in document
A/ES-10/L.1 concerning illegal Israeli actions in occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory.
By the terms of the preambular paragraphs of the
draft resolution, the General Assembly would express
awareness of the commencement, after the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 51/223, of construction by
Israel, the occupying Power, of a new settlement in Jabal
Abu Ghneim to the south of East Jerusalem on 18 March
1997, as well as of other illegal Israeli actions in
Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory.
It would note with regret that the Security Council,
at its 3747th meeting and at its 3756th meeting, failed
twice to adopt a resolution on the actions referred to
above, as a result of the negative vote of a member of the
Council. It would reaffirm the permanent responsibility of
the United Nations with regard to the question of
Palestine until it is solved in all its aspects and also the

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory
by force.
The Assembly would consider the serious deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, and in the Middle East in general,
including the serious difficulties facing the Middle East
peace process, as a result of recent Israeli actions and
measures. It would affirm its support for the Middle East
peace process, started at Madrid in 1991, on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978) and the principle of land for peace and for the
full and timely implementation of the agreements reached
between the Government of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the representative of the
Palestinian people, as well as of all commitments reached
between the parties.
The Assembly would recall its relevant resolutions,
including resolution 181 (II) and 51/223, and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular those on
Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the occupied territories,
including resolutions 252 (1968), 446 (1979), 452 (1979),
465 (1980), 476 (1980), 478 (1980), 672 (1990) and 1073
(1996). It would reaffirm that the international community,
through the United Nations, has a legitimate interest in the
question of the City of Jerusalem and the protection of the
unique spiritual and religious dimension of the City, as
foreseen in relevant United Nations resolutions on this
matter.
The Assembly would further reaffirm the applicability
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949 and the Hague
Regulations of 1907 to the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, and all other Arab territories occupied
by Israel since 1967.
Through the preambular paragraphs, the Assembly
would also recall the obligation of the high contracting
parties to the Geneva Convention to respect and ensure
respect for the Convention in all circumstances, in
accordance with article 1 of the Convention. It would
express its awareness of the serious dangers arising from
persistent violation and grave breaches of the Convention
and the responsibilities arising therefrom.
The Assembly would express its conviction that
ensuring respect for treaties and other sources of
international law is essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and its determination, in
accordance with the preamble of the Charter of the United

2

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
Nations, to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other
sources of international law can be maintained. In this
context, it would express its conviction that the repeated
violation by Israel, the occupying Power, of international
law and its failure to comply with relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions and the
agreements reached between the parties undermine the
Middle East peace process and constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
The Assembly would express increasing concern
about the actions of armed Israeli settlers in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and, finally, its
awareness that, in the circumstances, it should consider
the situation with a view to making appropriate
recommendations to the Members of the United Nations,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
377 A (V) of 1950.
Through operative paragraph 1 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would condemn the
construction by Israel, the occupying Power, of a new
settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim to the south of occupied
East Jerusalem and all other illegal Israeli actions in all
the occupied territories.
In operative paragraph 2, the Assembly would
reaffirm that all legislative and administrative measures
and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, that
have altered or purported to alter the character, legal
status and demographic composition of Jerusalem are null
and void and have no validity whatsoever.
In operative paragraph 3, the Assembly would also
reaffirm that Israeli settlements in all the territories
occupied by Israel since 1967 are illegal and an obstacle
to peace.
Operative paragraphs 4 and 5 contain demands for
an immediate and full cessation of the construction in
Jabal Abu Ghneim and of all other Israeli settlement
activities, as well as of all illegal measures and actions in
Jerusalem; that Israel accept the de jure applicability of
the Geneva Convention to all the territories occupied
since 1967; and that it comply with relevant Security
Council resolutions, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Operative paragraph 6 stresses the need to preserve
the territorial integrity of all the occupied Palestinian
territory and to guarantee the freedom of movement of

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
persons and goods in the territory, including the removal of
restrictions into and from East Jerusalem, as well as the
freedom of movement to and from the outside world; while
operative paragraph 7 contains a call for the cessation of all
forms of assistance and support for illegal Israeli activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, in
particular settlement activities.
Operative paragraph 8 recommends to the States that
are high contracting parties to the Geneva Convention to
take measures, on a national or regional level, in fulfilment
of their obligations under article 1 of the Convention, to
ensure respect by Israel, the occupying Power, of the
Convention.
The Secretary-General is requested under paragraph 9
to monitor the situation and to submit a report on the
implementation of this draft resolution, within two months
of its adoption, in particular on the cessation of the
construction of the new settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim as
well as of all other illegal Israeli actions in occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory.
Operative paragraph 10 expresses the need for
scrupulous implementation of the agreements reached
between the parties, and urges the sponsors of the peace
process, the interested parties and the entire international
community to exert all the necessary efforts to revive the
peace process and ensure its success.
Operative paragraph 11 recommends that a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question of
the City of Jerusalem, which should be reached in
permanent status negotiations between the parties, should
include internationally guaranteed provisions to ensure the
freedom of religion and of conscience of its inhabitants, as
well as permanent, free and unhindered access to the Holy
Places by the faithful of all religions and nationalities.
By operative paragraph 12, the Assembly would reject
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in accordance
with all relevant United Nations resolutions and
declarations.
Finally, through operative paragraph 13, the Assembly
would decide to adjourn the tenth emergency special
session temporarily and to authorize the President of the
General Assembly to resume its meetings upon request
from Member States.
We are all only too mindful of the series of events
which have made the present emergency special session of

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
the General Assembly necessary. We are equally
conscious of the exceptional significance of an emergency
special session of the General Assembly, called in
accordance with resolution 377 (V), entitled “Uniting for
peace”. Yet I deem it useful at this juncture to refer to the
statement of the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations yesterday, who so eloquently placed the
present emergency special session in its proper context.
He reminded us that we are indeed uniting for peace:
uniting against the violation of international law and
United Nations resolutions; uniting to confront the
arrogance of power and the mentality of occupation;
uniting to oppose the misuse of the veto and attempts to
neutralize the Security Council; uniting to rescue the
Middle East peace process; and uniting for a just solution
to the question of Palestine and the establishment of a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.
The draft resolution before the Assembly is indeed
a draft to unite for peace. Thus, on behalf of the sponsors,
I commend the adoption of the draft resolution by this
Assembly.
Mr. Jonah (Sierra Leone): I should like to begin by
commending the United States Government for its
foresight in shepherding, in 1950, the draft text that
resulted in the resolution under whose provisions we are
meeting today. My delegation has given full consideration
to the views of those who question the wisdom of
convening this tenth emergency special session.
Nevertheless, Sierra Leone, in supporting the convening
of this session of the General Assembly, has been guided
by some weighty considerations which formed a
significant part of the case that John Foster Dulles made
on 1 November 1950, when he urged Member States to
support the draft resolution that became resolution
377 (V).
Those pivotal considerations were formulated
according to certain principles. First, at San Francisco in
1945, the small and medium-sized States had agreed to
the right of veto only on condition that the General
Assembly was granted the power to intervene and to
make recommendations within the framework of Chapters
VI and VII of the Charter, in cases in which the Security
Council was unable to discharge its primary
responsibility. Secondly, Mr. Dulles emphasized that the
United States considered that the responsibility for
maintaining peace was not the monopoly of the great
Powers, and that informed world opinion was the factor
most likely to affect the course of events. There was even
every reason to believe that, better than any other organ,

3

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
the General Assembly would reflect world opinion on the
question of what was right — in other words, the
supremacy of law. Thirdly, it was understood that the very
fact that the General Assembly would stand ready to act if
the Security Council failed to fulfil its primary
responsibility would stimulate the members of the Council
to cooperate so that that organ might function as was
contemplated in the Charter.
My delegation believes that these considerations are as
relevant today as they were then. That is why we cannot
agree with the notion that discussion in the General
Assembly of the situation in the Middle East or the
question of Palestine is antagonistic to the peace process.
There is ample evidence to demonstrate that deliberations
in the General Assembly on these question have made
significant contributions to the long-term peace process in
the area. It should be borne in mind that invoking the
provisions of resolution 377 (V) during the Suez crisis in
1956 made it possible for the General Assembly to
authorize the very first United Nations peacekeeping
operation.
In the aftermath of the June 1967 conflict in the
Middle East, the General Assembly met in a very important
special session. Let me recall what the veteran former
Israeli Foreign Minister, Mr. Abba Eban, said in his
autobiography about the outcome of that session. He wrote:
“There was no doubt that Israel had gained one of the
greatest political victories of her international career.”
Furthermore, it was as a result of the deliberations at that
emergency special session that the Security Council was
compelled to meet again, and eventually adopt the nowfamous Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which
remains the bedrock of all peace efforts today in the Middle
East.
All the parties involved today in the Middle East have
reached a consensus that the Oslo peace process is in grave
danger of collapse, and there are no immediate prospects
for arresting the present deteriorating trend. In these
circumstances, how can the General Assembly remain
silent, particularly when the use of the veto, twice within a
brief period, has frustrated all action by the Security
Council?
The Middle East, or West Asia as some would like to
call the region, remains a strategic flash point, despite the
end of the cold war. Even though enormous progress has
been made in recent years, the deplorable conditions in

4

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
which the Palestinian refugees live remain unimproved.
My delegation therefore believes that the time is
opportune for the United Nations, through the General
Assembly, to make its contribution.
We value the critical role played by the United
States Government in the peace process, and we continue
to believe that direct negotiation is an ideal objective. But
we cannot ignore the fact that adverse political rhetoric
and imprudent actions have weakened the foundations of
peace in the area. We all applauded the commencement
of the Oslo peace process and the early efforts to
implement the agreement, but we are definitely now at an
impasse, and urgent action is required.
My delegation stands ready to cooperate with all
concerned to ensure that the peace process is put back on
track.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Twice
in the Security Council, and once in this Assembly, I
have made clear my Government’s view of Israel’s
decision to begin construction at Har Homa/Jabal Abu
Ghneim: it is unhelpful to the peace process. On those
occasions, I voted against the draft resolutions that had
been submitted because the United States did not believe
that they would have advanced the peace process. Today,
as a sponsor of that process, the United States urges
members of this Assembly to vote against the draft
resolution before us, which we believe will actually make
harder the difficult task before us: rebuilding confidence
between the parties and reactivating a productive
negotiation process.
Let me repeat that my Government shares the
concerns expressed here and in the Security Council about
the decision of the Israeli Government to begin
construction at this site. As President Clinton said last
month, we would have preferred that this decision had not
been made. It undermines the trust and confidence so
badly needed in creating the appropriate environment for
successful negotiations, especially on the difficult issues
involved in the permanent status talks.
The achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East requires an
honest negotiating process. The parties must take special
care to avoid pre-emptive actions that can be seen to
prejudge the outcome of negotiations, while working hard
to nurture an atmosphere of trust and confidence that will
make productive negotiations possible. The decision on

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
Har Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim did just the opposite. We
regret that it was taken.
However, our responsibility as a co-sponsor of the
peace process requires us to tell our friends in the United
Nations frankly: the Security Council and the General
Assembly should not insert themselves into issues that the
negotiating partners have decided will be addressed in the
permanent status talks. This can only harden the positions
of both sides and make their work even more difficult. It
will add to existing tensions in the region, complicate the
efforts of all parties to get the negotiations back on a
productive track and distract attention from the main
objective: making progress towards a peaceful, prosperous
Middle East. Such progress is the shared goal of most of us
in this Hall.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
formulations of resolutions past. Regrettably, the draft
resolution now before us fails to do this, at great cost not
only to the parties involved in the talks, but to the
credibility of the United Nations itself as a supporter of
peace in the Middle East.
It is clear to us that this draft resolution would have
an effect that is the opposite of its advertised intent.
Threats of economic boycott, condemnation and harsh
rhetoric will only serve to erode the vital trust, confidence
and quiet diplomatic efforts that are needed if the peace
process is to begin moving forward again. That is why
the United States will vote against this draft resolution.
Each vote in favour of this draft resolution adds to the
difficulty of reaching a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East.

However, the draft resolution now before the General
Assembly will fail to help achieve that goal. It is harmful
to the prospects for revitalizing the Middle East peace
process. The call made by some speakers yesterday for
collective action against a Member State is inconsistent
with the responsibilities of the Assembly and dangerous for
the credibility of the United Nations.

Mr. Powles (New Zealand): The purpose of
convening an emergency special session of the General
Assembly, as clearly stated in the resolution entitled
“Uniting for peace” resolution, is to maintain or restore
international peace and security. The decision to convene
this tenth emergency special session will be justified if
our deliberations are guided by this aim.

In addition, the draft resolution contains language that
tends to prejudge certain permanent status issues, such as
Jerusalem. We believe such phrases are inappropriate,
argumentative and unhelpful to the peace process. We will
continue to oppose inclusion of such language in resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council.

This will not be achieved, New Zealand believes,
unless both parties come to the realization that a just and
lasting peace must be the principle guiding their
negotiations. Peace in the Middle East requires all parties
to act with integrity. These foundations will generate the
confidence and trust to move the Middle East peace
process forward.

Finally, we believe that this draft resolution presents
a problem that goes beyond the threat it poses to the
Middle East peace process, and that is the threat it poses to
the orderly conduct of the business of the United Nations.
We believe that this draft resolution clearly infringes on the
authority of the Security Council. By moving in the
direction of General Assembly endorsement of collective
action directed against one of its member States, it sets a
dangerous precedent which could in the future be turned
against any Member State.
The United Nations can play and has played an
important part in supporting the Middle East peace process.
This is the right and proper role for the United Nations to
play. It requires creative thinking about what we can all do
to move the process forward, especially at times of crisis.
Certainly, it requires at the very least that we do nothing to
place new obstacles on the path to peace. This means, in
particular, that we must make every effort to avoid falling
back on the punitive, accusatory, backward-looking

Parties to the peace process face several options for
the future. These include engaging in meaningful steps
towards the final status negotiations or in a decisive drive
to achieve a final settlement in six months.
New Zealand believes that decisions on these options
are for the parties to decide. It is for the parties to the
negotiations to determine the most effective track. But we
are concerned that all parties must refrain from unilateral
actions which undermine the peace process and prejudice
the options for peace.
In this respect New Zealand believes that the
decision of the Government of Israel to initiate
settlements in Jabal Abu Ghneim is inconsistent with
international law. We do not recognize Israel’s annexation
of Jerusalem. New Zealand regards Israeli settlement
activity in the occupied territories as a clear example of
a policy which undermines the peace process and

5

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
prejudices options for peace. We cannot escape the
conclusion that such activity runs counter to the need to
work for a lasting peace.
Israel should build trust, not settlements. We call on
the Government of Israel to reconsider its policy on
settlements in the occupied territories. Equally, violence and
terrorism are not an acceptable response to the actions of
the Government of Israel.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today is
clear on both of these points. We welcome the spirit of
cooperation that has resulted in a text that New Zealand
will support. We hope that this draft resolution will be
adopted by an overwhelming majority.
It seemed until very recently that peace in the Middle
East was achievable. It still is, if all parties want it. It
cannot be forced on the unwilling or the intimidated.
Today, 25 April, is Anzac Day, on which New
Zealanders remember their own war dead. It is therefore
appropriate on this day for New Zealand to join others in
calling on all parties to renew their commitment to peace,
to rebuild confidence and trust and to enter into discussions
on a lasting peace in the region.
Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
convening of the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly, to consider the nefarious Israeli policy
of building settlements in the occupied territories — and
recently in the Holy City of Al-Quds — clearly illustrates
the outrage and grave concern of Member States. This
outrage is directed not only against the continued Israeli
defiance of the views and decisions of the international
community, but also against the action of a permanent
member of the Security Council that blocked a decision in
the Council, thereby leaving the general membership with
no other option but to resort to the extraordinary measure
of convening an emergency special session of the General
Assembly.
This emergency special session also indicates that
under the provisions of General Assembly resolution 377
(V), entitled “Uniting for peace”, the general membership
of the Organization has decided that because of the veto in
the Security Council on the same issue, the Security
Council has failed to exercise its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security in a
case where there appears to be a threat to the peace, a
breach of the peace, or an act of aggression — namely, the
Israeli decision to build Jewish settlements in the occupied

6

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
territories, including in East Jerusalem. In this context, I
should like to express our gratitude to the Arab Group for
its initiative to convene this emergency special session of
the General Assembly and to make this point crystalclear.
It is plainly unfortunate to note that the Security
Council was rendered ineffective by being prevented from
merely calling upon the Israeli regime to end its illegal
actions and policies, such as the policy of constructing
settlements in the occupied territories, particularly in East
Jerusalem. Undoubtedly, the exercise of the veto against
the adoption of a draft resolution that only deplored the
unlawful Israeli actions has done a major disservice to the
credibility of the United Nations and the Security Council
and to the cause of the rule of law, justice and fairness.
Numerous reports and documents of the United
Nations, including the annual reports of the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs
of the Occupied Territories, have provided ample
descriptions of the systematic and inhuman practices of
the Zionist regime, which include arbitrary mass arrests,
the detention and shooting of Palestinians, the sealing or
demolition of their homes and the internal closure of the
territories.
Last year, for the first time, the occupied territories
were subjected to total internal closure, resulting in
considerable hardships in the everyday life of their
inhabitants. Such closures have had destructive effects on
the economic and social situation of the occupied
territories and have caused much suffering. This
emergency session of the General Assembly should
condemn, in the strongest possible terms, those Israeli
practices as well as the decision to build new settlements
in Jabal Abu Ghneim, in East Jerusalem.
Land confiscation and the building of new housing
projects through the use of brute force, intimidation and
“quiet” deportations have always, in past decades, been an
integral component of the Zionist grand design to
perpetuate its occupation of Palestinian lands. It is
interesting to note that the statistics and figures indicate
that the increase in the number of settlers during the past
four years was the highest ever, illustrating the unholy
dichotomy of the Israeli agenda. On the surface, they
portray themselves as being engaged in a peace process,
while at the same time, and in practice, they grab more
land, deport more Palestinians, and give rise to more
outrage. Their policy of expanding Jewish settlements is

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
in line with the long-term strategy of the Israeli regime,
which is geared towards Judaization and a change in the
geographic, demographic and religious status of Palestine
and the city of Jerusalem in particular. This must be
stopped forthwith. This emergency special session of the
General Assembly has a historic responsibility with respect
to the question of Palestine and must fulfil the
responsibility it acquired by virtue of the Security Council’s
forfeiture.
The Israeli regime has intensified the policy of
demolition of houses in Jerusalem and, despite the concern
expressed by the international community, opened an
entrance to a tunnel located within the close vicinity of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, causing grave international concern,
particularly in the Islamic world. The continued aggressive
policies adopted and implemented by the occupying Power
against the Islamic sacred places and the occupation of
Jerusalem, a city that enjoys the respect of all divine
religions, must be condemned in this special session.
The view of the Islamic Republic of Iran on the issue
is not a secret to anyone here, but we realize that in the
realm of realpolitik, attempts are being made to resolve the
Palestinian issue in any way possible. However, it is
imperative for the General Assembly to take the lead in
condemning and rejecting the illegal Israeli actions and
policies in the occupied territories, particularly in East
Jerusalem, with a view to bringing those unlawful practices
to an immediate end.
Mr. Berteling (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries have aligned themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Latvia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia. Iceland
and Liechtenstein have also aligned themselves with it.
In past weeks, extensive debates have taken place on
the issue of the settlement plans in Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har
Homa, both in formal meetings of the Security Council, on
5-6 and 21 March, and here in the General Assembly on 12
March. In these debates the European Union extensively
clarified its position on the question of Israeli settlement
activities.
In the General Assembly meeting of 12 March, a
resolution deploring the decision of the Israeli Government
to approve construction plans for Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har
Homa and urging Israel to refrain from actually starting
construction activities was adopted by an overwhelming
majority.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
The European Union has taken note with concern of
the fact that Israel has effectively commenced
construction activities in Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har Homa,
with a view to building a new settlement on the West
Bank, within the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem, as
unilaterally defined by Israel.
The European Union disapproves of this fact, since
it constitutes a violation of the fourth Geneva Convention
and prejudges the outcome of the final status negotiations.
The work undertaken in Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har Homa
should therefore be suspended.
The European Union deeply deplores the violence
that has occurred in past weeks. At this critical time, it
is of the utmost importance that both parties show
restraint and return to their political dialogue on all
matters under dispute or subject to negotiation. The
European Union calls on the parties to make every effort
to revitalize the peace process and to refrain from any act
which could jeopardize it.
Mr. Nor (Brunei Darussalam): First of all, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this tenth emergency special session.
The recent actions taken by the Israeli authorities in
East Jerusalem should be of great concern to members of
the international community, as they represent a setback
for our hopes for the peace process and the prospects for
a just and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
Brunei Darussalam considers that the building of a
new settlement on Jabal Abu Ghneim contravenes the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, international
law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, the Hague
Rules of 1907 and relevant United Nations resolutions. It
is a negative action and, in continuing it, Israel has defied
the international community’s call for an immediate halt
to construction.
Brunei Darussalam calls upon Israel to cease
construction immediately and asks the Security Council to
persuade Israel to revoke its decision on the settlement
project. We would also like to urge the Israeli leadership
to avoid all activities which deprive the Palestinian people
of their rights.
We hope that this Assembly will reflect the strong
feelings recently registered by all members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the

7

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997

Non-Aligned Movement, and will support the adoption of
the draft resolution before us today.

Why have we asked for this emergency special
session? The answer lies in the following points.

Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): It gives me pleasure to convey to the
President of the General Assembly our thanks for his
continued efforts. I have confidence in the wisdom with
which he is guiding the work of the Assembly towards a
positive and promising result. I am grateful also to His
Excellency the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
great efforts towards the convening of this emergency
special session and for following its work and its results.

First, the Security Council dismally failed twice last
month to carry out its responsibility because of the use of
the veto by a permanent member of the Council. That
veto gave the Prime Minister of Israel a green light to
continue his settlements policy. It also amounted to
disregard for the feelings of Arabs, Muslims and
Christians, all of whom have very close historical and
spiritual links with Jerusalem.

I wish to express my greatest appreciation to all
countries that have responded positively to our just request
for the convening of an emergency special session on
24 April 1997, on the basis of the provisions of resolution
377 (V) of 1950, which gives the General Assembly the
right to address any matter that could affect international
peace and security in the event of the Security Council
failing to shoulder its responsibilities. The purpose of this
session is to discuss illegal Israeli actions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, to formulate recommendations and to
take joint action.
No one could have believed that we would ever hear
anyone in this Organization say — and on more than two
or three occasions — that the United Nations is not the
appropriate place to discuss and resist Israel’s settlement
policy in the Palestinian territories, particularly in
Jerusalem, and in the other occupied Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan. That is an astonishing
thing to say, because everybody knows that the Arab-Israeli
conflict and all developments in the Palestinian question
were born in the United Nations itself, in its principal
organs and in its specialized agencies. Everybody knows
that the annals and archives of the United Nations contain
thousands of resolutions, documents, reports and decisions
on the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the resolution
adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-first session
relating to all aspects of the Israeli settlements and to
sovereignty over water sources and other natural resources,
as well as other resolutions dealing with the Middle East,
Jerusalem, the Golan and Israeli practices in the occupied
territories.
I believe that it is our right to turn to the United
Nations. We are obliged to do this in order to cooperate
with all peace-loving countries throughout the world to save
the peace process, which Israel persistently tries to
undermine by every means at its disposal.

8

Secondly, our request for the convening of the
session was in implementation of decisions adopted at the
Islamabad summit of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, at the Cairo meeting of Foreign Ministers, at
the Rabat meeting of the Al-Quds Committee, and at the
New Delhi conference of Foreign Ministers of the NonAligned Movement.
Thirdly, the formula applied by the Arab Group in
requesting this session was that of the “Uniting for peace”
resolution, which reflects anew the true Arab will as
expressed at the Cairo Arab Summit, where Arab leaders
opted for peace as a strategic choice, provided that Israel
followed the same path and also made peace its strategic
choice.
Fourthly, we have turned to the United Nations four
times over the past two months, which is incontrovertible
proof that we see danger in Israel’s policy of escalation,
and in its persistent attempts to carry out settlement
activities in utter disregard of General Assembly
resolution 51/223 of 13 March 1997, and of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949, which is
applicable in all Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including Arab Jerusalem, and in all other occupied
Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan and southern
Lebanon.
In that light, let me note that the United Nations is
the great House to which we have always turned, to
which we are turning now, and to which we shall turn in
the future, because of our deep belief that the United
Nations has the responsibility to deal with the Israeli-Arab
conflict and with developments in the Palestinian question
in all its dimensions and aspects, and throughout all its
phases. Our action is not in any way intended to belittle
or diminish the role of the two sponsors of the peace
process. To the contrary, it is intended to support that role
by driving the peace process forward.

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997

What does it mean, this peace we are talking about?
And what does it mean when Israel talks about peace? Our
peace is based on the Madrid Peace Conference of 1991, on
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978) and on
the principle of land for peace. This is what we have
committed ourselves to since the beginning of the Madrid
Peace Conference.

is this peace Israel is talking about, when at the same
time it is clearly rejecting withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan and when it is saying that withdrawal from
Southern Lebanon is subject to conditions? This latter
claim is not in line with Security Council resolution 425
(1978), which says that Israel must withdraw from
Southern Lebanon without any preconditions.

But the other question we must answer is, what does
peace mean for Israel? Israel often talks about peace. What
does it mean? The peace of Israel consists of its Prime
Minister saying no: no to withdrawal from the Syrian
Golan, no to withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territory and no to the existence of a Palestinian state. The
Prime Minister has also said no to the cessation of
settlement activities in East Jerusalem. Thus — and the
Prime Minister confirmed this recently, after escaping from
his latest crisis — his peace means continued settlement
activities by the Israeli Government, for example in Ras alAmud. It means destroying the Burj al-Laqlaq Society for
social services in Jerusalem and opening a tunnel under the
Al-Aqsa Mosque — and keeping it open despite Security
Council resolution 1073 (1996).

The present Israeli Government refuses even to
recognize the commitments made by the previous Israeli
Government. On the basis of these commitments we have
adopted many binding resolutions. According to these
commitments, reached before negotiations came to a halt,
Israel has to withdraw to the fourth line of 1967. Israel
does not want to implement these commitments. This is
part of the Israeli policy that has replaced peace with
expansion and the building of settlements. This is why
Israel does not want to implement its commitments made
before the final status talks. Israel does not want to
implement the agreements it has made with the
Palestinian Authority.

Fifthly, the Israeli Government is still defying the
United Nations resolutions regarding Jerusalem and still
violating the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and The
Hague Rules of 1907. We are witnessing assaults by the
Israeli authorities on the rights of Christian and Muslim
Arabs in East Jerusalem, which has been occupied since
1967.
Sixthly, Israel is practising an iron-fist policy against
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. It is
encouraging extremism by implementing a plan aimed at
deporting and expelling Palestinian civilians in order, as the
saying goes, “to purify” the Hebrew State of its Arab
residents. As we all know, this expression represents the
ultimate in racism and racial discrimination. The Israeli
Government is destroying the very body of peace in order
to finish it off.
It is regrettable indeed that the peace process that
started in Madrid now seems to be dying because the Israeli
Government is overturning all that we have accomplished,
all our efforts, all of our commitments over the past five
years. The Israeli Government’s position rejects all the
bases of peace previously agreed upon. This means the total
annihilation of the peace process.
In answering the aforementioned questions we have to
note that Israel is pursuing a policy of prevarication. What

In view of all this, can someone tell me, what is this
peace that Israel would like us to implement? Does all
this contribute to the implementation of peace? Should
Syria and other Arab parties be interested in a peace that
does not give us back our rights?
As President Hafez al-Assad has said, the peace
process has to succeed because we are all interested in
peace. The whole region and the peoples of the world are
interested in peace. But for peace to triumph, preparations
must be made. Peace means justice. If justice is not an
integral part of peace, then we have not peace, but
capitulation.
The success of the peace process will reflect
positively on the peoples of the region and of the whole
world. Peace will spare us from making such sacrifices
and would save so many resources that could be used to
improve conditions.
The President of the Syrian Arab Republic has
confirmed that we will continue to be on the side of
peace, in all its aspects, and he has expressed the hope
that everyone, all countries, will strive towards that end.
Syria has always supported, as it does today, this strategic
option: to achieve peace Israel must completely withdraw
from the Syrian Golan to the fourth line of June 1967; it
must withdraw from Southern Lebanon and the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Arab Jerusalem; and it
has to guarantee the legitimate rights of the Palestinian

9

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
people in implementation of United Nations resolutions and
of the principle of land for peace. Under the terms of the
resolution “Uniting for peace”, we all bear a responsibility
to make this question a priority, because peace is the way
to achieve security.
In this light, I would like to state that, first, my
country condemns the Israeli settlement policy and Israel’s
defiance of the will of the international community. We
believe that Israel bears the responsibility for creating
tension and violence in the region. It is changing the
environment of peace to an environment of war.
Mr. Shimon Peres, the former Prime Minister of Israel, said
that the Government of Netanyahu was moving towards
war.
Secondly, it is natural that Syria express solidarity
with the Palestinian people and with the “children of the
stones”. They are facing the might and technology of a
military force and are resisting the Israeli occupation in
defence of their legitimate rights, which are guaranteed by
international conventions. We have to ask how, under any
moral system, we can call a child who is throwing stones
a terrorist, while the Israeli soldier who is trying to kill
him, who is attacking houses and mosques, is called a dove
of peace? What is the logic behind this?
Thirdly, if our region is being compelled to relive the
cold war, it is because of Israel’s extremist, fanatic,
aggressive and expansionist policies in the occupied
territories and vis-à-vis the peace process.
Fourthly, the Israeli settlement policy is not new to us.
It is rooted in history. But what is new is its intensification
and the dangerous path it has taken towards judaizing the
City of Jerusalem and expelling the Palestinians. Hence, the
General Assembly is called upon to shoulder its
responsibility and to take all measures necessary to stop
immediately and forthwith the settlement of Jabal Abu
Ghneim to the south of East Jerusalem and all Israeli
settlement activities in Palestinian territory, particularly
Jerusalem, and other Arab territories, including the
occupied Syrian Golan.
Fifthly, we must take steps to compel Israel to respect
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the Hague
Convention of 1907.
Sixthly, at this special session, convened under the
banner “United for peace”, the General Assembly is called
upon to fulfil its duty to save the peace process, which
Israel has tried to undermine completely and has brought to

10

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
an impasse. Hence, we call upon the sponsors of the
peace process and the countries of the European Union to
accord serious attention to the peace process,
commensurate with the dangers that beset it at a time
when the Prime Minister of Israel threatens it, and peace
and security in the region, with destruction.
We call on the General Assembly to take all
necessary measures in order to halt all assistance being
given to Israel’s settlement activities, particularly in
Jerusalem, which are illegal.
Syria’s position on peace is well known and
irrevocable. In particular, Syria has always asserted its
attachment to the bases of the Madrid Conference and the
principle of land for peace. It has called for the
resumption of the peace negotiations at the point at which
they were interrupted in order to build on what has been
achieved and to salvage the results of the great efforts
made over the past five years of negotiation by the
interested parties. Whosoever would squander those
results, though he may speak loudly of peace, cannot be
serious in his claim to seek the peace sought by the
peoples of the region and the world. The achievement of
peace in the region requires the world to act with alacrity
and sincerity before it is too late.
Mr. Amar (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
May I convey to the President the gratitude and highest
consideration of the Kingdom of Morocco. I also wish to
express my country’s thanks to His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan, the Secretary-General of our Organization, for his
tireless efforts and wise guidance.
Once again, we are meeting to discuss the decision
of the Government of Israel to establish a new settlement.
The delegation of Morocco is deeply concerned by
Israel’s decision of 26 February 1997 to pursue its illegal
policy of establishing settlements in the Holy City of Al
Quds. The decision to establish new settlements in Jabal
Abu Ghneim in the eastern sector of Al Quds is the latest
on the list of flagrant attempts to predetermine the results
of the final status negotiations on Al Quds by changing
the legal status and demographic composition of the Holy
City.
Month after month, we have seen Israel adopt a
series of policies and actions, the most recent of which
was the decision to build yet another settlement in the
area of Ras al-Amud, to open a tunnel within the precinct
of Al-Haram al-Sharif and to close offices of the
Palestinian Authority in Al Quds. These actions have

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
effectively created a new situation on the ground to the
detriment not only of the Palestinian people but also of the
peace process itself.
These acts were unacceptable when they occurred;
they are unacceptable today; and they will be unacceptable
in the future. They clearly violate the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly, which
prohibit any measure susceptible of altering the legal status,
demographic composition and civilizational role of Al
Quds. They are also incompatible with the Declaration of
Principles, the spirit and letter of the agreements that
followed it, and the generally accepted principles of
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which prohibits the occupying Power — in this
case, Israel — from making permanent changes in
territories under occupation or from settling any part of its
population there.
Israel’s recent decision to establish new settlements
must be condemned, given that the peace process had
appeared to be returning to a semblance of normalcy
despite Israel’s procrastination and attempts to reinterpret
agreements already concluded. Today, all that — and
particularly the mutual confidence that had been so
patiently built up over the past four years — has been
jeopardized by Israel.
Furthermore, we fear that the arbitrary measures taken
by Israel may provoke among the Palestinian people a wave
of anger and discouragement, with unforeseeable and often
painful consequences.
In this regard, outside the United Nations, various
international forums have concluded that Israel’s latest
decision is unacceptable. Thus, the recent ministerial
meeting of the League of Arab States in Cairo, the
ministerial meeting of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference in Islamabad, the meeting of the Al Quds
Committee recently held in Rabat under the high
chairmanship of His Majesty King Hassan II, and the
twelfth Ministerial Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement
in New Delhi all called for the adoption of concrete
measures to reverse the latest Israeli transgressions in the
occupied territories.
The peace process in the Middle East has given rise to
hopes for a new era of peace, stability and prosperity for
the peoples of the region, including the Palestinian people,
which has so long fought and suffered for its rights. The
peace process was to promote the convergence of
differences and respect for the interests and needs of all the

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
people of the region. We were convinced that this process
would usher in a new era in relations between Israel and
the Arab countries. But we are forced to note that Israel’s
unilateral measures are pushing us backwards, because
they belong to a past they we had sorely wished was
behind us.
The results achieved to date in the peace process are
certainly historic. It is now up to Israel scrupulously to
implement the provisions of the various agreements it has
concluded with the Palestinians. The recent agreement on
Hebron was to have been followed by negotiations on
other contentious questions, and more specifically on the
future status of Al Quds and the problems of settlements,
refugees and borders, as well as on the permanent status
of the occupied territories.
The peace process and the agreements entered into
by the parties concerned in the Middle East must be
implemented in full, in a coherent and just manner, and
not selectively, sporadically or conditionally. We call
upon the international community, in particular the
sponsors of the peace process, to oppose the decision on
the new settlements so as to ensure that the process is not
reversed.
The Kingdom of Morocco has no option but to
support peace and the commitments made to respect all
the requirements for peace. My country is fully aware of
the fate that will befall the Middle East if the peace
process fails. There can be no lasting peace unless all the
parties choose peace on the basis of justice and the
mutual recognition of legitimate rights and previously
agreed requirements.
Only as a result of courage and respect for
commitments by their leaders can the peoples of the
region harvest the fruits of peace. We hope that such a
peace can become a reality for generations of people who
have lived in fear, suspicion and violence for many
decades. Israel must build confidence, not settlements.
Mr. Eltinay (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation is convinced this emergency special
session of the General Assembly is taking place at a
moment when the question of Palestine and the situation
in the Middle East have reached a critical point because
of the decision of the Israeli Government to pursue its
settlement policy, the Judaization of Jerusalem and its
attack on the city’s Arab identity.

11

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
This emergency special session of the General
Assembly has been convened, under the “Uniting for
peace” resolution, in the wake of the Security Council’s
failure to carry out its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, with regard to the Middle
East, twice within one month. Israel’s decision to establish
a new settlement at Jabal Abu Ghneim, followed by bloody
and violent repression of civilians who refused to abide by
its decision, constitute a flagrant violation of Security
Council resolutions 252 (1968) and 476 (1980), which
consider the Israeli measures in Jerusalem null and void.
We call on the United Nations to put pressure on Israel to
lift its siege of the city and allow Muslim and Christian
Palestinian citizens to practise their religions.
The Israeli practices will surely lead to a disaster with
grave consequences for the peoples and States of the region
and for international peace and security. That is why the
Sudan condemns the Israeli actions against civilians. We
call upon the General Assembly, respecting the relevant
treaties and international agreements, to shoulder its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace
and security, and we call on Israel to put an end to its
actions, which wound the sensibilities of Muslims and the
adherents of all other religions of the world. Israel must be
required to do away with policies intended to change the
demographic and legal status of Jerusalem and the occupied
Arab territories on the basis of the principles set out in the
Charter that reject the annexation of territories by force.
The Sudan, in solidarity with the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people, and respecting the decisions of the
Arab summit in Cairo and the ministerial meeting of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference in Islamabad, calls
on the General Assembly, the most democratic body in the
United Nations, to put an end to all illegal practices in
Jerusalem. We also call on the two sponsors of the peace
process to put pressure on Israel so that it will respect the
decisions of the international community, especially
Security Council resolution 465 (1980), to call for an end
to all settlement activities and the dismantling of existing
settlements and to reaffirm that settlement policies
contravene international law.
The continuation of the Israeli actions could well
sound the death knell of the peace process. The Sudan is
firmly convinced that to ensure a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, Israel must abandon its
policy of colonization in the Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem, the rest of the West Bank,
southern Lebanon and the Syrian Golan, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and

12

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
425 (1978). Israel must respect the rights of the
Palestinian people, including its right to establish an
independent State, with its capital in Jerusalem.
As an occupying Power, Israel must respect the
Fourth Geneva Convention, whose provisions apply to
Jerusalem, which is a Holy City for Muslims and
Christians. We condemn the recent Israeli actions against
the Palestinian people, which create tension and
instability, and call on it to abandon such actions and
respect the rights of the Palestinians. That is why we
support the draft resolution in document A/ES-10/L.1. We
call on all States to take this legal measure so that peace
and security can reign in the Middle East and an
independent Palestinian state can be established, with its
capital in Jerusalem.
Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic):
The convening of the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly is an eloquent expression of the
realization by the Member States of the United Nations of
the need for the General Assembly to discharge its role
under the Charter in maintaining international peace and
security and to deal with the harmful effects of the Israeli
expansionist policies in the occupied Arab territories.
Israel, the occupying Power, took a decision on 26
February 1997 to build a new settlement, in Jabal Abu
Ghneim, within the expanded municipal borders of the
city of Jerusalem in order to establish new facts on the
ground that serve its expansionist settlement plan and its
policy of “ethnic cleansing”. This decision evoked the
anger and denunciation of the international community. It
is a new, flagrant violation of the rights of the Palestinian
people, a continuation of the policy of usurping land by
force and a breach of international humanitarian law, the
Fourth Geneva Convention and resolutions of the United
Nations. Moreover, it prejudices the very legal status and
demographic composition of Holy Jerusalem, as well as
its spiritual value not only for Arab peoples, but also for
the Muslim and Christian worlds.
As soon as Israel declared its intention to initiate the
building of the settlement in East Jerusalem, the Arab
Group resorted to the Security Council in order to obtain
a clear decision to halt the Israeli settlement policies,
which gravely threatened regional and international peace
and security. Regrettably, the Security Council failed
twice to discharge its responsibilities because of the veto
exercised by the United States. Israel went forward with
its settlement activities in the occupied Arab territories
and persisted in its brutal suppression of the uprising of

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
the Palestinian people, and tension continued to escalate in
the region.
Israel would not have been able to continue to violate
the most basic principles of international humanitarian law
and the resolutions of the United Nations, including the
resolutions of the Security Council, were it not for the
unlimited support given to it by the United States. That
support has included neutralizing the role of the Security
Council and exerting pressure to prevent the convening of
this emergency special session.
The continuation of these policies will lead the region
and the world to the most tragic catastrophes because it will
mean the absolute absence of law and the absolute
sovereignty of the logic of brute force. Those who
neutralize the role of the Security Council with regard to
Israeli expansionism and who claim that peace cannot be
achieved through the resolutions of the Security Council do
not hesitate to exploit the same mechanisms in the most
heinous ways to carry out their political designs against
peoples. While they prevented the Security Council from
condemning the flagrant Israeli violations of the Council’s
resolutions and of the sensibilities and sacred places of the
Muslim and Christian worlds, they did not hesitate to
convene the Security Council day and night for eight
consecutive days this month with the aim of condemning a
flight of Iraqi pilgrims to the Holy Places in Mecca.
The convening of this emergency special session and
the draft resolution it will adopt regarding the illegal Israeli
actions send a strong message that promotes the role and
responsibility of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, a strong message in the
interests of justice and peace and in repudiation of
selectivity and double standards.
Mr. Bergh (South Africa): My delegation welcomes
the convening of this emergency special session of the
General Assembly on the illegal Israeli actions in occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory.
That the convening of the emergency special session
follows so soon after meetings of the Security Council and
the General Assembly were held to consider the situation in
the occupied Arab territories bears undeniable witness to
the fact that recent developments in that region have
become a serious cause for concern, a concern underscored
by the firm resolve in support of the peace process which
was discernible in all those deliberations.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
South Africa has followed the unfolding
developments in the Middle East with optimism since the
signing of the Declaration of Principles and the Hebron
Protocol. As these instruments are based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Oslo accord, South
Africa — and, indeed, the international community —
recognized and acclaimed them as representing positive
steps towards the full realization of the long-awaited,
comprehensive and just settlement in the region. We had
hoped and believed that the parties concerned would
honour their commitments to these important agreements
and would show good faith by refraining from any
measures that could place obstacles in the way of their
implementation.
The decision of the Israeli Government to commence
the building of new settlements in Jabal Abu Ghneim has
had a negative impact on the peace process. We are all
aware that the Oslo agreement calls on the parties to the
agreement to avoid measures that may adversely affect
the negotiations and the final status of the territories
concerned.
It would appear that by embarking on this settlement
policy, the Government of Israel is engaging in a
unilateral attempt to change the legal status and
demographic composition of Jerusalem — an issue which
has yet to be discussed at the final status negotiations.
The present decision is also a departure from the
principle of land for peace agreed by the Israeli
Government and the Palestine Liberation Organization,
and stands in stark contrast to the principle of the “Peace
of the Brave” advanced by the former Prime Minister of
Israel, Mr. Shimon Peres.
The actions of the Israeli Government in Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied territories are illegal, as they
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and a
total disregard of the resolutions of the United Nations. It
is therefore not surprising that these actions have given
rise to a situation that seriously endangers peace and
security in the region. The Israeli Government should
bear full responsibility for the current tension and
violence which is gripping the occupied Palestinian
territories.
We believe that the peace agreements signed by the
Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization represent a firm foundation for ensuring
security for all and building peace in the Israeli-occupied
territories. Unilateral decisions can serve only to erode

13

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
and undermine the mutual trust and cooperation which is
essential to sustain the peace process.
We therefore urge the Israeli Government to fulfil its
obligations under the agreements reached by both parties
and to demonstrate its commitment to the promotion of
peace in the occupied Arab territories.
Indeed, the challenge before this body and the
international community is to ensure that the Israeli
Government fulfils the commitments and obligations it has
solemnly undertaken.
South Africa will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us because it sends a clear message to the
Government of Israel that the international community is
determined to put the peace process back on track.
Mr. Ould Yahya (Mauritania) (interpretation from
Arabic): I should like to begin by paying tribute and
expressing our deep gratitude to the President of the
General Assembly. We are convinced that his political
experience and diplomatic skills will contribute to the
success of this emergency session, as they have done to that
of the fifty-first session of the General Assembly, which he
has been guiding with outstanding skill and in a most
responsible manner.
We would like also to thank the Secretary-General for
his continued efforts, which made possible the convening
of this emergency session of the General Assembly. The
session was requested by the Group of Arab States in the
light of the real danger threatening the Middle East peace
process.
Our gratitude goes also to those States that felt dutybound to support the Arab initiative to convene an
emergency special session of the General Assembly. Their
support demonstrates once again the international
community’s firm belief that the United Nations must
shoulder its responsibilities in this sensitive region.
Following the decision taken by the Israeli
Government to build a new settlement at Jabal Abu
Ghneim, in East Jerusalem, and the resulting tension in the
occupied Palestinian territories; in view of the concern and
reproval of the entire world, in particular the Arab and
Muslim world; in the face of the Security Council’s
inability, after two successive meetings, to take adequate
measures to deal with this crisis; and in view of the noncompliance with the resolutions and recommendations of
the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic

14

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
Conference, the Al-Quds Committee and the Non-Aligned
Movement, we had to call for the convening of this
emergency special session. In accordance with United
Nations rules of procedure, we had no other means of
seeking legal redress. Mauritania thus attaches particular
importance to this session.
It is our moral and legal duty to confront, in a
serious and responsible manner, the threat posed to the
Middle East peace process by Israel’s illegal policies and
actions in the occupied Palestinian territories, and in East
Jerusalem in particular. These practices violate not only
international law, in particular the Hague Convention of
1907 and the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, but also
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and the treaties and agreements freely entered
into by Israel with other parties to the Middle East peace
process.
The question of Jerusalem is a sensitive one for all
of the revealed religions and for Muslims in particular.
This was made clear by the resolutions adopted at the
Islamic summit held several weeks ago in Islamabad and
by the decision taken at the most recent meeting of the
Al-Quds Committee, held in Rabat. That is why Israel’s
decision to build a new settlement in East Jerusalem
represents a violation by Israel not only of the agreements
signed with the Palestinian authorities on the future of
Jerusalem, but also of international law and of Security
Council resolutions 252 (1968) and 476 (1980), which
reaffirm that all Israeli measures taken in Jerusalem have
no legal validity and are therefore null and void.
My country expresses its support for the draft
resolution before us at this emergency session and calls
on all countries to support it as well in view of its
balanced and responsible nature, because by so doing we
will reaffirm once again the international community’s
commitment to a Middle East settlement and contribute to
international peace and security.
Mr. Felicio (Brazil): The Security Council and the
General Assembly have been overwhelmingly supportive
of the series of bold steps taken by the leaders of the
Middle East since the Madrid Conference of 1991. The
signing of the Declaration of Principles in Washington
opened the way for concrete progress in the Gaza Strip,
Jericho and, more recently, Hebron. These have been
landmarks in the gradual improvement in relations among
the parties concerned, which began to shape what has
largely come to be accepted as an irreversible peace
process. Brazil has been, and remains, a strong advocate

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
of this process as the only viable alternative for stability
through tolerance and solidarity among all peoples in the
region.
The convening of this emergency special session of
the General Assembly is indicative, however, of the disquiet
with which Member States have been following the latest
developments. Challenges to the peace process have been
overcome in the recent past. The remaining challenges must
likewise be tackled with the same resolve which produced
the momentous results of the last few years. If there is no
deliberate intention to retreat from the commitment to
peace — and we have heard no statement to that effect —
mistrust cannot be allowed to express itself through
disregard for international law, or through terrorism or other
forms of violence.
The prospects for a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the question of the city of Jerusalem have come
to the forefront of our attention. Action with respect to
Jerusalem which threatens to erode laboriously-achieved
progress as regards other localities should be avoided at all
cost. The capacity to put aside mutual hostility and engage
in constructive dialogue has already been displayed. It must
be regained and strengthened through intensified
consultation and negotiations. Permanent-status negotiations
between the parties should aim at establishing freedom of
religion and conscience, as well as free unhindered access
to the Holy Places by the faithful of all religions and
nationalities.
The hopes of the long-suffering populations of the
Middle East have been raised by the vision of a future of
peace. Their leaders, with the support of the international
community, have made significant strides in that direction.
Solutions will not be durable, however, if intransigence
prevails over the capacity to look for compromise. Brazil is
convinced that the most promising opportunity for peace in
a generation must be seized in earnest. We urge the parties
to resume contacts, in good faith, on the basis of
agreements already reached, and to seek inspiration in their
own achievements since Madrid in their search for lasting
peace.
Mr. Diatta (Niger) (interpretation from French): A
few months ago, during the Assembly’s general debate at
its fifty-first session, my country from this rostrum
welcomed the progress made in the Middle East thanks to
difficult but essential dialogue between Israel and the
representatives of the Palestinian Authority towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian
question, which is the core of the Middle East conflict. On

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
that occasion my country also expressed fear that this
positive dynamic could come to an end if the United
Nations did not play its proper role: that of keeping the
Middle East from descending into a new war with an
unforeseeable outcome.
Niger therefore welcomed the convening of this
emergency special session of the General Assembly to
consider the decision of the Israeli authorities to establish
a new settlement in occupied East Jerusalem. The serious
deterioration of the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories resulting from that decision gives rise to grave
concerns on the part of the international community about
the success of the peace process initiated at Madrid on the
basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978), and on the basis of the principle
of land for peace.
In this climate of tension it is the duty of the
General Assembly to take the measures necessary to save
the peace process to which all of us here are deeply
committed. This is all the more vital because the Security
Council has been unable to ensure that the voice of
justice is heard.
In terms of saving the peace, my country believes
that only strict and complete implementation of the peace
agreements that have already been concluded can enable
all parties unequivocally to translate into deeds the desire
for peace that motivates them and that they have clearly
proclaimed at this session. At this stage of the
negotiations, the international community must thus
prevent any geographic or demographic change that could
prejudge the final status of Jerusalem, and must view as
illegal any action taken to that end.
In the same vein, my country considers Al-Quds AlSharif to be an integral part of the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967 and therefore considers that all
provisions relating to the other occupied territories,
contained in the resolutions of both the General Assembly
and the Security Council, must be applied to it.
It is within our power to secure the triumph of the
dialogue and justice that form the basis for a future of
peace and security in the Middle East, a future which
must include the exercise by the Palestinian people of
their inalienable rights, including those relating to the
establishment of an independent State. Thus, in this
difficult phase of the peace process, everything must be
done, as a matter of priority, to restore trust among the

15

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
various parties and thus to accelerate the negotiations with
a view to full implementation of the agreements.
For its part, my country, which supported the
convening of this emergency special session, hopes that this
session will enable the international community
unambiguously to come out against the building of new
housing at Jabal Abu Ghneim, and against all unilateral
measures that could endanger the peace process.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): A year ago it would have
been beyond our wildest dreams that the General Assembly
would be meeting in an emergency special session to
consider illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territories. There
was hope for a peaceful resolution of the Middle East
conflict, particularly with regard to the Palestinian question.
Unfortunately, the actions of the Government of Israel in
the last few months have made it abundantly clear that this
could still be another missed opportunity for peace in the
Middle East. The right of the State of Israel to exist within
secure and internationally recognized borders is in no doubt
in our minds. The enjoyment of this right by the Israelis
cannot, however, be based on depriving the Palestinians of
the enjoyment of a similar and equal right.
Israel has a claim to Jerusalem as its capital based on
historical, political and religious considerations. And so do
the Palestinians. This means that the final status of
Jerusalem can be determined only through painstaking and
comprehensive negotiations, and not through unilateralism.
No attempt should therefore be made by either side to preempt the outcome of such negotiations, in any way
whatsoever, including tampering with the present physical
map of the city. The future status of Jerusalem is
understandably a highly emotive issue for both the
Palestinians and the Israelis, and it cannot therefore be
subject to unilateral action without inviting a response of
some kind from the other side.
Botswana totally abhors violence, even though we at
times understand the despair and desperation of those who
resort to the use of violent means to register their
frustration, having been left without any alternative. Peace
with security for Israel should also translate into peace with
security for the Palestinians, including the security of their
entitlement to a part of Jerusalem. Permanent peace cannot
be built on the foundation of ever-escalating levels of
provocation by one side, nor on the graves of the sons and
daughters of both Palestine and Israel. Permanent peace can
be established only through trust and mutual understanding.
Israel’s claims and aspirations cannot and should not be

16

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
attained at the expense of similar Palestinian claims and
aspirations, and vice versa. There can be no superior
claim over the city of Jerusalem in this regard.
This emergency special session is a clear
manifestation that the overwhelming majority of the
States Members of the United Nations are agreed that the
construction of the new settlements in East Jerusalem
jeopardizes the peace process, and that these States are
ready to stand up and speak for the protection of the
peace process. The special session was not convened
merely to express solidarity with the hopes and
aspirations of the Palestinian people and nation, although
there would be nothing wrong with doing so because
theirs are legitimate hopes and aspirations. The session
was convened to express the bewilderment of the Member
States at the blatant and unnecessary threat to the peace
process and to make Israel understand and appreciate the
international frustration and concern brought by the
construction of the new settlements. We hope that the
Government of Israel will also understand that its actions
are not in the interest of the peace of Israel itself. The
message would have been even more loud and clear if the
United Nations could have spoken with one voice on this
occasion. Israel would have realized the isolation of its
position and abandoned the construction of these new
settlements.
It took many painful years of negotiations for the
peace process to reach its present stage, and it would not
be in the interest of regional peace to reverse the gains
made so far. The construction of new settlements in East
Jerusalem would have exactly that undesired result —
hence the deep concern of the international community.
Our wish and prayer are that the Government of Israel
will heed the international disquiet caused by the
construction of the new settlements in East Jerusalem and
abide by the letter and spirit of the peace agreements
Israel freely entered into with the Palestine Liberation
Organization.
Mr. Kim Chang Guk (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): The principle of land for peace is the
nucleus of the Middle East peace process. Israel has been
insisting that the issue of the construction of Jewish
settlements should be resolved between Israel and
Palestine on a bilateral basis, instead of being deliberated
at the United Nations. However, Israel has made a
unilateral decision on the construction of the Jewish
settlements, in violation of its agreements with the
Palestinians.

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
By bringing new Jews to settle in East Jerusalem,
Israel is pursuing its goal of changing the demographic
composition and legal status of East Jerusalem and,
ultimately, of perpetually occupying East Jerusalem. Such
acts on the part of Israel are in contravention of the United
Nations resolutions on Palestine and relevant international
law, and therefore it is natural that these acts are being
denounced by the international community.
Moreover, the international community is gravely
concerned over the fact that these Israeli acts will create an
obstacle to the peaceful resolution of the Middle East
question. There can be no peace in occupied lands. Israel
cannot enjoy peace even if it uses its might to enforce
peace in the occupied territories.
It is the sacred right of people in occupied countries
to strive for freedom and liberation. It is a law that, where
there is occupation and repression, there is resistance. If
Israel sincerely desires to coexist in harmony with its Arab
neighbours, it should recognize this historic truth.
The issue of the Middle East should be resolved fairly
and comprehensively on the principle of land for peace.
The legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including
the right to establish an independent State, should be
restored and Israel should withdraw from all occupied Arab
territories. Above all, Israel should immediately halt its
construction of new Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem.
For decades, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has extended its support, both material and spiritual,
to the just cause of the Arab peoples. And we are proud of
this. The world has changed a lot. However, our support for
the Arab peoples has never changed. In the future, too, we
will firmly stand on the side of the Arab peoples until they
achieve their just cause.
Mr. Guillén (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): In
the years since the United Nations decided to create two
States and to establish Jerusalem as a corpus separatum, the
Organization has witnessed struggles that have completely
changed the territories that were to have served as the
demarcated borders of those two States.
For that reason, Peru, like the great majority of States
Members of the United Nations, has consistently supported
and co-sponsored resolutions endorsing the agreements
reached in Oslo and Madrid as well as the peace process to
which the parties involved have committed themselves.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
Hence, the expansion and resumed construction of
settlements in territories that were to have been
exchanged for peace and security within internationally
recognized borders are unacceptable and in contradiction
of the decisions of the Security Council and international
law. It is also unacceptable to see Jerusalem divided on
the basis of a de facto situation obtained by force.
The General Assembly is meeting for a second
time — now in an emergency special session — because
the final status of Jerusalem, which was to have been
discussed at the end of the peace process, has been and
continues to be violated by the construction under way in
Jabal Abu Ghneim.
The eastern zone of Jerusalem is protected by the
principles contained in Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 252 (1968) and 338 (1973), which determined that
Israel can have no sovereignty over those territories.
Jerusalem must therefore be protected by
international law. Moreover, it must be fully respected
because the General Assembly, in resolution 181 (II) of
1947, emphatically called for holy places, religious
sanctuaries and buildings to be respected, with clear
freedom of access, visitation and transit. Legally and
politically, any peace agreement must also contain
internationally guaranteed provisions reiterating and
ensuring the freedom of men and women of all faiths of
the world to visit Jerusalem, which must be a capital of
spirituality, faith and tolerance.
Since 1947, the United Nations has guaranteed any
Member of this Organization the right to resort to the
General Assembly to point out any threat or infraction of
the Jerusalem regime. This General Assembly’s objective
must be to send an urgent message to all parties involved
that the peace process should be resumed immediately
and to reject these acts, which are contrary to established
international agreements.
Peru maintains that the Assembly’s draft resolution
must emphatically, now more than ever, call for
abstention from of any act of violence on the part of
either party, wherever, by whomever and against
whomever these may occur.
Mr. Valencia Rodríguez (Ecuador) (interpretation
from Spanish): The delegation of Ecuador wishes to stress
the following aspects of the question under consideration.

17

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
First, the City of Jerusalem is of particular political,
historic and religious importance. It is the centre that has
long exercised an undeniable political influence in the
maintenance of the peace and security not only of the
region, but throughout the world, as a result of the
ramifications and interests involved. It has a lengthy history
entwined with the evolution of human thought, since it is
one of the world’s crossroads for various distinct
civilizations. It is the cradle for the three major
monotheistic religions that have shaped the destiny of a
large portion of humanity.
Secondly, an expression of the international
community’s interest has been the United Nations
involvement in the situation in Jerusalem almost since the
Organization’s very creation. This situation cannot be seen
outside the general context of the longstanding and difficult
problem in the Middle East, in which the primary actors are
currently Israel and the Palestinian people.
In view of that situation, Ecuador wishes to reiterate
the validity of the following principles, which constitute the
cornerstones of our international policies. First, the use or
threat of use of force in international relations is proscribed.
Secondly, the acquisition or occupation of territories by
illegal procedures or means, primarily the threat or the use
of force, are rejected. Thirdly, all States are obligated to
resort to peaceful means in the settlement of disputes and
to seek, in good faith and in a spirit of true cooperation, a
solution to existing conflicts and disputes between them.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
this relevance, we have come here not to fan the flames
of dispute and contradiction, but rather to seek agreement
and understanding.
As this century draws to a close, we have shrugged
off the deep tension produced by the prolonged period of
cold war. We have been able to avoid the confrontation
that has paralysed so many initiatives and made it
difficult to create a world of reduced tension and
increased trust.
We are living in a period that we have called the
post-cold-war era, but we are simply seeking new
international balances and solutions for the many
problems that have built up in the past and for others that
have assumed new form in the present. In the face of all
of this, however, we must find an answer and seek
harmony with the new circumstances facing the
international community.
Given this situation, we must preserve the peace
process in the Middle East, respecting the rights of the
parties to the dispute. We must not promote clashing
views, but, on the contrary, help resolve them in the most
peaceful and appropriate way possible so as to promote
international trust.

With regard to the draft resolution before us, the
delegation of Ecuador will determine its position on the
basis of prior considerations and with the consistent
objective of promoting a peaceful solution to the problem,
bringing the parties to the conflict together and ensuring
that it does not become a source of renewed confrontation.

My country wishes to take the opportunity of this
special session to speak clearly and directly so that what
we say here will, first, not hinder ongoing developments
and will, secondly, strengthen the United Nations, whose
mechanisms must be flexible and efficient enough to
respond at any given moment in support of international
order and world peace. On the one hand, we must
preserve justice for the parties to the dispute and, on the
other, strengthen the international mechanisms established
by international law for managing conflicts and disputes.
We therefore favour the adoption of consensus formulas
that will not contribute to damaging the rights of any of
the parties, but will strengthen those of all members of
the international community, especially those in the
Middle East that have faced harsh conflicts throughout
history, particularly in recent years of the twentieth
century.

Mr. Escovar-Salom (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): Arguments of varying force and direction have
been heard at this meeting of the General Assembly. The
fact is that we are here to consider a problem whose effects
are reflected in a context of significance to all members of
the international community, though we do not dismiss the
fundamental importance of bilateral negotiations. In view of

My statement would not be complete if I did not
refer to the specific situation of Jerusalem, which must
become the world archetype for brotherly coexistence,
since in it originated the major religions that have
millions of devotees. A climate of religious tolerance,
guaranteed by political and spiritual freedom, is not only
necessary for life and for the activities of Jerusalem, but

In applying these principles, it is necessary to
encourage negotiations between the opposing parties to the
conflict in the Middle East, in which they can count on
understanding and support from the international
community and the valid assistance of States that have
traditionally striven to assist the parties to the conflict.

18

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
a symbol for the entire world. What I, as the Permanent
Representative of Venezuela to the United Nations, am
saying here is nothing new. The General Assembly has
been proposing such an approach and arrangement since
1947.
In our efforts to strengthen trust, we hope that the
bilateral negotiations will continue to develop in a climate
of creativity, honesty and mutual good faith. Serious
conflicts have taken place in the Middle East over the past
50 years. We have been able to overcome them; the
international community has had the strength and the
instruments to do that. But we must safeguard the future
and prepare the way for the twenty-first century in a
climate of greater coexistence, trust and solidarity.
For all of those reasons, Venezuela has come here to
support formulas for coexistence, consensus, commitment,
peace, harmony and international solidarity, which will not
exacerbate confrontation but facilitate understanding and
peace.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 3369 (XXX) of 10 October 1975, I
now call on the Observer for the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.
Mr. Ansay (Organization of the Islamic Conference):
On behalf of His Excellency Mr. Laraki, the
Secretary-General of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC), I thank you, Sir, for calling on me to
address the General Assembly at its tenth emergency
special session, on the illegal Israeli actions in occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory.
At the outset, let me reiterate what I said in my
statement last month to this body: contrary to the
expectations of all of us, the situation in Palestine is not
getting any better, but becoming more bitter. We in the
OIC joined the international community in supporting the
peace process in the Middle East, despite some of the
disadvantageous elements in the agreements affecting
Palestinian interests. We had, in fact, hoped for a future of
peace in the area because of the signs of progress that
appeared after the early stages of the implementation of the
Oslo accords. We had welcomed last January’s agreement
on the redeployment of Israeli troops from Al-Khalil and
were prepared to continue to extend our support for the
attainment of the agreed goals and objectives of the peace
process.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
With great sadness, I have to say that not only our
hopes, but those of all well-wishers in the international
community, are now shattered by the regrettable turn of
events in Palestine, the responsibility for which lies with
Israel, and Israel alone. For it is Israel that has brought
about the turmoil, through a series of violations of various
elements of the peace agreements. It was the Israeli
decision to build a new settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim
in East Jerusalem that constituted its latest attempt at
pre-empting the outcome of negotiations on the final
status, by trying to change the legal status and
demographic composition of Jerusalem, a city which is of
central importance for not only the Arab world but also
the entire Muslim world, being the first Kiblah and the
third Holy City of Islam, and for all three major religions,
as well as for the international community. The Israeli
decision clearly violates the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations Security Council and General Assembly,
the Declaration of Principles and subsequent agreements.
It also threatens to undermine whatever progress has thus
far been achieved in the Middle East peace process.
At the Security Council meeting held on 5 March
1997, the Islamic group at the United Nations called on
the international community, including the Security
Council, to take urgent steps to ensure that the
Government of Israel reversed its decision and renounced
settlement activity in all the Arab occupied territories, in
particular East Jerusalem. Unfortunately, the Council
failed to take a position on the issue, necessitating the
convening of the General Assembly on 12 March, and
now this emergency special session. In this context, I
would like to inform the Assembly that the situation in
Holy Jerusalem will be the principal subject to be raised
by the Secretary-General of the OIC at his meetings with
the President of the General Assembly, the President of
the Security Council, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, during his visit to New York next week,
following his contacts this week in Palestine with
President Arafat and in Amman with the Jordanian
authorities.
We want to maintain the spirit of our solidarity with
the peace process in the Middle East, and we reiterate our
condemnation of this latest decision by the Israeli
Government concerning East Jerusalem, as we did after
another provocative action by Israel: the opening of the
tunnel under the Western wall of the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque. We also wish to register our dismay at the
Israeli attempt to redeploy from only an additional 2 per

19

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
cent of the West Bank, instead of making a meaningful,
effective and complete withdrawal from that Palestinian
territory.
I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
OIC’s position that a comprehensive and lasting peace in
the region cannot be achieved without the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) which, inter alia, emphasize that Jerusalem
is part and parcel of the territories occupied since 1967.
The President took the Chair.
We in the OIC continue to believe in the necessity —
indeed, the urgency — for the Security Council to
implement all of its relevant resolutions, including 252
(1968), 267 (1969), 465 (1980), 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and
1073 (1996), which all concern Jerusalem, as well as to
take all the necessary measures to prevent Israel from
altering the geographical and demographic status of
Jerusalem and from taking any action which in any way
affects the status of Jerusalem, the final status of which has
yet to be discussed in the subsequent stages of the peace
process.
At this point, I would refer to the view now being
advanced by one or two Member States to the effect that
the United Nations may not be the proper place to deal with
the issue of Palestine. This is, strangely enough, being said
about the world body which was established 51 years ago
in order
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war...to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person...and...to
establish conditions under which justice and respect
for the obligations arising from treaties and other
sources of international law can be maintained”.
I have quoted these words from the Charter of the
United Nations and, certainly, no Member State can deny
that. Nor can it be denied that the Oslo accords and all
other agreements flowing from those accords stem from the
spirit, principles and relevant provisions of the Charter.
Bilateral negotiations between two equals emerging
from the Oslo accords are welcome and would continue to
be of value so long as one of the two parties involved does
not assume the weight of the strong and tries to subdue the
weak. Once this happens, as Israel is doing now, it becomes
incumbent upon the weak, in this case the Palestinians, to
look to the United Nations for strength so that Israel may

20

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
be persuaded to adjust its conduct appropriately in the
implementation of the peace accords and try to become as
judicious and reasonable in its negotiations and deeds in
Palestine and in Jerusalem as the General Assembly
would expect it to be.
We would now urge the General Assembly once
again to play its role and to use its influence to bring an
end to the continuation of Israeli intransigence, as
demonstrated in its settlement policies in the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories, including its attempt at
the Judaization of occupied East Jerusalem. We would
appeal to the General Assembly to consider all these
Israeli policies and practices as blatant violations of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
agreements — especially the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 — and pronounce itself accordingly.
Through you, Sir, we would also again request the
international community to persuade Israel to lift the siege
around Jerusalem and to stop the implementation of all its
decisions and practices that are adversely affecting the
interests of the Palestinian people, especially the
confiscation of Palestinian lands, the demolishing of
Palestinian properties and houses, the withdrawal of
identity cards issued to Palestinians — which is designed
to expel them from Jerusalem — and the restrictive
measures that are preventing the freedom of movement of
persons and goods, not only between the territories of
Palestine and Israel, but also within the Palestinian
territory itself and between it and the outside world. All
of this is not only continuing the disruption of Palestinian
civilian lives, but is also preventing any of the viable
development of the Palestinian economy required under
the Oslo accords. We also urge the General Assembly to
prevent Israeli excavations around the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and to cease forthwith the violations of the Islamic and
Christian Holy Places in Jerusalem.
I would like to reassure the General Assembly
through you, Sir, as I have done in the Security Council
and in the Assembly before, that as soon as the necessary
measures to restore peace and security in the area have
been undertaken — thus improving the environment for
the resumption of the peace process — the OIC and its 54
member States, which represent the very serious concerns
of more than one billion Muslims all over the world, will
reinforce their whole-hearted support of the peace process
in the fulfilment of their collective desire to see peace and
tranquillity return to the area.

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
In conclusion, I would refer to the draft resolution
before the General Assembly today, which contains a fair
and judicious approach to the continuation of the peace
process in the Middle East. Its adoption by the Assembly
will send the correct and timely signal to the area that the
international community is not indifferent to the peace
process, but rather is most concerned about it and expects
and demands a fair and judicious dealing by Israel in that
process; which currently should be under way.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on the
debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.1.
Before calling on the first speaker in explanation of
vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats. Having said that,
I would like to appeal to all those delegations that will be
making explanations of vote before or after the vote that,
due to the lateness of the hour, they try to be as brief as
possible in the explanations of vote before or after the vote.
I shall now call on the representatives who wish to
explain their votes before the voting.
Mr. Peleg (Israel): In my statement yesterday, I
emphasized that there can be no substantive or procedural
justification for the convening of this emergency special
session. I am even more certain of this having read the
draft resolution circulated last evening.
The Middle East peace process has no need for
another forum to hurl heated and heedless rhetoric or
another resolution detached from reality and devoid of
even-handedness. The people of that region are looking for
solutions and answers. They will not find them in this draft
resolution.
Direct negotiations have been and will continue to be
the only viable and effective solution to the problems of our
region. This is indisputable. Since the convening of the
Madrid Peace Conference in 1991, we have achieved
dramatic and historical progress. But this was accomplished
only when the parties engaged in face-to-face
negotiations — sometimes around the clock and for weeks
on end —
tirelessly seeking agreement through
compromise.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
While this draft resolution contains many contentious
elements, I would like to confine my remarks to one
central theme.
At this critical juncture, no resolution regarding the
peace process by this or any other body can afford to
ignore the acute and pressing problems of terror and
violence. This requires more than a passing bland
reference buried in the draft resolution generically
rejecting terror. It also requires a complete rejection of
any incitement to violence. The peace process cannot be
sustained unless there is a categorical and unambiguous
commitment by all of the parties to prevent and combat
terror and violence.
The Palestinian Authority must work resolutely on
the ground to root out those known elements that prepare
and perpetrate acts of terror. Allow me to emphasize that
Israel and the Palestinian Authority know who and where
these terrorists are. The stakes are too high for the
Palestinian Authority to say one thing and do another.
We were therefore taken aback by the remarks of the
Observer of Palestine yesterday from the podium, which
called for the Palestinians to take to the streets to protest.
Statements such as these are not what we expect of the
Palestinians and should be condemned unequivocally by
the international community. They have real effects on
the ground.
Over the last 24 hours, a number of violent incidents
have occurred in the Jerusalem area. An incendiary device
was thrown at a bus, rocks were hurled at Israeli vehicles
and an Israeli was stabbed in Jerusalem. These incidents
all took place, if I may borrow the phrase of the Observer
of Palestine, in the streets, while this debate occurred.
The draft resolution before us does not send the right
message to the peoples of the region, in particular to the
Palestinians. The message must be that the peace process
will go forward and that violence and terror are
illegitimate and unacceptable. It is for this reason that
Israel will vote against the draft resolution and calls on
other countries to do the same.
Mr. Seyoum (Eritrea): The State of Eritrea attaches
great importance to the issue of peace in the Middle East
and has been following developments in that region with
keen interest in the past years.
It was the decision of the Israeli Government to
build a new settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim, to the south

21

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
of East Jerusalem, that brought about the convening of this
emergency special session after the matter failed to be
resolved in the Security Council Chamber. It is regrettable
that this had to happen, but in the conflict between the
Israelis and the Palestinians, insecurity in the region goes
beyond the dispute over the construction of new
settlements. The central issue is the basic principle of the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination, which my
Government considers crucial to the achievement of peace
in the Middle East.
My Government fervently believes in the exercise by
the Palestinian people of their right to self-determination
through the establishment of an independent homeland. It
is the conviction of my Government that a just, stable and
lasting peace cannot prevail in the Middle East without the
realization of this fundamental right.
Any agreement, resolution or continuation of the peace
process that does not guarantee this in clear language would
serve neither the interests of the Israelis or the Palestinians
nor regional security and stability. It is dismaying that past
United Nations resolutions pertaining to peace in the
Middle East have fallen short of this goal, as does the draft
resolution before us today.
The future status of the city of Jerusalem is another
matter of great concern that should be looked at in an
international context. In this respect, my Government agrees
with the recommendation contained in operative
paragraph 11 of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.1.
Finally, upon instructions from my Government, the
delegation of the State of Eritrea will vote in favour of
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.1, on which the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly is about to take
action.
Mr. Albin (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
The Government of Mexico supported the convening of this
emergency special session on the basis of the historical
Mexican position of support for the right of each and every
State to bring to the attention of the General Assembly all
issues of interest to it.
Independently of that fact, it is of concern to us that
the Security Council was unable to take a stand on the item
currently under consideration. We are here today because
of the repeated use of the veto, a privilege that we would
like to see abolished, and certainly not granted to any other
Members.

22

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
The Government of Mexico has resolutely supported
the Middle East peace process. Mexico is convinced that
dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes are, and
will always be, a better alternative than violence or
confrontation. The building of new settlements by the
Israelis in East Jerusalem runs counter to international law
and to the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
These activities predetermine and endanger the peace
process.
Mexico reiterates once again its condemnation of
terrorist acts, which kill and injure innocent people and
can never in any way be justified. One of the foundations
of the peace process begun at Madrid is the principle of
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force.
This fundamental premise of international law has led, in
world public opinion, to the expression “land for peace”.
We recognize the political validity of this phrase, which
is in line with the foundations of the peace process.
However, we would have preferred that, as the
formulation of a legal principle, it be more rigorously
worded.
Finally, we call upon the parties to respect the
commitments entered into and to re-establish the
necessary conditions for reactivating and accelerating the
peace process. It is for this reason that my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us today.
Mr. Holter (Norway): Norway has on several
occasions urged the Government of Israel to reconsider its
decision to establish a new settlement in Jabal Abu
Ghneim/Har Homa, in East Jerusalem. I take this
opportunity to reiterate our appeal to the Israeli
Government to respect the spirit of the Oslo agreements
and not to proceed with unilateral activities which change
the facts on the ground and thus pre-empt the outcome of
the negotiations on the final status of Jerusalem.
It is also with great concern that we recently have
witnessed new terrorist acts against innocent Israeli
civilians and a resurgence of violence. Terrorism must be
condemned in the strongest possible terms, and it is of
vital importance that all necessary efforts be made to
prevent it. The utmost efforts must be made to break this
spiral of violence, which could derail the peace process.
Norway remains convinced that the current crisis in
the peace process can be solved only by the parties
themselves, through direct negotiations, as foreseen in the
Oslo agreements. We therefore urge the parties to show
restraint and to respect and implement both the letter and

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
the spirit of the agreements, and to work together towards
a lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
While we may not have problems with the main
elements in the draft resolution before us, we nonetheless
are concerned that its adoption at the present time will not
be conducive to the goal which we are all seeking, namely
the early resumption of negotiations between the parties, in
accordance with the Oslo agreements. Against this
background, my delegation will abstain on the draft
resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting. The General
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.1.
I should like to announce that, since the introduction
of the draft resolution, the following countries have become
its sponsors: Cambodia and Maldives.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Micronesia (Federated
United States of America

States of),

Abstaining:
Australia, Canada, Germany, Latvia, Liberia,
Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Norway, Romania,
Rwanda, Uruguay
The draft resolution was adopted by 134 votes to 3,
with 11 abstentions (resolution ES-10/2).
The President: Before calling on representatives
wishing to speak in explanation of vote, I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Russian delegation is pleased to
acknowledge the excellent work done by the sponsors of
the resolution that the General Assembly has just adopted.
They took into account proposals and amendments to the
original text from a number of delegations, including
mine.
In its current form, the resolution seems to us
adequately to reflect the seriousness of the situation in the
Middle East peace process that came about as a result of
the start of construction on a new settlement at Jabal Abu
Ghneim in East Jerusalem and other acts by Israel in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The Russian delegation
therefore voted in favour of the draft resolution.
At the same time, we wish to explain our position on
a number of its provisions. Specifically, the reference in
paragraph 11 to internationally guaranteed provisions
regarding the status of the Holy Places in Jerusalem has
no direct relation to the topic of the resolution. My
delegation holds to the premise that the status of the Holy
Places in Jerusalem is a subject for Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations; for that reason, this “innovation” in the text
is a premature provision that must not be seen as
imposing a solution to this matter.

23

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
Mr. Minoves-Triquell (Andorra), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
As regards the expression of concern in the fourteenth
preambular paragraph about the activities of armed Israeli
settlers and the rejection in operative paragraph 12 of
terrorism, we want to stress the need for liaison between
the two parties in the area of security and for
implementation by the parties of all their commitments
under the relevant agreements. In that context we stress the
importance of paragraph 10, which urges the parties to do
this.
As a co-sponsor of the peace process, Russia also
views the reference to Security Council resolution
425 (1978) as somewhat inappropriate in the context of the
Madrid conference. At the same time, on the basis of our
principles, we support Security Council resolution 425
(1978) as a basis for a settlement between Lebanon and
Israel.
We hope that the adoption of today’s resolution at this
emergency special session of the General Assembly will
help create favourable conditions for the resumption of the
Middle East peace process and for the earliest possible
settlement of pending problems.
Mr. Abou-Hadid (Syrian Arab Republic)
(interpretation from Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic was a strong supporter of convening the
tenth emergency special session of the General Assembly,
devoted to a discussion of illegal Israeli actions in occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory. My delegation was among the first to inform the
Secretary-General of its support for the convening of the
session.
Because of its national sense of responsibility, my
country continues very strongly to support the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including the right of
return, the right to self-determination, and the right to the
establishment of an independent State on its own territory
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We consider that the
Palestinian question is at the core of the Israeli-Arab
conflict. In that connection, we reaffirm once more our firm
support for the Middle East peace process, initiated at
Madrid in 1991 on the basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), and on the basis of
the principle of land for peace.
Syria remains ready to resume the peace process from
the point it had reached in Washington. We believe that the

24

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
present Israeli Government must respect and implement
the commitments and promises undertaken by the
previous Israeli Government regarding full withdrawal
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of
4 June 1967.
My delegation voted in favour of today’s resolution
because it believes that the construction and expansion of
Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories
undermines the peace process and jeopardizes the peace
and security of the region and of the entire world. We
would at the same time like to clarify our position on a
number of paragraphs in the resolution.
First, with reference to paragraph 7, my delegation
reaffirms that all Israeli settlement activities in the Arab
territories occupied since 1967 are illegitimate and must
be considered null and void and in violation of the
principles of international law.
Turning, secondly, to paragraph 11, we would have
preferred the resolution not to include such a vague
paragraph on the status of Jerusalem. Owing to the
sensitivity of the issue and the importance of the city of
Jerusalem, this paragraph distances us from the crux of
the matter under discussion and, in fact, takes us in the
wrong direction. The status of Jerusalem has been
addressed in relevant United Nations resolutions, and we
consider that it would have been appropriate to make
reference to these.
Thirdly, as for operative paragraph 12, we consider
that the inclusion of this paragraph conflicts with the
content of the resolution, which focuses on the
illegitimacy of Israeli settlement activities in the Arab
lands that were occupied by force. These activities
contravene the most basic principles and rules of
international law. The inclusion of paragraph 12 derails
the resolution and has no place in its text.
Mr. Rowe (Australia): Australia has in the past
supported and continues to support the principles
underlying the resolution which the General Assembly has
just adopted. We also strongly endorse the rejection,
contained in the text, of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.
But Australia’s fundamental interest is in the
resumption of negotiations between the parties, in order
to move further towards a just, enduring and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Australia
considers that there is an urgent need to re-establish trust

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
and confidence between the parties as a prerequisite for
progress. We are deeply concerned that the resolution will
do nothing to advance the achievement of that result, and
we therefore abstained in the voting.
Mr. Henze (Germany): Germany would like to
explain its vote by stressing that, from the beginning, it
considered the text of the resolution unbalanced. We
therefore abstained in the voting. We would like to state,
however, that Germany supports the position of the
European Union member States concerning Israeli
settlements in East Jerusalem.
Mr. Fowler (Canada): Canada abstained in the voting
on the resolution entitled “Illegal Israeli actions in occupied
East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory”. It is Canada’s view that the resolution is not
helpful at this critical juncture of the Middle East peace
process.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
Declaration the General Assembly adopted during the
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations reaffirming the
right of peoples to resist foreign occupation, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and
international law. We also reiterate our condemnation of
Israeli terrorism, which is manifest in the ongoing acts of
violence committed by Israeli settlers and the Israeli
Army throughout occupied Arab territory.
Secondly, we are considering the question of the
Israeli occupation and the establishment of settlements,
including in Jerusalem. Any such illegal activity should
be condemned. True to our consistent policy, we should
state that the two parties should negotiate the permanent
status of the Holy City in conformity with the principles
of the Madrid peace agreement and taking into account
the need to ensure full Israeli withdrawal from occupied
Arab territory, including Jerusalem.

Canada is a strong supporter of and an active
participant in the search for a durable and lasting peace in
the Middle East. We are, thus, deeply concerned by the
current impasse in the negotiating process. It is our view
that only through direct dialogue and negotiations can the
parties achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region.

Thirdly, we wish to reaffirm the ongoing relevance
of the peace process agreed to in Madrid, which is based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 425 (1978). We further reaffirm the need for Israel to
comply with the Madrid framework and to resume
negotiations on all those matters on which negotiations
have come to a halt. Israel must respect the principle of
land for peace and withdraw from all occupied Arab
territories.

We oppose any unilateral actions that would prejudge
the outcome of these negotiations. We urge Israel to stop
settlement activity in East Jerusalem and elsewhere in the
occupied territories. In Canada’s view, the construction of
an Israeli settlement at Har Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim is a
violation of international law and harmful to the peace
process. We believe it is incumbent on the parties to honour
and fully implement their existing agreements. This
commitment must include a determined effort on the part
of the Palestinian leadership to combat terrorism.

Mr. Pérez-Otermin (Uruguay) (interpretation from
Spanish): At the earlier meeting of the General Assembly,
Uruguay stated its position clearly opposing Israel’s
policy of establishing new settlements in East Jerusalem.
On this occasion, Uruguay abstained in the voting on the
understanding that, in order to ensure that the peace
process will continue, this matter should be left to
bilateral negotiations between the two parties.

Mr. Samadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My delegation
voted in favour of resolution ES-10/2. However, while
expressing our reservations regarding operative
paragraph 11, I would like to say that my delegation’s vote
in favour of the resolution should not be construed in any
way as recognition of Israel.
Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from
Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
and would like to stress the following points.
First, my delegation would have preferred the
inclusion in the text of an explicit reference to the

The Acting President: The Observer of Palestine
has asked to speak. In accordance with General Assembly
resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and
43/177 of 15 December 1988, I call on the Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from
Arabic): On behalf of the Palestinian people and
leadership and of the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine to the United Nations, I should like to convey
our sincere thanks and appreciation to all the Member
States that supported the convening of this tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly and
the resolution just adopted by an overwhelming majority.

25

General Assembly
Tenth Emergency Special Session
This confirms once again the international community’s
firm position.
This session is undeniably of historic importance for
us, the Palestinian people and the peace process in the
Middle East. It is no exaggeration to say that it is of
historic importance for the work of the United Nations in
general. We now hope that the new, clear message
addressed to Israel, the occupying Power, will help us to
achieve our desired objective, in particular the cessation of
the illegal Israeli actions and a return of the peace process
to its appropriate track. It is our sincere hope that this will
occur in spite of the few negative indications and
irresponsible comments, which we will not address here.

3rd plenary meeting
25 April 1997
At any rate, while we hope that the results will be
positive, we reaffirm that, should Israel choose the wrong
path, we will resort once again to the Security Council
and, if necessary, to this emergency special session.
Once again, I reiterate our sincere thanks to the
General Assembly. It is our hope that, together, we can
contribute to the establishment of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
The Acting President: In accordance with the
resolution just adopted at the present meeting, the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly is
temporarily adjourned.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

26
