TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR
th

MEETING: 29 JANUARY
NEP

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 528) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . , , . . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Ceylon, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, the
People’s Republic of the Congo, the Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/9616 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . . . , . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTEI

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 29 January 1970, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Nsanze TERENCE (Burundi).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern IreIand, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 528)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Ceylon, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal,
the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, the Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone:
Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9616
and Add.1 and 2).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 26 January 1970 addressed to the President of
the Security
Council from the representatives
of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Burundi, Cambodia, Ceylon, Chad,
the Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
the People’s Republic of the Congo, the Philippines,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/B616 and Add.1 and 2)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French): In
accordance with the decision adopted at our last meeting

[1527th meeting], I invite the representative of Turkey,
the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
Mr. Cuhruk, to take a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. N. I;‘uhiwk
(Turkey), President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, took a place at the Security Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Council will now continue its consideration of the item on
the agenda. I should like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to document S/961G/Add.2, which brings to
fifty-six the number of signatories to the letter. Furthermore, members of the Council have before them the draft
resolution submitted by five Powers, namely, Burundi,
Finland, Nepal, Sierra Leone and Zambia [S/9620].
3. Before calling on the speakers on the list, and with the
consent of the members of the Council, I should like to
invite the representative of Finland to take the floor on a
point of order.
4. Mr, JAKOBSON (Finland): I apologize to those representatives who have included their names in the list of
speakers for today for asking to make a brief statement at
this stage on behalf of the sponsors of draft resolution
S/9620, but I think that it would be in the interests of the
Council as a whole, before proceeding with the debate, to
be informed as quickly as possible and without any delay of
certain revisions that the delegations sponsoring the draft
resolution wish to make. Members of the Council know
that consultations have been conducted both within the
Council and with delegations from outside the Council.
Many constructive suggestions have been made in the
course of those consultations about revisions that would
make the draft resolution more widely acceptable, and I
should now like to inform the Council of those revisions,
which will be circulated in writing as soon as possible.
5. The first revision relates to the fourth preambular
paragraph, in which a phrase is added at the beginning. I
shall read the paragraph in its revised form:
“‘ReaJj’irming that the extension and enforcement of
South African laws in the Territory together with the
continued detentions, trials and subsequent sentencing of
Namibians by the Government of South Africa constitute
illegal acts and flagrant violations of the rights of the
Namibians concerned, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and of the international status of the
Territory, now under direct United Nations responsibility”.

other words, the words “the extension and enforcement
of South African laws in the Territory” have been added at
the beginning of the paragraph.
In

6. The next revision concerns paragraph 5. The sponsors
found that the original form of that paragraph seemed to
give rise to misunderstandings. To clarify their intentions
they wish to rephrase the paragraph to read as follows:
“Culls zcpon all States, particularly those which have
economic and other interests in Namibia, to refrain from
any dealings with the Government of South Africa which
are inconsistent with paragraph 2 of this resolution”.
7. In paragraph 6 the sponsors, after their consultations,
have decided to make the proposed committee a sub-cotnmittee of the Security Council under rule 28 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure. The paragraph in
its revised form would read as follows:
‘Decides to establish in accordance with rule 28 of
the provisional rules of procedure an ad hoc sub-committee of the Council to study, in consultation with the
Secretary-General, ways and means by which the relevant
resolutions of the Council, including the present resolution, can be effectively implemented in accordance with
the appropriate provisions of the Charter, in the light of
the flagrant refusal of South Africa to withdraw from
Namibia, and to submit its recommendations by 30 April
1970”.
8. In paragraph 7 we wish to add to the States and
specialized agencies other relevant United Nations organs
which the sub-committee may wish to approach with
requests for information or assistance. In other words, that
paragraph would read as follows:
“‘Requests all States as well as the specialized agencies
and other relevant United Nations organs to give the
sub-committee all the information and other assistance
that it may require in pursuance of this resolution”.
9. In paragraph 8 the original phrase “expert committee”
must of course be changed to read “sub-committee”, and
the same applies to paragraph 9. In other words, paragraph
8 would read:
“Further requests the Secretary-General to give every
assistance to the sub-committee in the performance of its
task;”
and paragraph 9 would read:
“Decides to resume consideration of the question of
Namibia as soon as the recommendations of the sub-committee have been made available”.
10. These are the revisions which the sponsors desire to
make in their text and we hope that they will meet the
wishes of those who have expressed an interest in this
matter.
11. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
on the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, the representative of Turkey.

12, Mr. c~RUK
(Turkey),
President Of the Uniteld
Nations Council for Namibia (interprctatiorl jiOrn F~ncll) :
Mr. president, at the outset I should like to thank you and J
though yo~, all the members of the Council for having
permitted me as President of the United Nations COUII~
for Namibia to participate in this debate in the Security
Council on the question of Namibia.
13. Thus the Security Council is meeting today to
consider a situation which is full of grave implications IlOt
only for the maintenance of international
peace and
security in southern Africa, but also for the prestige an<1
authority of the United Nations, and in particular those 0.f
the Security Council.
14. The Security Council will recall that On 10 Octobelr
1969 the then President of the Council for Namibin,
Ambassador Abdulgani of Indonesia, addressed a letter to
the President of the Security Council [S/9471] in which hc
expressed the grave concern felt by the United Nations
Council for Namibia at the persistent refusal of South
Africa to comply with the terms of Security Council
resolution 269 (1969) of 12 August 1969, which callecll
upon the Government of South Africa to withdraw
its
administration from the Territory immediately and in any
case before 4 October 19 69. The reply of the South African.
Governtnent, contained in the letter from the Foreigrl
Minister dated 26 September 1969 fS/9463, annex I, of
3 October 19691, constitutes the fourth challenge by South
Africa to the authority of the Security Council in violation
of its obligations under Article 25 of the United Nations
Charter.
15. Not only does the situation thus crcatcd represent n
grave challenge to the United Nations on the part of one of
its founding Members, but, as the Council for Namibia has
pointed out, it could not fail to aggravate further n
situation which contains serious threats to international
peace and security.
16. The intransigence of South Africa on the question of
Namibia follows a long and painful historical process, one
so painful indeed as to make it distressing to dwell on. I
would point out, however, that for more than three years
there has existed the almost unanimous decision of the
General Assembly [resolution 2145 (XXIjJ to tcrminatc
the mandate of South Africa over the Territory of Namibia,
known at that time as South West Africa, and to place the
administration of that Territory under the direct responsibility of the United Nations. If the Assembly took that
decision, it was because South Africa had not fulfilled its
obligations under the mandate and had neglected to ensure
the material and moral well-being as well as the security of
the population.
17. Seven months later, on 19 May 1967, in order to meet
its responsibilities,
the Assembly created the Council
[resolution 2.248 F-V)] of which I at present have the
honour of being President, and entrusted it with the task of
administering the Territory and of leading its people t;o
itWetldence
before June 1968, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV). At the same time ~
the Assembly urged the Security Council to take necessary
measures to enable the United Nations Council for Namibin

to carry out its functions and the responsibilities entrusted
to it.

by the territorial bodies. We should also mention the forced
settlement of populations in racially separated zones. All
those measures were taken in flagrant violation of the
international status of Namibia. No notice was taken of the
fact that that Territory is juridically under the responsibility of the United Nations. There can be no doubt that all
those acts are in contravention of the resolutions of the
General Assembly and those of the Security Council.

18. What followed is positively lamentable. From the
outset, the Government of South Africa refused to comply
with General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), dated 27
October 1966, as well as with all the subsequent resolutions, whether they were adopted by the General Assembly
or by the Security Council, in accordance with the
authority vested in them by the Charter.

23. I should like to recall that in resolution 269 (1969) of
12 August 1969-a resolution in which South Africa was
called upon to withdraw from Namibia by 4 October 1969
at the latest-the Security Council reaffirmed the responsibility incumbent upon it to require from every Member
State respect for its obligations in accordance with the
provisions of Article 25 of the Charter.

19. The Government of South Africa has refused to
release its hold on Namibia and has constantly opposed the
establishment of any contact with the Council set up to
administer Namibia, and has also prohibited the latter from
having accessto the Territory.
20. Such a flagrant chailenge to the United Nations and to
the Security Council by a Member is without doubt a
violation of the provisions of Article 25 of the Charter and
represents a threat to the international order on which the
United Nations stands. What is even more grave however is
that South Africa has not limited itself to challenging the
United Nations, but has adopted a series of arbitrary
decisions intended to consolidate and strengthen its illegal
control over the Territory. I should mention, among others,
the use of armed force to put down the groups of the
population that are fighting for their legitimate rights, the
application of repressive measures such as illegal arrest,
deportation, trials and condemnation of Namibians under
the Terrorism Act of March 1967.

24. We should also recall that it was furthermore decided
that if South Africa refused to comply with the provisions
of that resolution, the Security Council would meet
immediately to decide upon effective measures in accordance with appropriate provisions of the relevant chapters of the United Nations Charter.
25. This brief glance at the recent evolution of the
problem of Namibia, where rights and interests are systematically pitted against each other, shows us clearly that we
are confronted by a situation which, if it does not move
towards a satisfactory solution, will inevitably have most
serious consequences. The authority of the Security Council has been openly defied by a Member State and the body
charged with the responsibility of the administration of the
Namibian Territory and of leading its people to independence, the United Nations Council for Namibia, is
unable to fulfil its tasks.

21, As the Council for Namibia underscored in its letter to
the Security Council of 29 August 1969 [S/9420], the
Government of South Africa has not only disobeyed
resolutions 245 (1968) and 246 (1968) of the Security
Council urging that the Namibians arrested under the
‘Terrorism Act be released and repatriated, but has continued holding those trials and has sentenced a new group
of Namibians under that same illegal legislation. The results
of that constant repression and of that intimidation are
manifest in the tension and turmoil prevailing in the
Territory and in the general exodus of populations seeking
refuge in neighbouring countries.

26. In those conditions, and in the light of its previous
decisions, the Security Council must meet the challenge of
South Africa. Any other attitude would be tantamount to
the abdication of its own responsibility.
27. It is evident that the United Nations Council for
Namibia, which I have the honour of representing here, is
deeply interested in any steps that might be taken to speed
up the solution of the Narnibian problem. It is in order to
serve that purpose and to make a useful contribution to the
efforts of the Security Council that the United Nations
Council for Namibia, at its recent meetings, has examined
new ways and means, practical and effective steps, which
would not necessarily stand in the way of the stern
solutions set out in Chapter VII of the Charter and which
only the Security Council can invoke. The United Nations
Council for Namibia is also aware that the application of
such measures is a last resort and, in order to be fully
effective, must receive wide support from the Member
States of the United Nations.

22. In its latest report to the General Assembly,’ the
United Nations Council for Namibia also dealt with the
measures adopted by South Africa to implement the
notorious Odendaal report in order to set up within
Namibia its own system of apartheid, thereby destroying
the unity of the Territory and transforming it into a simple
province of South Africa. I refer in particular to the
promulgation and to the implementation, in complete
illegality, of the act of 1968 on the so-called “development
of self-government” for the indigenous population. Subsequent measures were adopted to create Bantustans for
non-white ethnic groups. We must also mention the
promulgation and implementation in 1969 of the so-called
law on South West African affairs, providing for the
dismemberment of Namibia and the transfer to South
Africa of most of the powers and functions earlier exercised

28. The United Nations Council for Namibia, without
being able to go into the specific details, has already
considered an interim report from a sub-committee entrusted with examining, among other things, the ways and
means of assisting the Security Council to promote the
implementation
of the previous resolutions adopted, and
particularly resolution 269 (19 69).

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, 7iventy-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 24.

3

33. I also wish to pay the highest tribute to the outgoing
President, the representative of Zambia, Mr. Mwaanga. As
President of the Council and as the representative of his
country in the United Nations, he has given ample proof of
his qualities of dynamism, integrity and devotion to the
noble causes of the United Nations. He also displayed. great
tact in handling problems in the Security Council. We offer
our heartfelt felicitations not only to his distinguished
person but also to his great country, Zambia-a leader in
the liberation movement now stirring the world.

29. In the light of the foregoing comments and on behalf
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, I wish to
express the hope that the ad hoc group of experts envisaged
in the draft resolution, if it is set up as the initial draft
provides, will work as quickly as possible and submit to the
Security Council recommendations in keeping with the
views of the United Nations Council for Namibia, that is,
the need for effective action, that the work of the ad hoc
group of experts will tend to complement that being done
by the United Nations Council for Namibia and that, in a
word, the work being done will effectively assist the
Security Council to carry out its heavy responsibilities
towards the Namibian people.

34. We should also like to pay tribute to Algeria, Hungary,
Pakistan, Paraguay and Senegal, the outgoing members of
the Council, for their outstanding contribution to the work
of the Council and for their devotion to the principles of
the Charter.

30, Speaking as representative of Turkey, I should like
nlso to take this opportunity to express the views of my
:ountry on the question of Namibia. The Turkish Government greatly regrets that, in spite of the constant efforts of
the international community, no sign of progress towards a
solution is yet apparent in the problem of Namibia. The
present situation in that country, which is under the
jurisdiction of the United Nations, and the illegal presence
of South Africa are serious sources of concern for Turkey,
not only as a Member of the United Nations but also as a
member of the United Nations Council for Namibia. The
Turkish Government deeply deplores the persistent attitude
of defiance adopted by South Africa towards the world
Organization. The Turkish Government also deplores its
refusal to co-operate with the United Nations in the finding
of a just and equitable solution to this problem which is
repugnant to the conscience of mankind.

3.5. My warmest thanks go to you, Mr, President, iand to
all the representatives in the Council who so far have
welcomed and congratdlated my delegation on assuming its
seat in the Security Council. To all we pledge our full and
unstinted co-operation in supporting the principles of the
Charter and in increasing respect for the implementa,tion of
the work of the United Nations.
36. The Security Council has been convened on an urgent
basis by a letter that has now been signed by fifty-six
Members [S/9616 and Add.1 and 21 to look into the
question of Namibia. The brief contents of that letter are
indeed very significant. It states:
“Upon instructions from our respective Governments,
and with reference to paragraph 6 of Security Council
resolution 269 (1969), we have the honour to request
you to convene, on an urgent basis, the Security Council,
in order to examine the failure of the Government of
South Africa to comply with the letter and spirit of the
above-mentioned resolution and in particular its paragraph 4”.

31. To conclude, I need not recall that the urgent
convening of the Security Council is due to non-compliance
with the terms of resolution 269 (1969), which justifies the
necessity to re-examine the situation arising from the
refusal of the South African Government to comply with
that resolution. The facts of the problem are clear. The
Security Council must make effective the terms of resolution 269 (1969), in which it pledged its full responsibility
to the Namibian people.

I say “significant” because, for those representatives,
including myself, who signed that letter addressed to youa
Mr. President, the basis of our deliberation is paragraph 6 of
resolution 269 (1969), adopted by the Security Council on
12 August 1969. It is relevant, therefore, that we shoulcl
recall that paragraph, which reads as follows:

32. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, I wish first of all,
on behalf of my delegation and personally, to address to
you our most sincere and genuine congratulations on your
election to membership of the Security Council. It certainly
augurs well that the beginning of your term, in this first
month of the year, coincides with your assumption of the
presidency of this high organ of the United Nations. It is
also of the greatest significance that the very first problem
taken up by the Council should be an African problem, and
a problem which not only concerns the African continent
but also stirs the hearts and minds of humanity at large.
The fact that this African problem should be discussed
under your presidency when the United Nations enters the
twenty-fifth year of its life also has far-reaching meaning
and importance. All of us who have known you as a
colleague have recognized in your person the embodiment
of the renaissance of the great African continent. In your
deep knowledge of legal and international problems, as well
as your universal humanistic culture, you represent one of
the summits of achievement of the dynamic new African
generation.

“Decides that, in the event of failure on the part of the
South African Government to comply with the provisions
of the preceding paragraph of the present resolution, the
Security Council will meet immediately to determine
upon effective measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the relevant chapters of the United
Nations Charter”.

37. The Council was not convened after 4 Octoblzr 1969,
the deadline fixed by paragraph 5 of the same resolution,
which calls upon the Government of South Africa to
withdraw its administration from “the Territory immediately and in any case before 4 October 1969”. In
convening now, we are meeting “to determine upon
effective measures in accordance with the appropriate
provisions of the relevant chapters of the United Nations
Charter”.
4

3g. The first question arises, therefore, within the context
of the priority of finding effective solutions to problems
that have not yet been solved, and I cannot find better
words, as we embark on a new era of the United Nations,
than the eloquent words of the representative of Nicaragua,
Mr. Sevilla Sacasa, a veteran of the United Nations and one
of the signers of the Charter, who in his brilliant and
eloquent intervention yesterday stated the following:

regime of Pretoria are deaf and to decide on the course
dictated, before anything else by the dignity of man,
namely, the course of sanctions, the course of liberation,
and by the urgent necessity to aid Africa’s freedom-fighters,
42. A joint communique issued at the final session
yesterday of the fourteen-nation meeting suggested the
establishment of a “committee of sanctions to study the
activities of foreign firms, monopolies or interests dealing
with countries under white minority or foreign rule”. It was
also reported that delegates to that conference seemed
more certain of their position towards colonialism and
apartheid, and agreed that there was no alternative but to
increase aid to the African liberation movements, since
“South Africa and Portugal have rejected the possibility of
a dialogue opened to them” by the Lusaka Manifesto.

“In the search for effective solutions based on fairness
and justice, the Security Council must continue its
all-important work with the knowledge that the eyes of a
hopeful world are fixed on this table.
“If power without justice is tyranny, while justice
without power is a mockery, in the wise words of Pascal,
let us make every effort to combine power with justice,
so that power will always be just and justice will never
cease to be powerful,” /1527th meeting, paras. 93 and
94.1

43. When all efforts at persuasion have thus failed and
resolution after resolution of the United Nations has been
ignored, when the fundamental right of peoples to selfdetermination and freedom from outside domination is
suppressed, the duties incumbent on the highest organ of
the United Nations cannot be subject to controversy.
Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter indicate with clarity and
precision the course to be followed by the Council; this
indeed was charted by resolution 269 (1969) of 12 August
1969. If, nevertheless, imperialist and racist interests and
alliances are allowed to prevail over the larger interests of
the community of nations and peoples and to obstruct the
Council in the discharge of its responsibility, to what role
will the whole fabric of the United Nations be reduced?

39. It is highly regrettable that the Government of South
Africa has once again chosen to oppose the will of the
international community by following a completely negative course. Its failure so far to withdraw its administration
from the Territory of Namibia and its determination to
pursue its occupation of the Territory in defiance of the
resolutions of the United” Nations, including Security
Council resolution 269 (1969), jeopardize the principles of
the Charter, the efficacy of the United Nations and the
hopes of attaining any degree of international justice, peace
and security.

44. Security Council resolution 269 (1969) was not
equivocal. As I have stated, in paragraph 6 the Council
decides to “meet immediately”-and
I repeat---(?0 determine upon effective measures in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of the relevant chapters of the
United Nations Charter”; that is, in case of failure by the
South African Government to comply with the paragraph
calling upon it to withdraw its administration from the
Territory immediately and, in any case, before 4 October
1969.

40. Even the delays occurring in the convening of the
Security Council did not produce any effect in changing the
fundamentally negative stand of the Government of South
Africa. Indeed if any change occurred it was for the worse.
The authorities of South Africa deliberately.escalated their
defiance of the United Nations to new heights of cynicism
by trying to prove, in their letter addressed to the
Secretary-General on 26 September 1969/S/9463, annex I],
that the Namibian people were reaping the benefits of
their benevolent presence; these are arguments usually given
only by the morally bankrupt, who are blinded by the
arrogance of ephemeral power. They go further and
describe their propagation of the abominable practice of
apartheid in Namibia as a step towards the self-determination of Namibians; hence the cleavage that separates them
from the trends of the time and the principles of equality
and justice, a cleavage that renders any dialogue with them
non-viable and futile.

45. There is no need to demonstrate that the Government
of South Africa has failed to do so. As a matter of fact it is
proceeding now to justify its illegal occupation and openly
proclaims that it is maintaining its presence there for ever.
In simple terms, it is annexing Namibia, Does the Council
need further studies before it realizes that this is a flagrant
violation of all norms of international law and morality? Is
it not high time for the Council to prove its existence, to
take decisive measures and effectively discharge its responsibilities?

41. This was the bitter experience and the final conclusion
of the leaders of the central and eastern African countries.
They had, in spite of all the tragedies of the past, extended
to South Africa the possibility of a genuine dialogue by
their Lusaka Manifesto on Southern Africa12 but, in utter
disappointment,
they have met now in Khartoum,3 the
capital of Sudan, to acknowledge that the ears of the

46. Mr. President, undoubtedly the efforts deployed by
you and your colleagues from Zambia, Sierra Leone, Nepal
and Finland aim at helping the Council to meet this
challenge with decisiveness and efficacy. Accprdingly, we
see in the draft resolution presented by Mr, Jakobson of
Finland yesterday [5/9620] on behalf of the sponsors the
relevant preliminary steps towards a decision on the
measures to be employed by the Council in order to give
effect to its decision contained in resolution 269 (1969). If

2 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754.
3 At the Sixth Summit Conference of East and Central African
States held from 26 to 28 January 1970.
5

this is so-and I am commenting on the draft resolution of
yesterday-we would prefer the ad hoc group which is to be
in charge of eliciting this preparatory step to emanate from
the Council itself, because in the last analysis it is the
Council which has to take the ultimate decisions. The
Council can form a committee or a sub-committee of all or
some of its own members to engage immediately in this
study on the effective enforcement of its decisions and
report with the least possible delay.
4’7. If the Council lives up to its responsibilities, the
defiance of the Government of South Africa need not
undermine the authority of the United Nations. It lies
within the hands of the United Nations and especially in
the hands of the Council to take effective measures. If the
narrow interests of certain big Powers obstruct such a
:ourse, the responsibility is theirs and world public opinion
must be aware of where the ills lie. Accordingly, we do not
see that a useful purpose is served by paragraph 3 of the
draft resolution as it still stands.
48. Paragraph 5 is too restrictive. Acts of South Africa on
behalf of Namibia are naturally illegal as they emanate not
from a legitimate but from a usurping Power. The emphasis
should rather be put on refraining from assisting that
usurping Power in any way. That is precisely the tenor of
various General Assembly resolutions, the latest of which is
resolution 2548 (XXIV), in paragraph 6 of which the
General Assembly:
“Requests all States, as well as the specialized agencies
and international institutions, to withhold assistance of
any kind from the Governments of Portugal and South
Africa and from the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia until they renounce their policy of
colonial domination and racial discrimination.”

49. Indeed, a crucial point in envisaging any preparatory
action is the consideration by the Council of how it should
best carry out the obligations of the international community towards the colonial peoples whose struggle to
exercise their right of self-determination and independence
is recognized as legitimate by various General Assembly
resolutions, the latest of which is the resolution just
mentioned, in its paragraph 5.
SO. Finally, the concern felt all through the continents of
Africa and Asia and indeed all through enlightened world
opinion over the disquieting evolution of the question of
Namibia would make it difficult for the Security Council to
desist for a long period from considering the question. The
last paragraph of the draft resolution should be flexible
enough not to bar the Council from resuming consideration
if there is a case of emergency even before the committee
or sub-committee or ad hoc committee completes its work.
51 s These are our suggestions which we humbly think may
improve the draft resolution before us to the satisfaction of
those most directly affected by and concerned over the
deterioration of the situation of their brothers in humanity.
Moved as we are exclusively by a constructive spirit, it is
our earnest hope that these suggestions will be given the
attention they deserve.

52. My delegation considered it its duty to make these
remarks concerning the original draft resolution introduced,
as I said, by Ambassador Jakobson at our last meeting.
Today, at the beginning of this meeting, Ambassador
Jakobson introduced a set of amendments. We promise to
give those amendments the most careful attention and
thank the co-sponsors for this positive step.
53. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my delegation wishes to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, particularly during this
series of meetings which has as its aim the elimination of
colonialism in its worst form on the continent of Africa.
54. My delegation would, in addition, like to congratulate
the representative of Zambia on the most able way in which
he conducted matters as President of the Security Council
last month and the outstanding work his country has done
for liberation movements in southern Africa,
55. We owe a great deal to Algeria, Hungary, Pakistan,
Paraguay and Senegal for their distinguished activities
during the past two years when they were members of the
Council.
56. My delegation wishes to thank the permanent representative of Finland, Ambassador Jakobson, for his .welcome to our delegation and also for introducing the draft
resolution [S/9620], which incidentally has some relevance
to the universality of the problem and to the cont:ribution
which citizens of his country have made for many years to
the development of Namibia. We also wish to thank the
permanent
representative
of Zambia, Ambassador
Mwaanga, and the permanent representative of the United
States, Ambassador Yost, for their very kind words of
welcome yesterday. My delegation looks forward to a
period of co-operation with our colleagues on the Security
Council who were here before us, those who will always be
here, on a permanent basis, and those who like ourselves
have just started on their period of office.
57. Sierra Leone greatly believes in the essential importance of the Security Council and pays a sincere tr:ibute to
its tireless and courageous work towards peace and international security. My delegation fervently hopes that its
efforts will be more successful in this new decade of the
seventies upon which we are now embarking.
58. We have co-sponsored this draft resolution in response
to the duties placed on the Council through its resolution
269 (1969) of 12 August 1969. That resolution decided
that in the event that South Africa did not withdraw
immediately
from the Territory or at the latest by
4October 1969, the Council should meet immediately to
determine upon effective measures in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of the relevant Chapters of the
United Nations Charter. We are now near the end of
January and the immediacy of the matter compels us to
move forward towards some positive action on this matter.
59. The question of Namibia is one which has occupied
the attention of this Council and the General Assembly for
many years. It has recurred regularly but it is fair to say
that on each occasion some progress, however little, has
been made.

60. The position of my delegation on this matter was
clearly stated in the General Assembly by our Minister for
External Affairs last October, when he stated:
“Although South Africa continues to be a Member of
the United Nations, yet it persists in ignoring that body’s
resolutions. Since the termination of South Africa’s
mandate over Namibia and the setting up of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, we have seen no improvement in the attitude of the Vorster regime. Instead, it
continues to implement the Self-Government for Native
Nations of South Africa Act and the South West Africa
Affairs Bill, which give South Africa’s Parliament. and its
central government very wide powers over the affairs of
Namibia and enforce in that Territory the policy of
apartheid and discrimination.
“Increasingly, the actions of the white minorities of
South Africa, Namibia, Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea (Bissau), are forcing the rest of Africa to the
realization that the philosophy of non-violence, as stated
and exemplified by winners of the Nobel Prize of African
origin such as Chief Albert Luthule and Martin Luther
King, which we should have chosen to pursue, is not
practicable in the face of armed force and condonation
by nations which declare themselves democratic. More
and more, Africa is being pushed against its inner will into
a position of violence and revolutionyy4
61, My delegation is aware of the historical background of
the question. When Namibia was conquered by the South
African armed forces in 1915 from a contemporary colonial
Power, it was governed for a few years by them before the
end of the First World War. It appears that the circumstances surrounding the beginning of South Africa’s association with Namibia have persisted in the minds of its leaders
to this day, and to them these circumstances have been
further reinforced by the contiguity of the Territory. It
must be remembered, however, that Algeria was also near
France and had a large European population, but it was
eventually given independence. The repeated attempts of
General Smuts, the South African leader, at the post-war
conferences after the First and Second World Wars, to
annex South West Africa clearly demonstrate the South
African desire to absorb Namibia. The world community
then and now has continued to resist this concept of
Namibia being a fifth province of South Africa. This is
neither the place nor the time to review the various legal
decisions associated with South Africa’s manoeuvres to
continue the occupation of Namibia,

of Namibia, who have themselves a long history of
representative government, have never been allowed representation at the centre. It would perhaps be easy to say that
these complaints might similarly have been levelled against
some of the other colonial Powers, but the past decade or
two have seen those Powers granting independence to their
various colonial Territories and granting material assistmce
to them in varying degrees.
64. The present conditions and development of South
West Africa are not exceptionally different from some of
the Territories which have been given independence, and it
is our considered opinion that there wilt be little progress in
Namibia unless there is international supervision of the
Territory, ensuring that it moves rapidly towards gaining
independence.
65. In 1966, the General Assembly, after a thorough
examination of the situation, decided [resolution 214.5
(XX)] that the actions of South Africa with regard to
South West Africa were of such a nature that the Mandate
assigned to it had rendered itself terminable by all the codes
and standards of nations devoted to the pursuance of peace,
order and progress. That Mandate, which was given to
South Africa to ensure the well-being and security of the
inhabitants of Namibia, has been woefully betrayed by
racial discrimination,
apartheid,
the forced removal of
peaceful citizens from their dwellings, capital punishment,
police brutality and murder.
66. The Security Council, in its resolution 264 (1969) of
last year, recognized the termination of the Mandate and
formally asked South Africa to withdraw its administration
from Namibia. The Security Council followed this a short
while later by condemning South Africa for failing to
comply with the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council: it declared South Africa’s presence in
Namibia illegsh
67. It is very clear that all Member States which subscribe
to the principles of the Charter and all other States should
refrain completely from any recognition of legality of the
actions of South Africa in Namibia.
68. The behaviour of South Africa in this matter has
caused grave misgivings even amongst its friends. It would
probably have been wise, if South Africa had any desire for
peace in Africa, for it to have chosen to make its treatment
of South West Africa an example of a civilized country
willing to adopt the norms and ethics of civilization and
international justice,

63. In the past fifty years little has been done to improve
the well-being of the citizens of that country in spite of the
great wealth possessed by South Africa. For many years,
until recently, it did the minimum possible in meeting the
budgetary requirements of South West Africa. The people

69, Namibia stands out as a case in which, without
infringing on the sovereignty and internal jurisdiction of its
Government, South Africa could quite safely have followed
the example of the colonial Powers, such as Spain, Britain,
France and Belgium, by surrendering its hold on the
Territory and leading the people of South West Africa to
independence. Nothing would have been lost and a great
deal would have been gained if that had been done in a
situation where the tenets of international law and morality
were so clearly evident.

4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1711th meeting, paras.11 and 13.

70, The wearisome persist.ence of South Africa in holding
on to this Territory demonstrates an extraordinary degree

62, The United Nations has been judged to be the
successor to the League of Nations in the role of having
supervisory powers in respect of the obligations which were
entrusted to South Africa under the Mandate in 1920.

of the Charter to counter the refusal of South Africa to
withdraw from Namibia as demanded by Security Council
resolution 269 (1969).

of obstinacy and a troublesome denial of the march of
history towards decolonization and freedom for all men.
7 1. It is now incumbent on this Organization to plan, fully
and thoroughly, methods by which the freedom of Namibia
can be gained, The maintenance of a minority identified by
race alone and not by individual achievement that holds
power in both South Africa and Namibia is an invitation to
force and bloodshed both from within and without as the
only means of correcting that situation. This is an eventuality which not only white nations but also many others
would wish to see avoided. Its own persistent behaviour,
however, is steadily driving South Africa down a dismal
road where it has few friends, apart from Rhodesia,
Mozambique and Angola, which are themselves in a
similarly tense and oppressive state.

77. There have been suggestions in the past for the
formation of a council put forward by Canada, Italy and
the United States’ which called for a comprehensive survey
of the situation in the Territory of its human and material
resources, of its various requirements and of the conditions
which would enable the Territory to achieve self-determination.
78. We very much hope that the present corrunittee
envisaged will not only cover the same ground but lwill also
go much further in mapping out means for the compulsory
withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia.

72. We call upon all States to refrain, in any dealings with
respect to Namibia, from recognizing any right of the
Government of South Africa to act on behalf of the
Territory of Namibia. We must point out that there are
many of us who have decided to operate a total boycott on
South African goods and are doing so, so that South Africa
can realize the abhorrence with which we view not only its
illegal occupation of Namibia but also its denial of human
rights to most of its own citizens.

79. My delegation appeals to all members of the Security
Council to support this draft resolution which has added
force because of its rationality and restraint. We appeal to
all Member States, specialized agencies and international
organizations to grant every possible assistance to this
committee and its work.
80. My delegation cannot conclude without paying a
tribute to the United Nations Council for Namibia and its
Presidents, who have worked hard and steadily since the
Council was established under resolution 2248 (S-V) and
have had little co-operation from the South African
authorities, We reinforce that section of General Assembly
resolution 2588 B (XXIV) on the implementation of the
recommendations of the International Conference on Human Rights which noted with appreciation the efforts of
the United Nations Council for Namibia. The reports of the
Council for Namibia should be of great value to the
committee which we envisage, and the Council’s persistence
in working under such difficult and trying circumstances
will long be remembered in the history of the independent
State of Namibia.

73. We commend those nations and those groups of
citizens in nations still co-operating with South Africa for
the economic pressure they have concentrated and are
concentrating on the latter. It is sometimes said that this is
ineffective; but the example of the success of the bank
campaign against the consortium loan to South Africa
mounted by Members of the United Nations and committees of citizens in the United States should be noted. It
has terminated a $40 million credit loan by ten United
States banks to the Government of South Africa. It is only
by increasing the taking of practical steps of this nature
that South Africa will be compelled to change its policies.
It is again sometimes said that the black’ and coloured
South Africans and Namibians suffer most in an economic
boycott; but many of them have so little already that a
percentage loss affects their wealthy oppressors much more.

81. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, may I at ,this first
debate of the Security Council in 1970 weIcome you as the
first President of the Council this year and as representative
of the African continent and of a State which is a new
member of the Security Council, a State with which the
Soviet Union has established relations of friendship, mutual
understanding and co-operation? Your country, Mr. President, is small in size, but its voice is clearly heard both in
and outside the United Nations. The Republic of Burundi
has constantly been an advocate of peace and security, and
an ,opponent of imperialist arbitrariness and oppression. It
is only a short time since your country became a member
of the Security Council, but you have already been invested
with great trust and with full powers to direct the work of
the United Nations body which is charged with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security; and everyone can seehow successfully you are
discharging this difficult but very honourable and responsible task. This is due in large measure to your well-known
personal qualities and to your high degree of competence in

74. We have once more heard it said that trade should
have nothing to do with politics. In our view this is a
misguided opinion. Trade flourishes best and longest in
nations which have a stable democratic government in
which all communities enjoy full representation and have
access to just rewards for their individual efforts. Our
narrowing of economic restrictions to those in respect of
Namibia, in the present draft resolution, is dictated by
those obligations incumbent on us in this particular case.
75. A considerable amount of thought was given to our
request in the draft resolution to set up a committee of
experts, It has now been strongly suggested that the
committee should be composed of members of the Security
Council, among whom should be the permanent members.
76. It is possible in the view of my delegation to appoint a
committee which could report within three or four months,
This committee will in effect be investigating the ways and
means of implementing effectively the relevant provisions

5 Ibid., Fifth Special Session, Annexes, agendaitem I, d.ocumant
A/6640, para. 84.

8

United Nations matters. We are sincerely glad to observe
your success in the office of President of the Security
Council, and with all our hearts we wish you great success.
82. It is with a feeling of great sympathy that the Soviet
delegation also welcomes Ambassador Kulaga, representative of the fraternal Polish People’s Republic, which is a
member of the friendly family of countries in the socialist
commonwealth. Socialist Poland has been a Member of the
United Nations since the day on which this Organization
was founded, and it is not the first time that it has been a
member of the Security Council. Everyone knows what a
significant contribution the Polish People’s Republic has
made to the Council’s work in the past, and what a
constructive and active role Poland is playing in international affairs, in the activities of the United Nations as a
whole and in the noble cause of strengthening security in
Europe.

colleague of mine in our common work in the United
Nations. I hope that, with his great experience and
erudition, he will make a useful contribution to our
common co-operation in the interests of solving the
international problems which are to be considered by the
Security Council.
87. The Soviet delegation would also like to take this
opportunity
of expressing its appreciation to all our
colleagues who, on the expiry of their two-year term in the
Security Council at the end of 1969, have now left the
Council. We shall always remember with satisfaction our
work together in the Council with the representatives of
fraternal Hungary, with the representatives of the friendly
countries of Algeria, Pakistan and Senegal, and also with
the representative of Paraguay, a Latin American country
with which-though
there are no diplomatic relations
between our countries-we have always had constructive
co-operation.

83. We can be quite sure that socialist Poland, having now
become a member of the Security Council again, will
ensure that its participation in the Council’s work is even
more weighty and even more positive from the point of
view of strengthening peace and international security. We
are also deeply convinced that the great diplomatic experience of Ambassador Kulaga, his tact which is widely
known in United Nations circles, his outstanding talent for
dealing with the United Nations matters, as was clear to all
of us at the General Assembly’s twenty-fourth session,
during which he served so brilliantly as Chairman of the
Special Political Committee, and also his ability to find
ways of communication
and to establish personal and
business contacts with representatives of other countriesall this makes it certain that his participation in the,
Council’s work will contribute to the effective work of this
Council.

88. Finally, we should like to note the important positive
role played by the last President of the Security Council for
1969, the outstanding representative of Zambia, Ambassador Mwaanga. We should like to express our appreciation
and gratitude to him.
89. The Security Council is considering the question of
Namibia at a time when the peoples are entering a new
decade, the seventh decade of the twentieth century. The
decade which has just concluded was tempestuous and rich
in events. It brought about many changes in the political
configuration of our planet; and its results are undoubtedly
favourable for the forces fighting for peace, national
freedom and independence and social progress. Imperialism
has been forced .to retreat. At the beginning of the new
decade, the peoples are firmly confident of the triumph of
the forces of peace over the forces of war, and of the forces
of national liberation and progress over the forces of
oppression, imperialism and colonialism.

84. We also congratulate Ambassador Tomeh, the representative of a country friendly to the Soyiet Union, the
Syrian Arab Republic, which has become a member of the
Security Council; and we hope that his wide scholarly
erudition, his deep knowledge of international problems
and his great political experience will contribute substantially to the common efforts of all members of the Security
Council to find practical ways and means of solving the
important international problems which are and will be
before the Council,

90. Nineteenseventy-the
first year of the new decade-is
the year of a great anniversary, the hundredth anniversary
of the birth of Vladimir Ilich Lenin. The name and
activities of Lenin are linked with the creation of the first
socialist State in the world, and are linked with a whole
revolutionary era of liberation in the life of mankind.
91. The ideas of Leninism, which represent the organic
unity of scientific theory and revolutionary activity, have
exercised a most profound influence on the struggle for the
liberation of peoples, wherever it may be waged. The
twentieth century may with confidence be called the
century of the triumphal advance of Lenin’s revolutionary
ideas of freedom and the national liberation of oppressed
peoples.

85. The Soviet delegation welcomes Ambassador Nicol,
the representative of yet another friendly country, Sierra
Leone. The election of this young African State to the
Security Council is eloquent evidence of the high esteem in
which the United Nations and its Members quite rightly
hold the peoples of the African continent. We are sure that
Ambassador Nicol will work tirelessly in the Security
Council in the interests of maintaining international peace
and security and in the interests of the active struggle
against the last vestiges of colonialism in Africa.

92. Lenin deeply believed in the revolutionary possibilities
and the creative and constructive potential of the enslaved
peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America. He unmasked
the imperialist and colonialist myth about the so-called
“non-historical character” of these peoples and, with his
genius, he foretold that their struggle for liberation would
become one of the most important forces for world
progress. The prophetic forecast made by Lenin as long ago

86. Among the representatives of countries which are new
members of the Security Council, there is also the
representative of’ Nicaragua, Ambassador Sevilla Sacasa. I
should like to ask his colleagues to convey to him my
personal greetings and congratulations. He is an old
9

as 1921 that “. , . in spite of the fact that the masses of
toilers-the
peasants in the colonial countries-are still
backward, they will play a very important revolutionary
part in the coming phases of the world revolution,“6 is now
coming true.

has played and is still playing a positive role in the struggle
for the liquidation of colonial and racist rdgimes.

93. Subsequent events have confirmed the accuracy of
that scientific forecast by Lenin. The immense importance
of the national liberation struggle of the peoples of Asia,
Africa and Latin America, and its effect on the course of
historical development, are now no longer contested by
anyone, even the most dyed-in-the-wool imperialists and
colonizers and their “learned advocates”.
94. Guided by Leninist ideas, the Soviet Union has since
the first days of its existence resolutely opposed all forms
of social and national inequality; it has opposed colonial
and racist oppression and enslavement; and it has provided
every possible kind of support to peoples fighting for their
national freedom and independence. In the theses of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union “On the hundredth anniversary of the birth of
Vladimir Ilich Lenin”, which appeared in Pravda of 23
October 1969, particular stress is placed on the fact that:
‘6. . . there is not and has never been any revolutionary
movement, or any action by the niasses of the people for
national and social liberation, which has not received
active support from the party of Lenin, the country of
the October Revolution”.

99. Since the adoption of the Declaration, about thirty
countries have cast off the colonial yoke and become
independent and sovereign States. However, the struggle is
not yet by any means concluded. Colonialism has been
mortally wounded, but it is not yet dead and it is still
resisting violently. This is particularly evident in the caiseof
southern Africa. The verdict of future generations on the
times in which we live will depend to a large extent on. how
long it takes us-the United Nations as a whole-tlo rid
mankind of the scourge of colonialism once and for all, and
to wipe the last vestiges of colonialism from the face of
earth.
100. The Security Council is now considering the que:stion
of Namibia, which is located in southern Africa, the last
major bastion of colonialism and racism. It is very
significant that this question has now been brought before
the Security Council by fif?y-six Afro-Asian countries-nearly half the total number of States Members of the
United Nations. This is a tremendous and imposing force of
international public opiaion, and a force for international
progress. It makes a great impression on each one of the
members of the Security Council individually, on the
Council as a whole and on the United Nations.
101. The States of Asia and Africa are unanimously and
with one voice demanding that the process of clearing
Africa of the last vestiges of colonialism should be speeded
up. They are placing serious hopes in the Security Council;
and it is the duty of the Security Council to take account
of these views of Africa and Asia and to adopt practicial and
effective measures.

95. This role which the Soviet Union is playing in the
international arena has not, of course, evoked the same
reponse from the various forces in the contemporary world.
Some it inspires to an even more resolute struggle for
freedom and national independence and for their lawful
rights; and it strengthens their confidence in the final
triumph of justice and the equality of all peoples. In others,
it gives rise to ungovernable malice and hatred, and a
pathological hostility to the Soviet Union.

102. It would seem that, in regard to the questi’on of
Namibia, everything is quite clear. First, the United Nations
has long since recognized that the domination of Namibia
by the South African racists is illegal. Secondly, the General
Assembly and the Security Council have repeatedly demanded South Africa’s withdrawal from Namibia. The
racist r6gime of South Africa is disregarding the decisilons of
the United Nations. This means that the Government of the
Republic of South Africa has set itself against the TJnited
Nations and defied it. Thirdly, the Security Council
resolution of 12 August 1969 [269 (1969)/ set a time-limit
for the liberation of Namibia from domination by the
South African racists. However, the Government of South
Africa has violated this binding decision of the Security
Council as well. This means, in the political sense, that
South Africa-as a State Member of the United Nations-has come out in direct opposition to this international Organization. This position of South Africa represents a threat to peace and international security.

96. One consequence of this is that imperialialism has
been elevating anti-communism and anti-Sovietism to the
level of State policy. We are not paying any attention to
this howling by the imperialists. We are moving forward,
resolutely and confidently, along the path traced out by
Lenin, the path of support and defence of the rights of all
peoples which have been and are being oppressed by
imperialism.
97. Since the Soviet Union has from the first days of its
existence been in the vanguard of the great struggle for the
liberation of the peoples, it is quite natural and legitimate
that it should have taken the initiative which led to the
adoption by the Geneial Assembly of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

103. How is it that the South African racists and
colonizers are adopting this attitude of defiant effrontery?
Where do they get the audacity to disregard decisions of the
Security Council which are binding on all States Members
of the United Nations under Article 25 of the Charter?
Although the South African racist regime has established its
own economic and military machine, which is fairly
considerable in size by African standards, every’body-

98. This year the whole world-and, of course, the United
Nations above all-will be celebrating the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of that most important document, which
6 SeeV. I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 32, p. 482.
10

including the members of the Security Council-knows
full well that this is not the whole picture. There
is no doubt that if South Africa were acting alone, it would
never have the courage, never dare to set itself against the
United Nations and to engage in a confrontation with the
Security Council.

110. Where is South Africa receiving all these armaments
from? Always from the same source-from the military
arsenals of States members of NATO. This means that the
NATO military bloc was not established merely against the
Soviet Union. This is confirmed even by The Times of
London. In its issue of 24 January 1969 that leading United
Kingdom newspaper wrote as follows:

104. However, South Africa, in its colonialist and racist
policy in Namibia, is not alone; and this is the crux of the
matter. It is relying on direct economic, political and
military support from a number of Western countries-particularly the United States of America, the United King
dom, the Federal Republic of Germany and certain others.

“ . . * the embargo does not actually put a stop to arms
traffic between South Africa and Britain. The embargo is
not complete. . . . She”-Ynuth Africa-“has bought ships,
armoured cars, and . . . fighters. . . . She is building the
Belgian rifle under licence. The latest addition to the
South African arms industry is the Impala jet fighter, of
which initially 400 will be built. American light aircraft,
which could be useful for counter-insurgency, are being
assembled there”-i.e., in South Africa-“under licence,
and in all South Africa has acquired licences to build 140
different types of ammunition and bombs from overseas”.

105. The representative of Zambia, Ambassador Mwaanga,
in the interesting and informative statement he made at our
last meeting, listed in detail the Western countries which are
giving military and economic support to the racist regime in
South Africa. He pointed out that it is precisely this
circumstance which is encouraging the South African racists
to continue their policy of apartheid-the tyrannical oppression of the African population of that country,
numbering many milIions-and which is also enabling them
to disregard the decisions of the United Nations and defy
the Security Council.

This is where the South African racists are getting their
weapons from.
111. While discussions are going on in the United Nations,
while resolutions are being adopted, the South African
racists, relying on this assistance, are continuing to take
measures to consolidate the colonial regime in Namibia and
to perpetuate the apartheid system. It is precisely for these
purposes that Namibia is being divided into a “white part”
and the so-called “Bantustans’‘-African
reservations resembling the ghetto, that blot on the escutcheon of the second
half of the twentieth century.

104. United Kingdom, United States and West German
monopolies
are investing thousands of millions in the
economy of South Africa and are deriving many millions in
profits from the exploitation and plundering of the African
population.
It is enough merely to mention that investments by United Kingdom monopolies in the South African
monopoly
amount to more than $3,500 million, United
States investments to about $1,000 million and West
German investments to about 1,000 million marks.

112. Joint exploitation and plundering of the indigenous
African population of South Africa and Namibia, and the
joint extraction of super-profits from the blood and sweat
of Africans-this is what is uniting the South African racists
and the colonizers and making them allies. Joint exploitation and plundering of the African population of Namibia
and South Africa is uniting the South African racists and
the imperialist monopolies of Western countries, like twins.

107. These activities represent a gross violation of the
General Assembly resolutions condemning the imperialist
monopolies for their co-operation with the racist regime in
South Africa and demanding an end to such activities and
such co-operation.
108. The Western countries and their monopolies are also
grossly violating decisions of the United Nations such as the
Security Council resolution calling upon States to ceasethe
shipment of arms, ammunition and military vehicles to
South Africa. As is confirmed by a recent report in a South
African newspaper, The Rand Daily Mail of 4 November
1968, the United States supplied South Africa with
weapons to a value of 25 million rands during the period
1962-1968.

113. Everyone remembers that it was precisely the representatives of these countries which, in August 1969, did not
vote for the resolution on Namibia [269 (196911 introduced by the Afro-Asian countries. This means that their
hands were tied by some special considerations. What
considerations? The answer to this is perfectly clear to
each one of us. All this means that, if we are going to call
things by their proper names, we must in today’s discussion
in the Security Council on the question of Namibia refer to
and have in mind not only the South African racists, but
also their accomplices and protectors.

109. The South African Minister of Defence, Mr. Botha,
speaking in February 1969 to the Air Force Association in
Johannesburg, boasted that:

114. From all this, a quite definite and logical conclusion
must be drawn. The Security Council must seriously and
severely demand of the Western Powers that their monopolies should cease their moral, political, economic and
military support to the racist regime in South Africa and
their co-operation with this rbgime. What is the essential
requirement for this.7 The essential requirement is the
readiness and unity of action of all members of the Security
Council-above all, its permanent members.

“New and modern aircraft and equipment have been
acquired, are on firm order, or are included in plans for
future orders. We have, or will shortly have, aircraft for
maritime reconnaissance, day fighter aircraft for support
of ground force, all-weather aircraft, various types of
helicopters, light reconnaissance planes, ‘communicition
aircraft and bombers.”
1

115, As representative of the Soviet Union, e State
Member of the United Nations and a permanent member of
the Security Council, I wish to put the following question
to the representatives of all permanent members of the
Security Council who are present at this meeting: are they
prepared, together with all the other members of the
Council, to take effective measures on the question under
consideration?

the Afro-Asian countries repeatedIy referred to them. They
were also described by the representatives of the USSR and
the representatives of other socialist countries. In order to
exert effective pressure on South Africa and bring about an
end to the occupation of Namibia, the Security Council
must call upon all States to discontinue completely all
economic, trade, transport and other relationships with the
Republic of South Africa. All these measures are legally
justified under the Charter of the United Nations. They are
provided for in Article 41 of the Charter.

116. At the Council's
last meeting we heard the official
statement by Ambassador Yost, representative of the
United States of America, a State which is also a permanent
member of the Security Council. Mr. Yost said that the
United States of America recognizes the illegality of South
Africa’s presence in Namibia. If the United States really
takes this position on the question under discussion,
then-in order to ensure that its deeds tally with its words,
as they say-it should, having said “A”, also say “V-that
is, together with all the other members of the Security
Council and the Council as a whole, it should adopt a
strong and effective resolution which would really pillory
the racist regime in South Africa and would genuinely help
to free the people of Namibia from the terrorist domination
and tyranny of this regime.

120. Many countries, including the Soviet Union, have
long since ceased to maintain any relations with the
Republic of South Africa. It is essential that all other
countries-including the main partners and friends of South
Africa, and particularly the permanent members of the
Security Council-should
do likewise. This will indeed
constitute “effective measures”, It will mean that the South
African colonizers and racists will be isolated in international politics and also physically isolated. It will be of
genuine help to the people of Namibia in its struggle for
freedom and national independence, This is the basic
position from which the Soviet Union will proceed when
the Security Council takes a decision on the question under
consideration.

117. AS far asthe Soviet Union is concerned, it is ready to
co-operate in helping the Council to take effective measures
by means of which it would be possible to force the South
African regime to comply with the decision of the United
Nations revoking the mandate over Namibia, and to force
South Africa to leave that country and allow the people of
Namibia to decide its own future and manage its own
affairs itself.

121. The representative of Zambia has already reminded
us of Security Council resolution 269 (1969) which
referred to the need for taking effective measures against
South Africa if it should fail to comply with the Security
Council’s previous resolution on Namibia. South Africa has
not complied with that resolution, and it is clear that the
time has now come to take these effective measures. If they
are not taken, the whole procedure in the Security Council
will be reduced merely to the utterance of statements
which are resolute and sometimes even revolutionary in
tone, but are followed by the adoption of weak, unavailing
and ineffective resolutions.

118. The essence of the Soviet Union’s position on the
question under consideration may be summed up as
follows. First, in keeping with the Leninist principles of its
foreign policy, the Soviet Union is in favour of the earliest
possible liberation of the people of Namibia. The
Namibians have grown tired of waiting; they are losing faith
in the United Nations. They have no alternative left but to
take up arms, The armed struggle of the colonial peoples
has been officially recognized and legalized by the United
Nations. The sooner the Security Council takes effective
measures against,South Africa to speed up the liberation of
Namibia, the better. Secondly, Yhe Soviet Union behoves
that the decisions of the Security Council must be complied
with. It has consistently striven to uphold the honour and
international prestige of the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole. This exalted United Nations
body, which is invested with extensive powers for the
maintenance of peace and international security, has a duty
to force South Africa to heed its decisions and to find the
possibilities and ways of ensuring compliance, Thirdly, the
Soviet Union is ready to take part in the implementation, in
regard to South Africa, of “effective measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the relevant
chapters of the United Nations Charter”, those measures
which-as the Government of South Africa was warned in
Security Council resolution 269 (1969)-were to be applied
if by 4 October 1969 it had not withdrawn its administraiion from Namibia.

122. With regard to the draft resolution which has been
introduced [S/9620], the Soviet delegation reserves its
right to state its views after the text of this resolrrtion has
been finalized. We believe the fmal text is now in the
process of being drafted.
123. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): Mr. President, may I first of
all welcome you most warmly to the Security Council as
representative of Burundi, and express my particular
satisfaction at seeing you preside over the Council in the
first month of the year? We are impressed with the able
manner in which you have been guiding the work of the
Security Council. My delegation has full confidenc8ein your
leadership and wishes to pledge its co-operation in the
discharge of your duties. I should also like to pay our
tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Mwaanga of
Zambia, for the most effective and impartial fashion in
which he conducted the proceedings of our Council during
the last month.
124. I take this opportunity of extending my warm
welcome to-besides you, Mr. President-the other new
members of the Security Council: Ambassador Sevilla
Sacasa of Nicaragua, Ambassador Kulaga of Polandl, Ambassador Nicol of Sierra Leone and Ambassador Tomeh of

119. What are these measures? At the twenty-fourth
session of the General Assembly many representatives of
12

t
E.:

Syria, All of them are eminent diplomats of very high
qualities, very worthy representatives of their countries. I
look forward to working with them in close collaboration
during this year.

responsibility of the United Nations, or it continues to
explore all possible avenues and make all possible efforts to
find the ultimate solution of the question. Naturally, we
must make the latter choice, The Security Council must
retain the initiative and try to achieve what little progress
can be achieved in this difficult situation.

125. Finally, I should like to pay our warmest tribute to
the five outgoing members of the Security Council, which
during their fruitful terms of office left a mark on the work
of the Council. My particular gratitude is due to Ambassador Agha Shahi of Pakistan, whose outstanding qualities
as a diplomat and as a person we all recognise and who
represents a country with which my own country enjoys a
friendship of good co-operation and neighbourliness,

130. In the draft resolution we are seeking to move the
Council, in its search for a solution of the question of
Namibia, a little ahead of the dead centre in which it has
been placed as a result of Couth Africa’s refusal to comply
with the decisions of the United Nations, particularly
Security Council resolution 269 (1969). The final text of
the draft resolution is the product of the broadest and the
most serious and careful consultations not only among the
sponsors but also among other members of the Council.

126. Turning to the matter under consideration I would
make it clear at the outset that the general position of my
delegation with regard to the question of Namibia has been
stated time’and again. I refer particularly to the statements
I made before the Council on 20 March 11464th meeting],
4 August [1493rd meeting] and 12 August 1969 [1497th
meeting].

131. Paragraphs 5 and 6 are the main features of the draft
resolution. In paragraph 5, a call has been addressed to all
States, particularly those which have economic and other
interests in Namibia, to refrain from any dealings with the
Government of South Africa which are inconsistent with
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, which declares that
South Africa’s presence in Namibia is illegal, This is a very
important provision. However, it is not an entirely novel
feature, because we may recall that in paragraph 7 of
resolution 269 (1969) the Security Council had called upon
“all States to refrain from all dealings with the Government
of South Africa purporting to act on behalf of the Territory
of Namibia”.

127. The convening of the Security Council at this time
was necessitated by the refusal of the Government of South
Africa to comply with the provisions of Security Council
resolution 269 (1969) of last August. South Africa persists
in its illegal occupation of the international Territory of
Namibia. That has led to the undermining of the authority
of the United Nations and the worsening of the international situation in southern Africa. Both resolution 2498
(XXIV) and resolution 2517 (XXIV), adopted by the
General Assembly at its last session, called attention to that
deteriorating situation. Resolution 2517 (XXIV), in particular, drew the attention of the Security Council to the
need for taking appropriate measures to solve’ the grave
situation that has resulted from South Africa’s refusal to
withdraw its administration from Namibia.

132. In paragraph 6, which is the central and novel feature
of the draft resolution, the Council decides to establish an
ad hoc sub-committee of the Council to study, in consultation with the Secretary-General, ways and means by which
the relevant Council resolutions can be implemented in the
light. of South Africa’s refusal to withdraw from Namibia.
133. I would not like to anticipate the work of the
sub-committee. However, it is the wish of my delegation
that the sub-committee seriously examine, among other
things, all the possibilities of action which were suggested
for the consideration of the Council-first, by Ambassador
Sen of India in his statement made before the Council on
4August 1969, and then, in detailed outline, by Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia in his statement yesterday.

128. The draft resolution [S/9620], which was presented
to the Council at our last meeting by Ambassador Jakobson
of Finland on behalf of five delegations, including my own,
and which has been revised today, does not initiate those
appropriate measures called for in the Assembly resolution.
The reasons are obvious. The measures cannot be applied
without the support of all the permanent members of the
Security Council most of which, as we all know, are
unfortunately opposed to a course of corrective action in
cases in which the interests of South Africa are concerned.
It is the view of my delegation that the continued
occupation of Namibia by South Africa is an aggression and
that it represents a threat to international peace and
security. My delegation is convinced that no measure by the
United Nations which fell short of those provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter would be sufficient to persuade
or coerce the Government of South Africa to withdraw its
iRegal presence from Namibia. We reahze the difficulty in
securing the application of those measures by the Security

134. The draft resolution is interim in nature and its
purpose is to help the Security Council to make vital
decisions in this regard in the future. In the opinion of my
delegation, it represents, above all, an attempt to confront
the permanent members of the Security COU~C& and
particularly those which have political, economic and other
interests in South Africa, with a fuller and expert evaluation of the situation of Namibia and get them increasingly
and effectively committed, if they are at all committed, to
the United Nations cause with regard to the situation. My
delegation sincerely hopes that the draft resolution will be
overwhelmingly adopted by the Security Council.

council.

135. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) fi?‘Z~e!QretatiOn from
Spanish): Pnst of all, Mr. President, I wish to congratulate
you on your election to the presidency of the Security
Council In the performance of your duties you can count
on the assistance and co-operation of my delegation. I

129. In these circumstances, the Security Council has but
one alternative open to it: either it does nothing and
remains content with its resolution 269 (1969), which has
been contemptuously disregarded, and it consequently loses
initiative on the question which remains under the special
13

(ES-V) calling for the decolonization df the Territory. Yet,
South Africa has not taken the least steps to fulfil its
ineluctable obligation. Yet, my delegation feels that in the
eyes of the law dates are not irrelevant. They may of may
not be respected, but none can deprive them of their formal
value, since all legal situations acquire full validity when
referred to a specific time. As far as the law is concerned-and resolutions of this organ, we must recall, do
have a binding nature-the
setting of a date always
presumes the creation of an obligation for the one to whom
the binding regulation is addressed. Lack of compliance
with that obligation does not void the obligation of its
validity. It merely places the guilty party in a criminal
position. It legally confronts him with a blame for which he
may have to answer.

should also like to take advantage of this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia for his
conduct of the Council’s business last month, when he
showed greai competence and activity in the performance
of his duties as President. Finally, on behalf of my
delegation and personally, I wish to welcome the representatives of Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone and Syria, who
have joined us in the work of the Council. At the same
time, I should like to express our appreciation to the
outgoing members-namely,
Algeria, Hungary, Pakistan,
Paraguay and Senegal-for their co-operation with us in the
work we accomplished together last year.
136. We have just begun the year during which we shall
commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation
of the United Nations. In the course of those twenty-five
years one problem has been of constant concern to the
United Nations and has constantly appeared on the agenda
of the General Assembly session-the question of Namibia.
The very first Assembly session adopted resolution 65 (I)
on 14 December 1946 in which the Govermnent of the
Union of South Africa was warned to call off its plans to
incorporate the Territory of South West Africa, which still
enjoyed international status. Since that time the General
Assembly and the Security Council have adopted almost
100 resolutions on the problem of Namibia.

141. The Assembly and the Council have condemned the
conduct of South Africa, but that is where the problem
rests, gravely sapping the authority of our Organization.
Perhaps the most important problem we have to face today
is the stand of the Member States that refuse to take into
account the resolutions of the main bodies of the United
Nations, thus hurling the gravest of all challenges that the
world Organization has to confront, since they affect the
Organization’s very reason for existence and the very pillars
on which rest its authority, its prestige in the eyes of world
public opinion and its ability to carry out the tasks that
were entrusted to it twenty-five years ago.

137. A number of committees and sub-committees entrusted with studying and recommending measures to be
adopted have been created, dissolved, and re-created. All
paths have been explored to find a solution in keeping with
the terms of the Charter and with the resolutions adopted
by the political organs of the United Nations. The results of
these efforts and steps are most discouraging. The Government of South Africa refuses to accept the resolutions of
the United Nations, and the situation in the Territory has
deteriorated to the point where today it is threatened with
the loss of its national identity and territorial integrity.

142. For these reasons my delegation would have preferred a draft resolution more in keeping with the principles
that have been vioIated. Yet we prefer to believe that with
the adoption of the draft resolution before us a new
possibility is opened to us to find a just solution to the
problem of Namibia.
143. My delegation will vote in favour of this draft
resolution in the hope that we will not be adopting just
another resolution nor creating just another committee, but
rather that we are making a new and perhaps a last effort to
find a solution to a problem which in the course of
twenty-five years has been a source of constant concern to
the Organization and which constitutes one of the most
bitter frustrations that the United Nations faces in this year
of 1970, when it celebrates its twenty-fifth anniversary.
Finally, I should like to thank the United Nations Council
for Namibia and its President for the valuable contribution
they have made to this important question.

138. Owing to the gravity of the situation, the Security
Council adopted two resolutions on the subject in 1968,
and met twice more in the year that has just ended,
approving two further resolutions. The first of these,
resolution 264 (1969) of 20 March 1969, declares that the
presence of South Africa in Namibia is illegal and contrary
to the principles of the Charter. Any title that South Africa
might have held over the Territory expired when the
General Assembly by resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 declared the Mandate terminated and decided that the
Territory would become a direct responsibility of the
United Nations.

144. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Frenclz):
(There are no further speakers on the list.) The enthusiasm
of the Council, and particularly of those members that have
spoken, leads me to express the hope that we shall not need
to hold a meeting during the week-end. You have surely
earned a rest and therefore if at all possible we should avoid
imposing another burden upon you. Hence, I propose that
we hold a meeting tomorrow morning at 10.30, hoping that
we can conclude our work at that meeting or, if not, in the
afternoon at the latest. From the consultations held it
appears that there is agreement on this point. As there is no
objection, it is so decided.

139. In resolution 269 (1969) adopted on 12 August
1969, the Security Council took a further step when it
called upon the Government of South Africa to withdraw
its administration from the Territory immediately and in
any case before 4 October 1969. Thus, the obligation was
defined in a more precise way since a concrete date wasset,
which did not allow for any manoeuvres of interpretation
with regard to the scope or the moment of fulfilment of the
obligation.
140. However, the date has passed, as did also that of June
1968, set by the General Assembly in resolution 2248

The meetingrose at 7.20 p.m.

14
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50(or equivalent

in othtx

currcndes)

82005-May

197~ZJOO
