S/2005/384

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 June 2005
English
Original: French

Letter dated 13 June 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1483 (2003), I have the honour to
transmit the attached letter from my representative on the International Advisory
and Monitoring Board for Iraq (see annex). It contains updated information on the
Board’s activities and follows his letter of 6 January 2005 (S/2005/12, annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-38456 (E) 150605 150605

*0538456*

S/2005/384

Annex
[Original: English]

Letter dated 2 June 2005 from the representative of the
Secretary-General on the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board for the Development Fund for Iraq addressed to the
Secretary-General
As your representative on the International Advisory and Monitoring Board
(IAMB) for the Development Fund for Iraq, I am pleased to provide you with an
update on the activities of the Board since my letter dated 6 January 2005, in which
I recapped the actions of IAMB during 2004.
IAMB received, on 21 May 2005, the audit reports by KPMG covering the
audit of Iraq’s oil export sales and Development Fund for Iraq operations for the
period stating with the dissolution of the Coalition Provisional Authority on 29 June
2004 and ending on 31 December 2004. The reports were immediately posted on the
IAMB website (www.iamb.info) and a press release was issued.
The audit reports consist of the statement of cash receipts and payments for the
Development Fund for Iraq for the period from 29 June to 31 December 2004 and
the following reports: report of factual findings in connection with export sales;
report of factual findings in connection with the oil proceeds receipts account;
report of factual findings in connection with disbursements; and management letter
on internal controls.
The audit reports continue to be critical of the controls in place in the spending
ministries, the United States agencies in respect of the outstanding commitments
using Development Fund for Iraq resources and the Iraqi administration of
Development Fund resources. The main weaknesses include: (a) incomplete
Development Fund accounting records; (b) untimely recording, reporting,
reconciliation and follow-up of spending by Iraqi ministries; (c) incomplete records
maintained by United States agencies, including disbursements that were not
recorded in the Iraqi budget; (d) lack of documented justification for limited
competition for contracts at the Iraqi ministries; (e) unreconciled quantities of oil
and oil products exported, indicating a lack of control and possible misappropriation
of oil revenues, and significant difficulties in ensuring completeness and accuracy of
Iraqi budgets and controls over expenditures; and (f) the non-deposit of proceeds of
export sales of petroleum products into the appropriate accounts in contravention of
Security Council resolution 1483 (2003).
IAMB had the opportunity to review those reports in draft form with the
auditors at its meeting on 17 and 18 April.
IAMB decided to draw to the attention of the Government of Iraq the
weaknesses identified in the audit reports and to invite the Government to act on the
audit recommendations to strengthen the financial controls and the administration of
the Development Fund for Iraq.
Modalities are currently being explored to extend the audits to cover the period
from 1 January to 30 June 2005.

2

S/2005/384

IAMB also followed up on the recommendations made in the context of
previous Development Fund audits and requested a briefing by the interim
Government of Iraq on steps taken to address the concerns that were raised by
IAMB in the light of the findings contained in the two previous audits of the
Development Fund covering the period from May 2003 to June 2004.
At the meeting held in April, the member representing the interim Government
of Iraq provided information on the steps that were being taken to strengthen
controls in the Ministry of Oil, including: (a) installation of an integrated computer
system; (b) inspection and certification of imported oil products; (c) completion of
feasibility studies on oil metering; and (d) the issue of an invitation to tender for a
comprehensive oil metering system. Steps have also been taken to strengthen
controls at spending ministries, including: (a) scheduling the implementation of a
comprehensive
financial
management
information
system
by
2007;
(b) implementing procedures, in coordination with the Board of Supreme Audit,
over receipts, payments and procurement; (c) scheduling an audit of all contracts
concluded in 2003 and 2004; (d) appointing inspectors general in all Iraqi
ministries; and (e) establishing an integrity commission to look into financial
irregularities and abuse.
IAMB was briefed on measures taken to control the disbursements from the
Development Fund for Iraq, including the closure of current accounts at various
ministries and the establishment of a procedure whereby allocated funds would not
be transferred to the ministries but disbursements to the ministries would be based
on estimated monthly needs.
IAMB also received a briefing from the Iraq Board of Supreme Audit. The
President of the Board noted the difficult task the Board was facing and pointed out
that the adoption of the public debt and financial administration law would assist in
the administration of funds. He also indicated that the creation of a contract
management capacity in each ministry was being considered. The Board is planning
to widen its audit coverage at the State Oil Marketing organization. With regard to
smuggling, the Board intends to submit a report to the Council of Ministers on the
control procedures that could help to address this matter.
In my previous letter, I had informed you that IAMB had agreed to the terms
of reference for a special audit of sole-sourced contracts using Development Fund
for Iraq funds proposed by the United States Government, to be completed by an
independent auditor. In a letter dated 15 April 2005, the United States Government
informed IAMB that an auditor had been selected. The special audit of sole-sourced
contracts calls for: (a) identifying all contracts awarded non-competitively by the
Coalition Provisional Authority valued at over $5 million that used Development
Fund funds; (b) providing a summary of the findings of audits of such contracts that
have already been conducted by various United States Government audit agencies;
and (c) conducting additional audit procedures on non-competitively awarded
contracts that have not been the subject of audit, including whether such contracts
were consistent with the purposes outlined in Security Council resolution
1483 (2003).
IAMB has been briefed by a representative of the United States Department of
Defense, who provided additional clarifications regarding the status of the audit.
The audit reports are scheduled for completion and transmission to IAMB by the
end of August 2005.

3

S/2005/384

IAMB took note of the report of the Special Inspector General for Iraq
Reconstruction dated 30 January 2005 regarding the oversight of funds provided to
Iraqi ministries through the national budget process. IAMB noted that the findings
contained in the report were along the same lines as those identified in the
Development Fund for Iraq audits carried out for the IAMB.
IAMB noted that the unredacted Defense Contract Audit Agency reports
covering sole-sourced contracts had been made public. Those reports refer to
overcharges and questionable amounts billed under the sole-sourced contracts of an
amount in excess of $200 million. IAMB noted with regret that those findings had
been redacted in earlier reports of the Agency submitted to IAMB.
The next meeting of IAMB is tentatively scheduled for September. By that
time, the special audit of sole-sourced contracts using Development Fund for Iraq
funds should be available, as should the audit of the Fund covering the period from
1 January to 30 June 2005.
(Signed) Jean-Pierre Halbwachs
Representative of the Secretary-General to
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board

4
