S/2010/637

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 December 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 7 December 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter dated 30 November 2009 (S/2009/642) informing the
President of the Security Council of the progress made by the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission, and his reply dated 14 December 2009 (S/2009/643), in which
he took note of my intention to continue the activities of the United Nations support
team to the Mixed Commission with funding from the regular budget. In the same
spirit, by the present letter, I would like to inform you of the latest achievements and
activities undertaken by the Mixed Commission.
As you know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the 10 October 2002 ruling of the International
Court of Justice on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary dispute. Through my good
offices, and with the support of the United Nations Secretariat, I have continued to
facilitate the implementation of the ruling of the International Court of Justice.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority along the boundary, addressing the situation of
affected populations and making recommendations on confidence-building
measures. Achievements to date in the implementation of the ruling of the Court
include withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area (December
2003), along the land boundary (July 2004) and in the Bakassi Peninsula (initial
withdrawal and transfer of authority in June 2006 and completion of the process in
August 2008), as well as delineation of the maritime boundary (May 2007). In the
course of 2010, the Mixed Commission was able to continue to facilitate the process
smoothly and peacefully, including helping maintain open dialogue and
communication between the two countries. The following are some of the activities
for which the United Nations support team to the Mixed Commission has provided
substantive, technical and logistical support.
Concerning the demarcation of the estimated 1,950-kilometre land boundary,
progress continued to be made in 2010 with the field assessment; Cameroon and
Nigeria have now agreed on 1,466 kilometres. This distance does not take into
account an additional section of 95 kilometres currently being assessed. Progress is
slowing as a result of the geographical terrain becoming more difficult to access and
irregular meetings of the parties causing delays in decision-making by the Mixed
Commission.

10-69449 (E) 171210

*1069449*

S/2010/637

The rate of implementation of demarcation contracts funded through
extrabudgetary resources increased through 2010. The contractor in charge of the
ground control survey aimed at rectifying satellite imagery to align it with the actual
coordinates on the ground. The field work for that contract and a capacity-building
workshop for technicians of Cameroon and of Nigeria have been completed. During
the first semester of 2010, the United Nations Office of Project Services continued
demarcation activities, placing 378 boundary pillars along a first section of land
boundary starting from Lake Chad.
The United Nations Office for Project Services faced a number of constraints,
including incomplete provision of technical specifications for pillar locations and
security incidents involving border communities, which prevented it from reaching
the target of 700 boundary pillars constructed under the project agreement for this
first section of the land boundary.
Concerning the maritime boundary, Cameroon and Nigeria agreed in 2010 on a
“resource clause” dealing with oil and gas fields straddling their common maritime
boundary. This clause, which paves the way for cross-boundary cooperation on oil
and gas, provides the basis upon which both Governments will be able to reach
agreement covering all aspects of hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation. The
parties also agreed on a clause relating to oil and gas installations and safety zones
and institutional arbitration as their preferred method of conflict resolution.
Reports by United Nations civilian observers monitoring the situation along
the land boundary and in the Bakassi Peninsula have concluded that the prevailing
situation continues to be peaceful.
The follow-up committee established by the 12 June 2006 Greentree
Agreement continued its work following the final transfer of authority in the “zone”
in the Bakassi Peninsula from Nigeria to Cameroon on 14 August 2008.
In 2010, the two meetings of the follow-up committee (both in Geneva, on 5
and 6 July and on 28 and 29 October) were preceded by observer visits in Bakassi.
The follow-up committee noted the efforts undertaken to sensitize the populations
on fishing rules and regulations as well as on wood exploitation and security, along
with the readiness of the Cameroonian authorities to undertake investigations into
any alleged incidents brought to their attention.
In 2010, the Mixed Commission continued to support the formulation of
confidence-building measures to guarantee the security and welfare of affected
populations and to promote initiatives to enhance trust between the two
Governments and their peoples.
At the request of both parties, my Special Representative pursued discussions
with the Resident Coordinators for Cameroon and Nigeria aimed at reviewing their
development assessment frameworks in order to accommodate cross-border
confidence-building and development programmes. This should result in a joint
strategy to be led and owned by the parties and joint programme proposals which
will be presented to both Governments in 2011.
Although an exact date for completion of the activities of the CameroonNigeria Mixed Commission is difficult to predict, demarcation activities should be
completed by 2015. The feasibility of this deadline will depend on (a) the ability of
the parties to reach agreement on all areas of disagreement and (b) successful

2

10-69449

S/2010/637

mobilization by the Mixed Commission of the required additional extrabudgetary
funding to complete the demarcation work.
After 2011, the following activities will conclude the work of the Mixed
Commission:
(a) Assisting the parties in addressing the remaining areas of disagreement
arising from the field assessment;
(b) Coordinating and certifying demarcation contracts, including the
completion of pillar emplacement and all remaining land boundary demarcation
activities by 2014;
(c) Following up and supporting the activities of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the Gulf of Guinea Cooperation Council;
(d) Promoting cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation on
oil and gas fields straddling boundaries and joint security monitoring along the land
boundary;
(e) Implementing exit strategies by handing over the activities of the Mixed
Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other subregional structures;
(f) In line with the June 2006 Greentree Agreement and through the followup committee, monitoring the situation in the “zone” of the Bakassi Peninsula for
the remainder of the five-year transitional period (from August 2008 to August
2013), during which special protection shall be granted to Nigerian residents.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. During the period from 2004 to 2010, the
activities of the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular
budget. The Governments of Austria, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan,
Sweden and Uruguay have provided support in kind for the substantive and
technical work of the Commission (military and legal experts), in addition to the
logistical support provided by the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria, and the
voluntary contributions of both countries, as well as those of Canada, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the European Union, to the
trust fund for the demarcation activities.
Given the cost-effectiveness of the mission and the important tasks remaining
at this juncture to help advance the peaceful implementation of the ruling of the
International Court of Justice, it is my intention to ask for resources from the regular
budget for the Mixed Commission for the period from 1 January to 31 December
2011.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-69449

3
