Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1068 E (XXXIX) of 16 July 1965, in which the
Council recommended to Member States, and especially
to those making use of technical assistance, that they
give greater priority to projects and programmes directed towards the advancement of women, and invites
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
executive heads of the specialized agencies to encourage
the participation of women in projects submitted by
Member States;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1068 C (XXXIX) of 16 July 1965, in which the
Council emphasized the importance of training appropriate cadres, especially in the developing countries,
in order to enable women to participate fully in the
economic, social, cultural and political life of their
respective countries ;
3. Welcomes the support given by the Economic
and Social Council to the other recommendations made
b¥ the Commission on the Status of Women at its
eighteenth session;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and the international non-governmental organizations to continue their
efforts for the improvement of the status of women;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
study especially the possibility of expanding the assistance which can be rendered for the advancement of
women in developing countries ;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to co-operate with
the Commission on the Status of Women to these ends;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly informed on developments in this respect, especially with regard to the possibility of establishing
a unified, long-term United Nations programme for
the advancement of women;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Iran for its generous invitation, which enabled the
Commission on the Status of Women to hold its
eighteenth session at Teheran in conditions that were
particularly favonrnblr for its work.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2060 (XX). Advisory services in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Noting that proposals have been made to hold an
international seminar on apartheid in 1966,
Recalling that these proposals were brought to the
attention of the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-ninth session, 20
Requests the Secretary-General to organize in 1966,
in consultation with the Special Committee on the
Policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic
of South Africa and the Commission on Human Rights,
an international seminar on apartheid and authorizes
him to use such funds as may be necessary for the
purpose, making appropriate readjustments within the
budgetary allocations approved for section 14 (Human
rights advisory services), part V (Technical programmes), of the United Nations budget.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
20 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentirth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/6003), para. 549.

43

2061 (XX). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
ll/ oting that the heavy agenda of the Third Committee
at the twentieth session has not allowed the Committee
to consider rither the draft Convention on Freedom of
Information or the draft Declaration on Freedom of
fnformation which was snhmitted to it by the Economic
and Social Council,
Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms, to thr promotion of which the Unitrd Nations
is dedicated,
Derides to devote, at its twenty-first session, as much
time as it deems necessary to the consideration of the
ikrn on frerdom of information.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1065.
2062 (XX). Creation of the post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the agenda of its twentieth session
included the item entitled "Creation of the post of
United Nations High Commissionrr for Human
Rights",
Considering that owing to other priorities the proposal relating to this question could not he considered,
Convinccd that it would be useful to obtain the
opinion of the most appropriate United Nations organ
to dral with the matter.
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
transmit to the Commission on Human Rights the
proposal for the creation of the post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for study of
all aspects of thr matter and for report, through the
Council. to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
pertinent documents concerning that proposal to the
Commission on Human Rights.
1397th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
2080 (XX). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Third Committee, owmg to its
heavy agenda, has not been able to consider the draft
International Cov('.t'lants on Human Rights at the
present session,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1075
(XXXIX) of 28 July 1965 on organizational and
procedural arrangements for the implementation of
conventions and rrcommendations in the field of human
rights,
1. Derides to defer to its twenty-first session the
further consideration of the draft International Covenants on Human Rights ;
2. Invites Governments of Member States to consider the measures of implementation and the final
clauses of the draft International Covenants on Human
Rights prepared by the Commission on Human Rights,
the explanatory paprr preparrd by the Secretary-

44

General Assembly--Twentieth Session

General 21 and the observations received from ( ;overnments22 in accordance with (;encral Assembly resolution 1960 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963, so that at
the twenty-first session of the Assembly Member States
will be in a position to complete the preparation of
the <lraft International Covenants on Human Rights.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.

2081 (XX). International Year for Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 designating the year 1968 as International
Year for Human Rights,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human
l< ights has been an instrnment of the highest importance
for the protection and promotion of the rights of individuals and the furtherance of peace and stability,
Convinced that its role in the future will be of equal
significance,
Considering that the further promotion and development of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms contributes to the strengthening of peace
throughout the world and to friendship between peoples,
Considering that racial discrimination, and in particular the policy of apartheid. constitutes one of the
most flagrant abuses of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and that persistent and intense efforts must be
made to secure its abandonment,
Reaffirming the belief that the cause of human rights
will be well served by an increasing awareness of the
extent of the progress made, and the conviction that
the year 1968 should be devoted to intensified national
and international efforts and undertakings in the field
of human rights and also to an international review
of the achievements in this field,
Stressing the importance of further development and
implementation in practice of the principles of the
protection of human rights laid down in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination,
Convinced that an intensifica~ion of efforts in the
intervening years will heighten the progress that can
he made by 1968,
Convinced further that the proposed international
review of progress in the field of human rights can
advantageously be carried out hy means of an international conference,
Noting the interim programme of measures and activities to be undertaken in connexion with the International Year for Human Rights and in celebration of
the twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, recommended by the Commission on
Human Right~ and set out in the annex to the present
resolution,
Noting further that the Commission on Human
Rights is C'Ontinuing the preparation of a programme
of observances, measures and activities to he undertaken in 1968,
21 Ibid., Eigliteenth Session, Annexes, agen<la item 48, document A/5411.
22 !Ind., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 65, dornments A/5702 and Add.I.

1. Calls uf'on St;ites Members of the United Natiom
and mcmlwrs of the specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations, tlw specialized agencies
;md the national and international organizations con-·
cerned to devote the vear 1968 to intensified efforts and
undertakings in the· tie Id of human rights. including
an international reYiew of achievements in this field;
2. Urges Member States to take appropriate measures in preparation for the International Year for
Human Rights. and in particubr to emphasize the
urgent need to eliminate discrimination and othe1·
violations of human dignity, with special attention to
the aholition of racial discrimination and in particular
tlw policy of apartheid;
3. lm,1ifes all Member States to ratify before 1%R
the Conventions alreadv concluded in the fit>ld of human
rights, ancl in particul;r the following:
Snpplementary Convention on the Aholitinn oi
Slavery, the Slave Trade and Tnstit11tions :md
Practices Similar to Slavery;
fnternational Labonr Organisation Convention concerning the Abolition of Forced l .ahour;
International Labour Organisation Convention concerning Discrimination in respect of Fmployment
and Occupation;
International I ,abour Organisation Convention concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and \Vomen
\Vorkers for \Vork of Equal Value;
f nternational Labour Organisation Convention concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of
the Right to Organize ;
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultnral
Organization Convrntion against Disnimination in
Education;
Convention on the Preventinn :md Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide :
Convention on the Political Rights of Women;
International Convention on the Elimimtion of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Decides to hasten the conclusion of the following
draft conventions so that they may be open for ratification and accession if possible hefore 1968:
Draft Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
Draft Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights;
Draft International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Religious Intolerance;
Draft Convention on Freedom of Information;
5. Decides to complete by 1968 the consideration and
preparation of the draft declarations which have been
approved by the Commission on Human Rights and
hy the Commission on the Status of Women;
6. Approves the interim programme of measures and
activities envisaged for the United Nations annexed to
the present resolution and requests the SecretaryGeneral to proceed with the arrangements for the measures to be undertaken by the United Nations set out
in the annex;
7. Invites Member States to consider, in connexion
with the International Year for Human Rights, the
possible advantage of undertaking, on a regional basis,
common studies in order to estahlish more effective
protection of human rights ;
8. Invites regional inter-governmental organizations
with competence in the field to provide the international
conference envisaged for 1968 with full information
