S/PV.8604

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8604th meeting

Tuesday, 27 August 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Szczerski. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Ms. Niamke
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26328 (E)
*1926328*

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

is too horrible to fathom. In the past month, we have
seen an increase of violent incidents, including settlerrelated violence in the West Bank, and continuing
tensions in and around Gaza.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: I am afraid that I must begin this
month’s briefing to the Council by focusing on the rising
spectre of violence in the West Bank and Gaza and the
threat for a regional escalation. Both are happening
against the backdrop of the complete political deadlock
of the Middle East peace process and the lack of any
prospective to revive it.
On numerous occasions, the Secretary-General and
I have warned that the lack of a political horizon towards
resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of
the two-State solution, unilateral moves on the ground,
including settlement construction and expansion,
terror attacks and a multitude of other factors create an
explosive mix that can be resolved only by a leadership
that is willing to return and capable of returning to the
table for meaningful negotiations towards a sustainable
and just peace and that can stand up to extremists
and radicals and uphold what we in the international
community, the Security Council and the region have
said so many times, namely, that lasting peace can be
based only on the idea that Israelis and Palestinians live
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition,
as both peoples have a legitimate and historic right to
their own statehood.
That can be achieved on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions and mutual agreements.
If we stray from that framework, we will see the
inevitable radicalization. We cannot give up on the goal
of a peaceful resolution to the conflict. The alternative
2/18

27/08/2019

On 8 August, a 19-year-old Israeli was murdered in
the West Bank, stabbed close to the settlement of Migdal
Oz. Two Palestinian suspects were later arrested by the
Israeli security forces. On 15 August, two Palestinian
teenagers stabbed and injured an Israeli police officer in
Jerusalem’s Old City. One of the assailants was shot and
killed. The following day, two Israeli teenagers were
injured in a car-ramming attack near the settlement
of Elazar, south of Bethlehem. The 26-year-old driver
was shot and killed by an off-duty Israeli policeman.
On 23 August, an improvised explosive device was
detonated near the settlement of Dolev, north-west of
Ramallah, killing a 17-year-old Israeli girl and severely
injuring her father and brother.
I unequivocally condemn all attacks on Palestinian
and Israeli civilians. Such dangerous attacks serve only
those who want an escalation. Violence and terrorism
must be condemned by all. Their glorification by
Hamas, the Islamic Jihad and other Palestinian factions
is indeed deplorable.
In East Jerusalem, two months after the killing of
a 21-year-old Palestinian in the Al-Issawiya district,
tensions remain high as the Israeli security forces
continue to carry out raids and arrests. Overall in the
past month, two Palestinians and Israelis have been
killed and at least 102 Palestinians and seven Israelis
have been injured in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.
In response to the terrorist attack on 23 August
near the settlement of Dolev, the Israeli Government
decided to submit to the High Planning Committee a
plan for the establishment of the new neighbourhood in
Dolev with approximately 300 new housing units. That
decision is part of the practice to expand settlements in
the wake of attacks in the West Bank.
In addition, settlement expansion, demolitions
and seizures of Palestinian property continued during
the reporting. period. Citing the lack of Israeliissued building permits, which are nearly impossible
for Palestinians to obtain, the Israeli authorities
demolished or seized 22 structures in Area C, including
14 donor-funded aid structures and 11 structures in East
Jerusalem. Among the demolished structures were four
water cisterns, serving two herding communities in
19-26328

27/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

southern Hebron, which are already facing severe water
shortages. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the demolitions have resulted
in the displacement of 19 people, including six children,
and affected the livelihoods of some 2,000 others.
I reiterate the statement made by the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory that Israel’s policy of destroying Palestinian
property is not compatible with its obligations under
international humanitarian law.
On 5 and 6 August, Israel’s High Planning
Committee advanced plans for some 2,400 housing
units in Area C settlements, with 800 units reaching
the final stage of approval. Some 200 units in East
Jerusalem were also advanced during the reporting
period. Further, the Security Cabinet of Israel
discussed on 30 July the advancement of another 6,000
housing units and, in a rare step, unanimously approved
granting construction permits for 715 housing units for
Palestinians living in Area C.
The expansion of settlements has no legal effect and
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law. By
advancing the effective annexation of the West Bank, it
undermines the chances for establishing a Palestinian
State based on relevant United Nations resolutions as
part of a negotiated two-State solution.
Despite the relative calm over the past two months,
the situation in Gaza remains very fragile as violent
incidents continue. During the reporting period, some
11 rockets and mortars were launched from Gaza
towards Israel. Most were intercepted. Two landed in
the Israeli town of Sderot on 17 and 25 August, causing
material damage. In response, just yesterday, Israel
decided to temporarily reduce the fuel transfer to Gaza
by a half. That unfortunate decision has already resulted
in a reduction of energy supply to the Gaza Strip.
On several occasions during the reporting period,
some 15 militants from Gaza breached, or attempted
to breach, the perimeter fence, triggering retaliatory
fire or air strikes by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) in
which nine militants were killed. The weekly protests
at the perimeter fence also continued. Some individuals
engaged in violent activity. The IDF responded mostly
with riot dispersals means. However, live ammunition
was also used. One Palestinian was killed and 545 were
injured, including more than 150 children.

S/PV. 8604

Although there were fewer incidents involving
incendiary kites, balloons and other devices being
launched from Gaza as compared to the previous
period, at least 11 fires were reported. Israel must
calibrate its use of force and use lethal force only as a
last resort and in response to imminent threat of death or
serious injury. Hamas must prevent the indiscriminate
launching of rockets and mortars towards Israel. It
must ensure that protests at the fence remain peaceful
and prevent provocation. I would also like to reiterate
that the fate of two Israelis civilians and the bodies
of two soldiers missing in Gaza remain an important
humanitarian concern for all.
I am afraid that I also have to raise the alarm on
the deteriorating situation in the health-care sector
in Gaza, particularly the lack of resources, including
medical supplies. According to the World Health
Organization, in July, 254 items, or 49 per cent, of
essential medications, and 225 items, or 26 per cent, of
medical disposables were reported to be at less than one
month’s supply at Gaza’s central drugstore.
On 20 August, Deputy Special Coordinator
McGoldrick visited a hospital in Gaza and met with
a group of women beneficiaries of projects supported
by the United Nations Occupied Palestinian Territory
Humanitarian Fund. He heard about the large number
of health issues that Palestinian women are facing as a
result of the humanitarian crisis. Doctors highlighted the
scarcity of cancer drugs in Gaza and the unpredictable
referral system for treatment outside Gaza as serious
challenges. The United Nations is committed to
working with all parties, including donors, to prevent a
health crisis in the Gaza Strip.
Meanwhile, access to drinking water has improved
with the completion of a new desalination plant, which
will serve up to 200,000 people. I would like to express
my appreciation to the State of Kuwait for generously
funding that project through the Islamic Development
Bank. The past month also saw an increase in the
number of permits given to Palestinian businessmen
and labourers from Gaza.
While those efforts are not enough to fundamentally
change the harsh realities of life in the Gaza Strip, they
serve to lessen the impact of the ongoing humanitarian
and economic crises. The past month also saw serious
movement and access constraints continue on national
staff from United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations in Gaza. Those

19-263283/18

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

restrictions affect nearly all our national staff, who are
unable to leave Gaza for practically any purpose. Israel
must significantly improve the movement and access of
goods and people to and from Gaza as a step towards
lifting the closures in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
The Muslim holiday of Eid Al-Adha and the Jewish
commemoration of Tisha B’Av coincided this year on
10 August, which led to tensions at Jerusalem’s holy
sites. Israeli authorities allowed Jewish visitors to
access Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount on that day
under police protection. In the days before the holiday,
Muslim religious leaders urged worshippers to come en
masse to the Al-Aqsa Mosque for Eid prayers.
In clashes between police forces and worshippers
that took place before and during the entry of Jewish
visitors into the compound, 29 Palestinians were
injured, including the Chairman and members of the
Islamic Waqf Council. According to media reports,
Israeli security forces also sustained four injuries. I
reiterate the call for the status quo at the holy sites to
be upheld in line with the special and historic role of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as Custodian of the
Muslim and Christian Holy Sites in Jerusalem.
Following the demolitions of Palestinian homes
in Areas A, B and C of the West Bank on the East
Jerusalem side of the barrier, which Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo briefed the Council on last month
(see S/PV.8583), President Abbas stated on 25 July that
the Palestinian leadership would suspend compliance
with agreements signed with Israel and start putting in
place mechanisms to implement that decision. For the
sixth consecutive month, the Palestinian Government
refused to receive Israel’s transfer of tax revenues less
than the full amount owed to it.
On 22 August, however, following months of
consultations, Israel and the Palestinian Authority (PA)
agreed for the PA to receive approximately $568 million
in reimbursed taxes levied by Israel on fuel. That is an
important measure that will temporarily relieve the
PA’s financial situation. Disagreement on the bulk of
the tax revenue transfers, however, remains. In that
context, I reiterate my call on both sides to continue
their engagement in a constructive manner and comply
with the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations.
Turning briefly to other developments in the region,
on 25 August media reported that two unmanned aerial
vehicles had crashed in the southern suburbs of Beirut.
On 26 August, also according to media reports, a
4/18

27/08/2019

military base of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command in the Bekaa Valley, along
the Lebanese-Syrian, border was targeted in an air raid.
President Aoun and constitutional leaders in Lebanon
have referred to the drone incident as an assault on
Lebanon’s sovereignty and a blatant violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). The United Nations takes note of
those statements as well as of the ongoing investigation
into the incident by the Lebanese authorities. The
United Nations reiterates its appeal to all concerned
to cease violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and fully
implement its provisions. The United Nations calls on
the parties to exercise maximum restraint both in action
and rhetoric.
In conclusion, I would like to repeat, as I said at
the beginning of this briefing, that tangible steps can,
and must, be taken to reverse the negative trajectory of
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict — urgently — in order
to counter the rising spectre of violence and the threat
of regional escalation. The United Nations remains
committed to supporting Palestinians and Israelis
to resolve the conflict based on international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and prior
agreements, and to realizing the vision of two
States — Israel and Palestine — living side by side in
peace and security.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chief of Cabinet of the President of Poland.
At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his informative
briefing. I also want to take this opportunity to
commend Mr. Mladenov for his relentless efforts to
restore peace and stability in the Middle East. I can
assure him that Poland highly values his role in the
process of the stabilization of one of the most crucial
regions to the world’s security.
Regrettably, for yet another month, we have
witnessed the fading of the prospect for peace between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. The situation on
the ground continues to deteriorate, deepening the
atmosphere of mutual distrust. Only a couple of days
ago, rockets were fired once again from Gaza towards
southern Israel. Fragments of one of them struck a
home in the town of Sderot earlier this month. Light
was shed on worrisome reports of several incidents of
infiltration into Israeli territory by armed Palestinians
19-26328

27/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

from the Gaza Strip, which were followed by exchanges
of fire.
I want to reiterate that Poland strongly condemns
such acts, as well as all instances of terrorism and
incitement. Five years have passed since the previous
full-Scale conflict in the Gaza Strip. It is imperative
that all parties take the necessary actions to stop another
wave of hideous violence and engage in good faith in
efforts aimed at achieving lasting de-escalation.
Poland is also concerned about any unilateral actions
taken by Israel in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We
deem the settlement policy in the occupied territories
illegal under international law and a formidable obstacle
to peace that undermines the chances for establishing
a viable Palestinian State. Reaching a breakthrough on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation remains a prerequisite
to peace. Poland calls on the Palestinian factions to
engage in the reconciliation process and commends
Egypt on its role in facilitating it. There is a pressing
need to restore a consensual political atmosphere for a
meaningful peace process to be delivered. A failure to
do so could result in reaching a point of no return.
All parties must demonstrate their commitment
to peace through actions and policies. Poland remains
a proponent of a negotiated two-State solution, based
on the internationally agreed-upon parameters, which
should lead to Israel living side-by-side, in peace and
security, with a sovereign, neighbouring and democratic
Palestine. We support all international efforts aimed
at breaking the current impasse in the peace process.
We commend the United States for its commitment to
that end. Nevertheless, without the far-sighted vision
of the leadership of both sides and their readiness to
compromise, as was the case at Camp David in 1978,
reaching lasting peace will be impossible.
We furthermore believe that, without respect for
the basic rules of international law, including those
pertaining to the protection of civilians, there can be
no lasting peace in the Middle East. Poland continues
to actively advocate for compliance with international
humanitarian law, which constitutes the fundamental
means of protecting civilian populations.
As we heard during the Special Coordinator’s
briefing, last weekend we witnessed air strikes in
Lebanon near the Syrian border. Those followed the
crash of two drones in the southern suburbs of Beirut
during the weekend. We have underlined many times
that increased instability in one country may quickly

S/PV. 8604

further destabilize an already violent region. We
therefore call on all sides to exercise maximum restraint,
as the situation in the region remains very tense.
In that context, I also want to underline that
Poland remains firmly committed to supporting the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We consider it to be a
major contributor of vital services to those in need.
Supporting the Agency’s work is an act of humanity
that makes a tangible difference in the lives of those
directly affected by conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Welcome
you to New York, Mr. President. It is good to have you
with us in the Security Council this morning. I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing and his
tireless efforts.
I want to start by expressing our deepest
condolences to the family and friends of Rina Shnerb,
who was brutally murdered in an improvised explosive
devise attack while hiking in the West Bank with her
family. Our thoughts and prayers are also with her
father and brother, who were seriously wounded in the
attack. That attack occurred just weeks after the murder
of Israel Defense Forces Corporal Dvir Sorek. Attacks
such as those undermine attempts to find a solution to
the conflict and build trust between the parties. The
perpetrators of those brutal murders must be brought
to justice.
I also want to highlight Hamas’ praise for those
attacks, which is deeply disturbing. Speaking about the
death of Rina Shnerb, a Hamas leader said, “I bless this
operation and greet the hands of those who executed it”.
How can that be tolerated? And how can so many here at
the United Nations refuse to condemn an organization,
Hamas, whose leaders make such statements?
This month we also continued to see rocket
attacks launched from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and
other terrorist factions, as well as armed infiltration
attempts. That represents an alarming escalation,
and we condemn those attacks. It is beyond time for
Hamas to put the interests of the people of Gaza first
by rejecting violence, instead of seeking to extract
concessions through attacks and threats.

19-263285/18

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In that vein, I recently met with the family of
Hadar Goldin, whose body is being held by Hamas as
a bargaining chip, along with the body of Oron Shaul.
As we tragically recall, Hadar was killed during a
ceasefire at the end of the 2014 Gaza conflict, and it
has been almost five years exactly since his family
began their struggle to have Hadar’s remains returned.
As the Special Coordinator noted, the return of those
remains is an issue of serious humanitarian concern,
and we urgently call for their return, which is long
overdue, to take place now. We also cannot forget
Avraham Mengistu and Hisham Al-Sayed, who
continue to be imprisoned by Hamas. Their families
must recover their loved ones. Those are the acts of a
brutal terrorist organization, whose actions should and
must be condemned.
To conclude, I note that for years this body has
come together to discuss this contentious topic; but we
have seen little success in making progress towards a
solution that creates a lasting, secure and prosperous
future for both Israelis and Palestinians. The United
States remains committed to pursuing a comprehensive
peace through direct negotiations. We encourage
all those present to keep an open mind regarding the
United States efforts and to remain constructively
engaged with our team as we move forward.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to welcome you, Mr. President,
to preside over this meeting. We also thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.
We look forward to the submission of at least two written
reports per year on the state of the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), in accordance with the
agreements reached on different issues in the Security
Council, the provisions of that resolution and the note
by the President contained in document S/2017/507.
“The Security Council is the highest world body.
After the Council, we leave our issue in the hands of the
Almighty, until Judgment Day. If justice for all people
cannot be attained here, where should we go? Please
help us. We call upon the Council to help us so that we
do not commit acts that are at variance with our beliefs,
those of the Council and the world.” (S/PV.8183, p.10)
Those are the words that His Excellency the
President of the State of Palestine, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
the highest Palestinian official, used in addressing
the international community from this Chamber in
6/18

27/08/2019

February 2018, when he called for the liberty, dignity
and independence of his people, just like other peoples.
Almost one and a half years have passed since he
launched that call and, regrettably, we have not lifted a
finger in response.
The Oslo Accords are nearly 25 years old, and
we have had great hopes for leading to a just and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question
which is at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
However, the Israeli acts of aggression continue to
entrench the occupation and undermine any real chance
for peace that would ensure the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. The occupying Power continues its
arbitrary detentions and the demolition and seizure of
Palestinian homes.
Moreover, the occupying Power continues the
construction of settlements in an unprecedented
manner, especially after the most recent announcement
made by the Israeli occupation authority to build
over 2,300 settlement units in the West Bank. It also
continues to expand the already existing settlements
and forcibly displace Palestinian civilians, in another
blatant violation of resolution 2334 (2016). It continues,
as well, to tighten the siege imposed on the Gaza Strip
and its aggression on Islamic and Christian sanctuaries.
The Israeli occupation authority takes illegal unilateral
decisions, such as freezing part of Palestinian tax
revenues and refusing to renew the mandate of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron, not to
mention its measures that aim to change the historic
and democratic nature of the city of Jerusalem. It tries
to impose a fait accompli and exercises sovereignty
over the territories that it occupies.
There are those who believe that the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories cannot get any worse
than they are at present. However, the daily violations
against the Palestinian people are unprecedented, given
the dangerous precedents that the Palestinian question
has recently witnessed, the most notable of which was
the recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
and the relocation of embassies there, while ignoring
the fact that East Jerusalem is Palestinian land that has
been occupied since 1967.
All those measures, and many others, have
compelled the Palestinian Authority to halt its
implementation of the agreements that were reached
with the Israeli occupying Power. We all have
responsibilities to help meet the legitimate aspirations of
19-26328

27/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Palestinian people and to uphold the responsibilities
that we have been tasked as Security Council members
to protect civilians, given the escalating violence.
We call upon Israel, the occupying Power, to cease
all acts of aggression against the Palestinian people,
commit to the protection of civilians and guarantee the
implementation of international law and the relevant
resolutions. Palestine cannot remain the exception
to the rule. In addition, the international community
must be committed to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and provide its budget with the necessary resources
and financial contributions so that it continues to
offer its educational, health and social services to the
community of Palestinian refugees.
In conclusion, despite what President Abbas said
before the Council, we are committed to peace as
a strategic choice. Arab States concluded the Arab
Peace Initiative in 2002. It is based on international
law, resolutions of international legitimacy and the
principle of land for peace. We cannot accept a solution
to the Arab-Israeli conflict that is not in line with those
international terms of reference, to be preceded by an
end to the occupation by Israel of the Palestinian and
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem; its recognition of the State of Palestine
and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination and right
of return; compensation to Palestinian refugees; and
resolving their cause in a just manner, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Moreover,
we call on Israel to stop its repeated violations of the
sovereignty of Lebanon and to respect its obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1701
(2006).
Ms. Niamke (Cote d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Welcome to New York, Mr. President.
Мy delegation commends Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his detailed briefing on the latest
developments in the situation in the region, including
the Palestinian question.
Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the
ongoing stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process. The hope created by the Oslo Accords has
been eroded, giving way to radical rhetoric and its

S/PV. 8604

corollary of episodic violence that contributes only to
the deterioration of the situation in Gaza and the West
Bank. The lack of a viable framework for dialogue
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides within which
they could resolve their differences leads to further
mistrust, which fuels outbreaks of violence. In the light
of that impasse, my country encourages the parties
concerned to listen carefully to the calls for dialogue
launched by the international community.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that just and
lasting peace is not possible without a negotiated
political solution and compromises on the most complex
issues. To that end, it is important that both sides refrain
from any actions that could lead to a resurgence of
deadly clashes, which would ruin hopes for peace and
undoubtedly plunge the region into a spiral of conflicts
with disastrous consequences.
Côte d’Ivoire has faith in the virtues of dialogue
and urges the international community to intensify its
mediation efforts in order to bring both parties back
to the negotiating table for further peace talks without
preconditions and under the auspices of the United
Nations. This is the opportunity for my country to
reaffirm its commitment to the security of the State of
Israel and the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and, consequently, our support for
a solution involving two States, coexisting peacefully
within the framework of the 1967 borders.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to
deteriorate, while the ongoing opposition between
Fatah and Hamas further complicates the development
of appropriate responses to the many difficulties faced
by the Palestinian people. The estimated unemployment
rate of 53 per cent, the drastic decline in the supply of
decent housing, school and hospital infrastructure and
the continued decrease in basic social services, such as
drinking water and electricity, are all vulnerabilities
that deserve the attention of development partners and
humanitarian agencies.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call for a convergence of
views among Council members and encourages them
to work to mobilize the necessary assistance to meet
the essential needs of those affected. My delegation
also urges international partners, as providers of
humanitarian assistance, to continue their support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose crucial role

19-263287/18

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in alleviating the suffering of the Palestinian people is
well established.
My delegation commends Mr. Mladenov on his
resolute commitment, which clearly illustrates the
mediation efforts of the United Nations in the quest
for a negotiated political solution to the current crisis
between Israelis and Palestinians. Côte d’Ivoire
would like to reiterate its support and encourage
him to continue his good offices with the parties to
the conflict. The Council also has an urgent duty to
overcome differences and work towards peace, security
and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes you, Mr. President, to
the Security Council to preside over today’s meeting. I
would also like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his briefing and for his efforts.
Recently, the conflict in the Gaza Strip has
escalated. The situation in Jerusalem remains grim.
Settlement construction has continued. Inflammatory
rhetoric is frequent. The Middle East peace process has
stalled. At the same time, the situation in the Middle
East has become increasingly tense. Local conflicts
continue to emerge. China is very concerned about
the situation. I would like to take this opportunity to
emphasize the following points.
First, the Palestinian question is at the core of
the Middle East issue and at the root of the region’s
issues. Safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests
of the Palestinian people is a shared responsibility
of the international community. Foreign occupation
and historical grievances are at the source of the
complexity and insolubility of the Palestinian
question. The international community should uphold
multilateralism, promote dialogue and negotiations
and find a peaceful resolution to the Palestinian-Israeli
issue through political consultations. Violence or threat
of force will not help solve the problem. All the relevant
parties should move towards each other, actively
promote internal reconciliation in Palestine, put an
immediate end to inflammatory words, actions and
mutual accusations and avoid unilateral measures that
undermine trust, so as to create favourable conditions
for resuming dialogue.
Secondly, efforts should be made to promote
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian issue, based on existing international
consensus. The two-State solution is the only right
8/18

27/08/2019

way to solve the Palestinian-Israeli issue. The relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative constitute the
fundamental parameters to be followed in that regard.
The international community should proceed on that
basis to promote an early resumption of peace talks
between the two sides, with a view to establishing a fully
sovereign Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Any new initiative
should be in line with those international parameters.
Thirdly, resolution 2334 (2016) should be effectively
implemented. Settlement-building continues, and the
prospect of the two-State solution has been severely
undermined. The parties concerned should immediately
stop all settlement activities in the occupied territories,
stop demolishing Palestinian houses and destroying
the property of the Palestinian people and should take
measures to prevent violence against civilians. All legal
and unilateral actions aimed at legitimizing settlementbuilding should be stopped immediately, and practical
measures should be taken to redress their impact.
China hopes that the Secretary-General will submit to
the Council another report on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).
Fourthly, we should pay close attention to, as
well as improve, the economic and humanitarian
conditions in Palestine. The party concerned should
fully lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip as soon as
possible, effectively fulfil its obligations under relevant
international treaties, such as the Paris Protocol on
Economic Relations, and fully implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) has made vigorous efforts
to improve humanitarian conditions for Palestinian
refugees, including by safeguarding their rights, easing
the pressure on host countries, actively promoting
regional peace and stability and preventing the spread
of terrorism and extremist ideology in refugee camps.
China appreciates those efforts. The international
community should continue to lend firm support to
UNRWA and contribute to improving humanitarian
conditions for Palestinian refugees.
China has always been committed to promoting
the Middle East peace process and will continue to
follow the four-point proposal put forward by Chinese
President Xi Jinping to promote a political settlement of
the Palestinian issue. China will continue to strengthen
communication and cooperation with the major parties
19-26328

27/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8604

and countries of the region and will play a positive and
constructive role in achieving peace in the Middle East.

accompanied by worrisome statements regarding the
annexation of all or part of the occupied territories.

China is also assisting Palestine to the best of its
ability in the area of development. On 30 July, China and
Palestine signed a document on the implementation of a
Ramallah schools project, which will provide hundreds
of secondary school students in Ramallah with access to
nearby schools. China has also actively promoted local
exchanges in cooperation with Palestine, supported
local social development and provided support to
UNRWA. We will continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to Palestine through bilateral channels.

The demolition of Palestinian homes in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem are also continuing
unabated. France, along with its European partners,
has condemned the demolition of several buildings by
the Israeli army in the area of Wadi Al-Hummus, East
Jerusalem. Those demolitions in zones A and B are
unprecedented, illegal under international law and serve
to further undermine the Oslo Accords. As reaffirmed
in resolution 2334 (2016), settlement is illegal under
international law. This policy aggravates tensions on
the ground and undermines the conditions for a just
and lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians and
must be brought to an end.

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his enlightening briefing,
which provided us with a clear and precise outline of
the situation and the issues at hand.
First of all, I would like to draw our collective
attention to the further deterioration of the situation in
Gaza and the need to address it. The recent increase
in tensions we are witnessing today must compel us
to closely follow developments in Gaza in the coming
weeks. We must do everything we can to avoid any new
escalation of the conflict, as we have been observing
since early May. In that context, we call on the parties
concerned to exercise full restraint. Further civilian
casualties must be avoided at all costs. I would also
reiterate France’s strong condemnation of shooting
from Gaza towards inhabited areas in Israel.
These tensions are a reflection of the broader
crisis throughout Gaza, which is simultaneously
humanitarian, economic and political in nature. As we
know, lasting stability will be possible in Gaza only in
the context of a negotiated settlement. That requires
the full return of the Palestinian Authority, on the one
hand, and the lifting of the blockade, on the other hand,
accompanied by credible security guarantees for Israel.
Secondly, I would like to refer to the dangers that
today weigh heavily on the two-State solution and risk
irreversible damage to it. The ongoing settlement policy
in East Jerusalem and the West Bank continues to take
us further away from a two-State solution. France
condemned the recent decisions taken by the Israeli
authorities on 5 and 6 August to allow the construction
of 2,500 housing units in the West Bank, in addition to
the 4,500 new housing units that have been approved
since the beginning of the year. These decisions are
all the more disturbing given that this policy has been

Finally, France followed with concern the clashes
on the Esplanade of the Mosques that took place
on 11 August in the context of Muslim and Jewish
holidays. We call on all parties to refrain from any
act or statement that could exacerbate tensions and to
demonstrate a sense of responsibility with a view to
mitigating the situation. France recalls its commitment
to preserving the status quo of 1967 at the holy sites of
Jerusalem. To call the status quo into question would be
fraught with the risk of regional destabilization.
As the backdrop continues to worsen, France calls
for safeguarding the two-State solution. A solution to the
conflict must be, as we know, fundamentally political
and based on the long-standing parameters, defined in
particular by the relevant Council resolutions, and in
response to the legitimate aspirations of both parties,
namely, the establishment of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security,
within secure and recognized borders, with Jerusalem
as its capital. France, in conjunction with its European
partners, stands ready to support all efforts, including
economic initiatives, as long as they fall within the
framework that we have collectively defined.
With such a solution pending, we must urgently
focus on the immediate improvement of the
humanitarian situation, especially in Gaza, where basic
essentials — such as medicine in particular, but also
fuel — must be able to be delivered. We must also pay
special attention to what Mr. Mladenov has just told us
about the risk of a health crisis in Gaza.
Moreover, while the Palestinian Authority is
experiencing a worrisome fiscal situation, France
notes with satisfaction the agreement reached on tax

19-263289/18

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

exemptions on oil imports by the Palestinian Authority.
This represents a first step towards a resolution of
the ongoing crisis over Israeli budgetary payments to
the Palestinian Authority. In that connection, France
encourages both parties to continue their discussions
in that direction.
Allow me to reiterate that, in the absence of a
political solution for a just and lasting peace, the
programmes of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East are
essential to provide vital assistance to more than
5 million Palestinian refugees, thereby contributing to
the stability of the entire region.
In conclusion, turning to recent developments in
Lebanon, as the Permanent Representative of Kuwait
mentioned, I would like to take the opportunity of this
briefing to express France’s deep concern regarding the
situation. In the context of current regional tensions,
it is imperative that all parties avoid an escalation and
comply with the relevant Council resolutions, while
also refraining from any violation of the Blue Line.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.
Once again, we note that the situation is
deteriorating, and tensions are mounting. The
settlement-building policy and related measures of
eviction and demolition are continuing unabated
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. This
policy undermines respect for the basic rights of
Palestinians, as well as fundamentally — and soon,
irremediably — undermining the two-State solution,
which we support.

27/08/2019

efforts of humanitarian actors. In particular, I would
like to stress the importance of the mandate of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Beyond humanitarian support, there will be
lasting stability in Gaza only through a negotiated
settlement, which involves lifting the blockade and
opening up crossing points, while taking into account
Israel’s legitimate concerns about its security. In the
meantime, we call on the Israeli authorities to ensure
unhindered access to humanitarian and development
actors and goods.
A political solution to the crisis also requires
the full return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza.
We reiterate our call to the parties to relaunch the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process.
Children continue to be severely affected by this
conflict, as also shown in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Children and Armed Conflict of 20 June
2019 (S/2019/509). We call on all parties to refrain
from the excessive use of force. We urge Israel, as
the occupying Power, to put in place preventive and
protective measures. We call on Palestinian movements
to refrain from encouraging children to participate
in violence.
We are also concerned about the detention of
children and the circumstances in which it takes place.
We call on the Israeli authorities to respect international
norms governing juvenile justice, to stop submitting
children to administrative detention, to end all forms of
ill-treatment in detention and to refrain from enlisting
child detainees as informants.

Belgium strongly condemns the policy of settlement
building, as well as any initiative aimed at consolidating
it. We will not recognize any unilateral annexation of
the occupied territories. We recall that Israel, as the
occupying Power, is obliged to ensure the protection of
the rights of the Palestinian population. Moreover, we
condemn the attacks against the Israeli population. We
are also concerned about the recent clashes at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. It is imperative to preserve
the status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem.

Belgium remains convinced that there is no
other option than a negotiated solution, based on the
coexistence of two States, with the city of Jerusalem
as the future capital of the two States, in accordance
with the internationally agreed parameters. Those
parameters were defined and endorsed by the Council.
It is therefore necessary for the Council to guarantee
their implementation. Belgium will continue to work to
that end in order to meet the legitimate aspirations of
Palestinians and Israelis.

For 12 years, life in Gaza has been dominated by
the blockade, which is seriously affecting the health
and education sectors, among others. Women and
young people are especially impacted. We welcome the

Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting and your presence here this
morning, Sir, to lead the work of the Security Council.
We thank Mr. Mladenov for his detailed briefing.

10/18

19-26328

27/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peru notes with deep concern the continuing
deterioration of the political and humanitarian
conditions underlying the question of Palestine.
We must continue condemning the recurrence of
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
by Hamas and other radical Palestinian actors, the
disproportionate nature of Israeli responses and the
confrontational rhetoric of their respective authorities.
This dynamic, coupled with the inaction of the Security
Council and the inertia on the part of certain key actors,
has a negative impact on an already highly volatile
environment. Bringing this grave situation to an end is
a challenging but urgent undertaking.
Under the prevailing circumstances, we reaffirm
our commitment to the only solution we deem viable
and consistent with international law, namely, that of
two States with internationally recognized and secure
borders, to be negotiated directly between Israel and
Palestine, on the basis of the borders in place in 1967,
which must also lead to the determination of the final
status of Jerusalem.
We recognize the right of Israel to safeguard
its own security and existence through self-defence
measures exercised legitimately in accordance with the
principles of legality, proportionality and precaution.
In that regard, we must remember Israel’s obligation
to comply with the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council. In particular, we view it as urgent to put an
end, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), to the
intensified settlement activities, property demolitions
and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967. Such practices contravene international
law, seriously jeopardize the territorial integrity of
the Palestinian State and undermine the prospects for
reaching a solution based on the existence of two States.
We furthermore emphasize the urgent need to
continue efforts to address the serious humanitarian
crisis in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
has deteriorated following cuts in the financing of
aid programmes. In that regard, it is imperative to
provide continuity to United Nations infrastructure
and development projects in Gaza, make gains in the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process and continue
mobilizing the support of the international community
to address the financial difficulties facing the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We also wish to recognize
the willingness of the Israeli Government to agree

S/PV. 8604

on a solution allowing for the release to Palestinian
authorities of previously withheld fiscal revenues.
Following the recent episodes of violence in
Lebanon, Peru underscores the need to respect the
country’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, in line
with the provisions of international law and, specifically,
resolution 1701 (2006). We urge all the parties involved
to act as called for by the prevailing circumstances,
refrain from unilateral actions that could escalate
tensions and prioritize diplomatic channels.
In conclusion, I would like to note that Peru
looks forward to receiving the written report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) next month,
which will contribute to greater transparency and
deeper discussion within the Council.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I should like to
join others in welcoming you, Sir, to the Security
Council today, as well as to thank Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing and, through him, his team for all they
are doing.
I want to start by stating clearly that the brutal
murder of an Israeli soldier on 8 August and the
improvised explosive device terror attack, which killed
a 17-year-old Israeli on 23 August, are both an outrage.
This perpetual cycle of violence does not serve anyone’s
interests and must end.
The United Kingdom is also concerned by the
increase in tension in Gaza, including the four attempts
this month by Gazan militants to infiltrate Israel, which
contribute to an environment of terror. We utterly
condemn the abhorrent rocket attacks by militants
in Gaza. Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and all
militant groups must cease all actions that are violent or
provocative or put civilian lives at risk. We encourage
the Palestinian Authority, Israel and regional and
international actors to put forward sustainable, longterm proposals for resolving the threat posed to Israel’s
security by Hamas and for returning the Palestinian
Authority to Government functions in Gaza.
It is also important that we continue to address the
underlying causes of the economic and humanitarian
situation in Gaza, in particular, by improving
movement and access for people and goods. On this
point regarding the humanitarian situation in Gaza, let
me say that the United Kingdom is of course firmly
committed to supporting the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

19-2632811/18

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(UNRWA) and Palestinian refugees across the Middle
East. UNRWA is a vital humanitarian and stabilizing
force in the region. The United Kingdom has increased
its funding to £65.5 million this year, to match our
support from 2018, but does remain concerned about
the funding crisis.
Turning to settlements, the United Kingdom is
seriously concerned about the plans announced earlier
this month by Israel to advance over 2,300 housing units
in Israeli settlements in the West Bank. We urge Israel
to halt its settlement expansion, which is contrary to
international law and promotes the effective annexation
of the West Bank. As we put on record before in the
Security Council, the United Kingdom would be
strongly opposed to any move to annex all or part of
the West Bank. Such a move would be deeply damaging
to prospects for lasting peace between Israel and the
Palestinians and could not pass unchallenged.
During last month’s open debate (see S/PV.8583),
many Member States expressed alarm regarding
the demolition of Palestinian properties in Wadi
Al-Hummus in Sur Bahir. I reiterate that the United
Kingdom remains seriously concerned by the continued
demolition of Palestinian property and evictions of
Palestinians by Israeli authorities. This practice causes
unnecessary suffering to ordinary Palestinians and is
harmful to the peace process.
I also want to touch on the clashes that took place on
the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 11 August,
during the religious holidays of Eid Al-Adha and
Tisha B’Av. The United Kingdom urges all parties to
maintain calm, avoid provocation and uphold the status
quo to ensure the safety and security of the Temple
Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif and all who worship there,
particularly during religious observances.

27/08/2019

the Israeli Government to reverse its decision, which
undermines the Oslo Accords. We encourage the
Palestinian Authority to accept the remainder of the
revenues on a provisional basis, as refusing all revenues
only harms Palestinians.
Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live
in peace and security. The ongoing violence serves to
underline that a just and lasting resolution that ends
the occupation and delivers peace to both Israelis and
Palestinians is long overdue. The United Kingdom
therefore continues to encourage the United States
Administration to bring forward detailed proposals
for a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement that
address the legitimate concerns of both parties. And,
as we have said before, the best way to achieve that
is through substantive peace talks between the parties,
leading to a two-State solution, based on 1967 lines,
with Jerusalem as a shared capital, and a just, fair,
agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we welcome you,
Mr. President, to New York. We also thank Poland for
having included the Israeli-Palestinian issue on this
month’s agenda.
I would also like to thank the team of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for the detailed and informative
briefing he just gave us. His ongoing dedication and
commitment to his sensitive mission in the Middle East
are commendable.

I noted what Mr. Mladenov had to say about the
recent escalation between Israel and Hizbullah. That
is a cause for concern for the United Kingdom. Of
course, we support Israel’s right to security, but we
also condemn violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty. We
urge both sides to show restraint and to de-escalate. A
conflict would be in no one’s interests.

On Friday, 23 August, the response of Israeli
forces to the protests in the Gaza Strip resulted in
hundreds of injuries. Rockets launched at Israel from
Palestinian territories by radical groups and Israeli air
strikes on Gaza cause significant damage on both sides.
That is compounded by improper exchanges between
Israeli settlers in the occupied Palestinian territories
and local Palestinians. Israel must respond with
proportionate force and the terrorist attacks must stop.
The environment is quite hostile, which is worrisome
for Equatorial Guinea.

Turning to the more positive developments, the
United Kingdom welcomes the agreement between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to transfer
outstanding fuel taxes. But we remain worried about
the impact of Israel’s wider decision to withhold tax
revenues from the Palestinian Authority. We encourage

That is the sad state of coexistence between
Israelis and Palestinians. The conflict between the two
peoples has gone through different scenarios in the
almost 70 years of its existence, sometimes reaching
the highest alert levels. And that, which is no small
thing, has happened in the full view of all the members

12/18

19-26328

27/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Council, the United Nations and the entire
international community.
The lack of a sustainable and definitive political
solution to this conflict, over such a long period — in
addition to being an unending source of destabilization
for the entire region — could raise questions about the
prestige and leadership of this Organization in general,
and of the Council in particular. That is what we all
absolutely must avoid. Instead, we should surprise
those who doubt the effectiveness and ability to achieve
results of the United Nations. We have sufficient tools
to do so, but we sometimes lack consensus and unity
among all Council members.
We held a debate recently on international
peace and security that focused on the Middle East
(see S/PV.8600), in which, among other things, we
underlined the importance of a political process
based on inclusive dialogue between the parties to the
conflict. Almost all of us agreed that a lasting peace
between Israelis and Palestinians would be possible
only through a two-State solution. To that end, we
stressed the essential role of the United Nations in all
the conflicts in the region — a critical responsibility
that falls to the Security Council as the principal organ
for the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security.
With regard to the Gaza Strip, we welcome the efforts
of the United Nations, which is working closely with
Egypt to mediate and reduce tensions in that enclave.
According to Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, last month
those efforts led to an Israeli-authorized extension of
the Gaza fishing zone from 10 to 15 nautical miles, the
return to the Gaza Strip of 44 confiscated fishing boats
and certain flexibility in some of the conditions for the
travel of businessmen based in Gaza.
We also welcome the United Nations efforts to
generate employment through the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which recently created about 9,000 employment
opportunities, including 3,000 for women. In any case,
the humanitarian situation in Gaza remains troubling,
and the Council must continue to be seized of this issue.
Our delegation hopes that all efforts continue in this
positive direction so that we can resolve all the political,
economic and humanitarian concerns that threaten the
stability of this population enclave, which has always

S/PV. 8604

created a volatile atmosphere that does not favour
either of the parties. In that regard, we urge Israelis
and Palestinians to refrain from unilateral actions that
could exacerbate an already complex environment. We
must alleviate the suffering of the people of Gaza.
Finally, on the Palestinian question in general,
the delegation of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
commitment to supporting all initiatives that take into
consideration existing instruments of international law,
such as the resolutions of the Council and the General
Assembly, as well as those of other internationally
recognized entities. For Equatorial Guinea, it is
paramount to find a solution resulting from negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians that is applauded by
the international community. That solution must be a
two-State solution, with independent States living in
peace, with security guarantees for both and for the
other States of the region.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We welcome the presence of the
Secretary of State of the Chancellery of the President
Poland. It is an honour to have you among us. We also
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing.
The Dominican Republic reiterates its grave
concerns about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The
demolition and seizure of Palestinian property by
the Israeli authorities continue. Sixty-six buildings
were recently demolished or seized owing to a lack
of construction permits, which are difficult for
Palestinians to obtain as they are issued by the Israeli
authorities. This practice must stop. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the recent incidents caused the displacement of 90
Palestinians, including 58 children.
Although there has been a reduction in violence in
Gaza in recent months, protests continue in peripheral
areas. Last Friday, 2 August, during what was the sixtyninth week of the Great March of Return protests, the
Israeli forces again used firearms and other violent
means of controlling the protests. There are reports
of 64 injured, including 27 children. The Dominican
Republic calls on the international community to
condemn all violations of international law and to ensure
that civilians taking part in the protests are protected.
The Dominican Republic continues to defend the
current international consensus whereby the only way
forward for Palestinians and Israelis is the negotiation

19-2632813/18

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of a two-State solution with borders based on the
1967 lines. We reiterate the importance of creating an
enabling environment for peace in order to pave the
way for talks on all final-status issues, including the
issue of Jerusalem.
With regard to Palestinian attacks against Israel,
the Dominican Republic maintains its position,
namely, that we emphatically condemn any act of
violence. The launching of rockets and mortars towards
civilian populations is inhumane and prohibited under
international law. Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad must stop this practice immediately.
The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories continues to be a source of concern and
could be further undermined if the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), which provides assistance
to over 3 million Palestinians, does not return to a
level of funding that enables it to meet the needs of
at-risk populations. A recent report by the UNRWA
ethics office revealed evidence that UNRWA senior
management has engaged in “sexual misconduct,
nepotism, retaliation, discrimination and other abuses of
authority”. As a consequence, two donors, Switzerland
and the Netherlands, immediately suspended their
contributions. Belgium followed suit shortly after.
In conclusion, we urge all the parties concerned to
work together to open the door to talks and to avoid
provocations and soaring rhetoric. We trust that the
work of the international organizations is vital in
providing relief, reducing the risk of violence and
finding a solution to this regrettable situation.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by welcoming
you, Mr. President, to the Chamber and thanking you for
presiding over a meeting on this very important issue.
I also wish to thank Mr. Mladenov for his important
update on the situation on the ground. Indonesia shares
his concern about the rising spectre of violence in the
West Bank and Gaza. This is an issue that really must
be addressed.
At a debate on this issue last week, we discussed
at length peace and security in the Middle East (see
S/PV.8600). It is important to point out that, during the
debate, there was a general consensus that the longstanding Israel-Palestine problem is the core issue of
conflict in the region, and that arriving at a durable
solution on this issue requires our commitment to
14/18

27/08/2019

multilateralism and the rule of law. With that in mind, I
wish to highlight some pertinent points.
First, violence and provocations must stop. We
are appalled at the continuing provocative actions
by the occupying Power, in breach of international
law and various United Nations resolutions. In Gaza,
violence against Palestinian civilians persists, with
no accountability. In East Jerusalem, the storming of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound by Israeli occupation
forces on the morning of Eid Al-Adha two weeks ago is
a serious act of provocation that gave rise to religious
and political tension. We need to make sure that such
reckless action against the holy site never happens
again in order to avoid creating further instability in
a region already experiencing unprecedented turmoil.
These cycles of violence and provocation must stop.
The Government of Israel must adhere to international
law, particularly international humanitarian law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, the root cause of the conflict must be
addressed. We must never forget the elephant in the
room, which is the illegal occupation of Palestinian land
by Israel. Israel’s persistent illegal settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories is a clear sign
of it effective ongoing occupation of Palestine. This
illegal action is designed to alter the demography,
characteristics and geographic realities of the occupied
Palestinian territories, thereby making a solution to the
protracted conflict more difficult to attain. This is the
root cause of the problem that requires the Council’s
utmost attention. It is quite unfortunate that this organ
has failed to respond to such illegal actions, regardless
of the various attempts that have been made. In other
words, multilateralism is under constant threat.
Thirdly, humanitarian assistance must be sustained.
Since 2018, there has been a sharp deterioration
in the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. In
the West Bank, the coercive environment, which
is intensified by the ongoing demolitions, forced
evictions, discriminatory planning, access restrictions,
settlement expansion and settler violence, is increasing
the vulnerability of the Palestinian population. In
addition, Palestinian refugees are experiencing
increased suffering due to the lack of funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Indonesia shares
the view that improving UNRWA management is
crucial but, at the same time, UNRWA should not be
defunded or shut down. The role of UNRWA is vital
19-26328

27/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

not only as a lifeline, but also as a safeguard of the
Palestinian right of return against all the Powers that
want to do away with it.
Regarding the reference by the Special Coordinator
to the Israeli drone crash in Lebanon, Indonesia
strongly condemns that attack as well as the daily
violation of Lebanese sovereignty by Israel, which
constitutes a clear violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
Indonesia believes that the Council needs to take these
daily violations seriously as a potential trigger of
renewed conflict.
To conclude, Indonesia wishes to reiterate the need
for the members of the Council to unite in greater
commitment to the ever-increasing challenge of the
peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
guided by multilateralism and international law. As
stated during my intervention last week, overcoming
the violence and atrocious humanitarian conditions
in Palestine and achieving a durable solution to the
conflict will come down to the ability and willingness
of the Council to act courageously to realize a twoState solution.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me begin by
extending a very warm welcome to you, Mr. President; it
is great to have you here in New York. Let me also thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive
and unfortunately, once again, very sobering report.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is first and
foremost a political conflict that requires a political
solution. Germany therefore remains fully and firmly
committed to a negotiated two-State solution based on
the internationally agreed parameters as the only viable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
As already stated last month (see S/PV.8583), we
are extremely concerned about repeated statements
from various sides in Israel calling for an annexation of
all or parts of the West Bank. Should such statements
become Government policy or law, it would constitute a
clear violation of international law, which prohibits the
acquisition of territory by force.
It is a truism that there is no fast track to peace.
However, bypassing the most controversial questions
in the process by taking them off the table or creating
facts on the ground will not lead to sustainable peace.
Germany will not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed by the parties through negotiations.

S/PV. 8604

Nonetheless, I would like to underscore once more that
Germany remains steadfast in its commitment to the
security of Israel as a Jewish and Democratic State. We
will not be silent when Israel’s security or right to exist
is questioned or compromised.
Joint efforts to restore a political perspective for the
resumption of the peace process are urgently needed.
We support any attempts to restart meaningful direct
talks and negotiations between the parties, with the
objective of achieving lasting peace. We therefore call
on all parties to refrain from taking unilateral measures
and counter collectively the negative developments on
the ground, which are undermining the viability of a
negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, based on the internationally agreed parameters.
With regard to the recent developments that the
Special Coordinator referred to, we are appalled by
the repeated deadly attacks on Israeli civilians in the
West Bank in the past weeks and strongly condemn the
repeated rocket attacks by Hamas or other groups from
Gaza into Israeli territory, which put Israeli security
and the lives of civilians at risk. That increase in
violence is deeply worrying. It makes the resumption
of much needed dialogue even more difficult and will
only create further suffering. It cannot be justified and
must stop immediately.
Concerning the recent incidents on the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, we recall the paramount
importance of the agreed status quo for keeping the
peace at that unique site. One of the main obstacles to
a political settlement is the ongoing Israeli occupation
and the continued settlement activities in the territories
occupied in 1967. The continued expansion of settlement
activity by Israel is a matter of great concern. We
firmly reiterate our position that settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under
international law and undermine the prospect for a
negotiated two-State solution.
The recent decision of the Government of Israel to
build more than 2,000 housing units in settlements in
the occupied West Bank and this week’s announcement
of an additional 300 housing units in one of the Israeli
settlements only fuel the already heightened palpable
tensions between Israel and the Palestinian sides,
especially in the run-up to the September elections in
Israel. Therefore, we call on all sides to refrain from
further escalation.
Before I conclude, I will make two brief remarks.

19-2632815/18

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

First, with regard to the importance of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), in our view UNRWA
remains indispensable to meeting the basic needs of
Palestinian refugees. As the largest bilateral donor,
Germany remains committed to UNRWA and continues
to significantly contribute to the Agency’s budget.
Lastly, concerning Lebanon, in view of the recent
incidents with regard to Lebanon, as we heard from
the Special Coordinator, we call on all sides to cease
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and exercise
maximum restraint in order to avoid any escalation.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We welcome you to New
York, Mr. President, and thank you for presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council today. My delegation
would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing and tireless efforts in taking forward the
Israeli-Palestinian question.
At the outset, South Africa would like to remind
the Council of the United Nations and the Council’s
own decisions taken in resolution 242 (1967) calling for
Israel to withdraw its armed forces from the territories
occupied in the conflict. I would like to express South
Africa’s unwavering support for the two-State solution
and the agreed peace processes aimed at ensuring two
viable States of Israel and Palestine with the possibility
of them coexisting side by side to the mutual benefit of
all the people in the region.
We also express our grave concern about the
continued disregard for the prevailing and long-standing
Middle East peace process, such as the systematic
foreclosing of the final-status issues, particularly with
regard to the borders and the status of Jerusalem.
South Africa believes that the continued expansion
of settlements violates international law, undermines
the prospects for achieving peace and contravenes the
decisions of the Security Council, effectively damaging
its credibility. If the Council cannot uphold its own
decisions, it will lose its effectiveness and purpose. We
continue to call for the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) and note that the overt violation of Security
Council resolutions usually evokes stricter measures
on the party responsible for such infringements. The
Council should be consistent and fair vis-à-vis all
United Nations Member States.
16/18

27/08/2019

South Africa believes that the Council ought to
work towards restoring the trust in the legitimacy of
the peace process that has been pursued for decades
and prevent the further development of antagonism
between the parties. The rockets fired into Israel from
Gaza in recent days and the deadly Israeli responses are
clear indications that, as long as the impasse continues,
the instability will be perpetuated and more lives will
be lost.
We further call for the written response by the
Secretary-General on this matter in accordance with
resolution 2334 (2016), and we look forward to the
circulation of the written report ahead of the next
reporting cycle in September. Furthermore, we also
express our concern about the continued human rights
violations in the occupied territories and emphasize
that those violations only contribute to the festering
hatred between Palestinians and Israelis.
We believe that, instead of antagonistic acts, such as
building additional barriers and walls, closing schools
and killing civilians, the Council should encourage
gestures of hope and the building of trust between the
parties, namely, the Palestinians and the Israelis, which
has long since been lacking. The Council should urge
the current generation of Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to resolve this core issue in the Middle East. Passing
the problem onto the fourth generation of Palestinians
and Israelis since 1948 would be disastrous, and the
Council would regret it for many years to come.
South Africa therefore proposes that the Council
also reconsider its long-delayed visit to the region. In
that regard, should some members of the Council be
unwilling to participate in the visit, the Council should
consider a mini-mission, which could include those
members interested in taking part in such a visit.
We believe a visit to the region will be a clear
indication that the international community has not
washed its hands of the core and long-standing conflict
in the Middle East. Similarly to the Council’s other
field visits, it will also provide Council members the
opportunity to meet relevant actors on the ground,
including the Governments of Israel and Palestine,
convey our good wishes to them and help them resolve
this question.
In conclusion, South Africa remains firmly
convinced that dialogue is the only viable option that
can effectively address the issue of self-determination
for the Palestinian people and calls on the Council to
19-26328

27/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

implement its resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016). South Africa remains hopeful, and we continue
to urge both the Israeli and Palestinian sides to resume
the peace process to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting resolution to the Palestinian question.
As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, and concurrently the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Security Council, we should recall
and implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
establishing the State of Israel, which we did, and the
State of Palestine, which we are failing to establish.
We look forward to any initiative, including on
the part of the United States of America or any other
party or parties, that can inject positive momentum
into the Israeli-Palestinian question. This crisis must
be resolved in our lifetime.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his report on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We welcome you, Mr. President, as Secretary
of State of the Chancellery and Chief of the Cabinet of
the President.
The Middle East is at the heart of global politics.
The region is beset by many crises, old and new. Russia
is closely following the development of the situation,
given that we have long-standing relations with the
States of the region, based on mutual respect, mutually
beneficial cooperation and common interests.
We note with concern the ongoing tension in
the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. It is further
compounded by Israel’s ongoing settlement activities
and the situation in and around the Gaza Strip.
Against that backdrop, it is clear that unilateral
actions do not bring us closer to resolving the old and
new problems in the region. The situation of some United
Nations Member States trying to put Governments of
other States beyond the reach of the law is particularly
harmful. We, like many of our partners, see clearly that
the only way out of all of that is by pooling international
and regional efforts, with a central role played by the
United Nations and its Security Council. That premise
must be the basis for all relevant efforts and initiatives.
Our memory is still fresh of the statement made in
this Chamber a month ago by the Special Representative
for International Negotiations of the United States on
the Middle East peace process, Mr. Jason Greenblatt

S/PV. 8604

(see S/PV.8583). Frankly, statements on the uselessness
of seeking consensus on the Middle East peace
process within the United Nations and the futility of
the relevant Council resolutions are of great concern
to us. Choosing to destroy all that has been achieved
on creating an independent Palestinian State, living in
peace alongside Israel, is fraught with the most terrible
consequences for the entire region. It would allow only
for the further radicalization of the Arab street.
In the light of the statement of our American
colleagues on the need to review and revise old
decisions of the United Nations on the Middle East
peace process, I would like to recall that it was thanks
to General Assembly resolution 181 (II) that Israel was
established. The declaration on the establishment of the
State of Israel also mentions it. We would like to know
how far the United States is willing to go in revising old
and unnecessary decisions.
For our part, we are convinced that unilateral
actions that ignore international law will not produce
results. They are detrimental to the prospects for a
just and lasting solution to the long-standing IsraeliPalestinian problem. We support the involvement
of the Quartet of international mediators as the only
mechanism to support the Middle East peace process
endorsed by the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Russia is doing everything in its power to promote
all of the activities in the Middle East peace process,
including by offering a potential platform for meetings
between Israel and Palestine, without preconditions. We
are also undertaking efforts to restore intra-Palestinian
unity, and we welcome the steps taken by our Egyptian
colleagues in that direction.
In that context, the Security Council’s mission to the
region is long overdue, which many of our colleagues
have already mentioned. It should bolster trust, facilitate
the resumption of negotiations between the parties and
prevent the failure of the international community’s
efforts to ensure conditions for the implementation of
the only viable settlement on the international legal
basis. That framework was developed by the Security
Council, and its revision should be done within the
Security Council, too. No unilateral steps can replace
the key tenets of the two-State solution, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the status of
the occupied territories, including the Syrian Golan.
We will continue to provide assistance to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine

19-2632817/18

S/PV.8604

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Refugees in the Near East. Its activities are not only
humanitarian but also political and provide an important
stabilizing effect in the Palestinian territories and the
Middle East region. All final-status issues, including
Jerusalem, basic security issues and refugees, should be
the result of direct negotiations between the Palestinians
and the Israelis. Seeking consensus on those sensitive
issues during direct negotiations is essential to their
future sustainability.
We consistently call on all interested parties to
take steps to de-escalate and settle the problems in the
Persian Gulf through political and diplomatic means.
Enhancing the military presence, including of States
outside the region, creates the risk of armed clashes.
That crisis endangers peace and security in the Middle
East as a whole, as well as international efforts to resolve
regional conflicts. It is increasingly relevant to look at
the need to develop a lasting mechanism for collective
security in the region, based on equitable dialogue and
cooperation. The relevant Russian initiative focuses
on addressing the deadlock in conflict situations and
developing confidence-building and security measures.
We should also continue our efforts to eradicate
the terrorist presence in the countries of the region. We
call on all forces of good to engage in collective efforts
in that regard, while ensuring respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant decisions of
the Security Council, as well as the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, and rejecting double
standards. We urge that those principles be respected
in all countries facing such a threat: Syria, Iraq, Libya
and Yemen.
I must also note that we are extremely concerned
about the information regarding the incident on

18/18

27/08/2019

25 August involving two unmanned aerial vehicles
over the Lebanese capital. According to some reports,
they were Israeli reconnaissance drones. The situation
is exacerbated by Israel’s simultaneous arbitrary
missile strikes on targets in neighbouring Syria, the
most recent of which was on a military facility near
Damascus last weekend.
For our part, we have repeatedly pointed out the
danger of such activities in a tense regional atmosphere,
and we warned that they could lead to a large-scale
armed conflict with unpredictable consequences. We
again call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint
and strictly comply with international law, including
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that context, we reiterate our commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
stability of Lebanon. At the same time, we reaffirm the
importance of the role of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, whose mandate we are soon to extend.
The activities of peacekeepers have a stabilizing impact
not only on the Blue Line but also within Lebanon and
the Middle East as a whole.
Russia will actively contribute to stabilizing the
situation in the Middle East. We are ready to cooperate
with all interested players, and we call on all to
work together.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

19-26328
