S/PV.8913

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8913th meeting

Tuesday, 30 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez/Mr. Ochoa Martínez . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Benaabou
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-36027 (E)
*2136027*

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Envoys expressed concern regarding negative
developments across the occupied Palestinian territory,
including ongoing acts of violence in the West Bank,
the advancement of new settlement units, an untenable
fiscal crisis within the Palestinian Authority and threats
of violence from the Gaza Strip.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process; and
Ms. Comfort Ero, Interim Vice President and Program
Director, International Crisis Group.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: I brief the Security Council
today as we face a series of heightened and interrelated
risks across the occupied Palestinian territory.
In the West Bank, a severe financial and economic
crisis is threatening the stability of Palestinian
institutions. At the same time, ongoing violence
and unilateral steps, including Israeli settlement
expansions and demolitions, continue to raise tensions,
feed hopelessness, erode the Palestinian Authority’s
standing and further diminish the prospect of a return
to meaningful negotiations.
In Gaza, the fragile cessation of hostilities
continues to hold, but further steps on the part of all
parties are needed to ensure a sustainable solution that
will ultimately enable a return of legitimate Palestinian
Government institutions to the Strip.
Amid these concerning developments, on
17 November the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians met in Oslo at the ministerial level.
Participants commended the parties for approaching
the meeting with a constructive attitude, urging
them to implement reforms and follow through on
commitments to help stabilize the Palestinian economy
and strengthen its institutions. Participants expressed
support for a package of recommended steps for the
parties and the donor community.
On the margins, I met with my fellow Middle
East Quartet Envoys. In a joint statement, the Quartet
2/20

30/11/2021

The Quartet Envoys also reiterated the need to take
constructive steps to advance the two-State solution
and called on all parties to help address the current
urgent challenges through fiscal and other reforms, as
well by avoiding unilateral steps that could exacerbate
tensions and undermine the prospects for peace.
In the meantime, violence continued daily
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory. In the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, clashes,
attacks, search-and-arrest operations and other incidents
resulted in the deaths of four Palestinians, including
two children, and injuries to 90 Palestinians, including
12 children, caused by the Israeli security forces. One
Israeli civilian was killed and nine civilians, including
one woman and one child, and six members of the
Israeli security forces were injured in the course of
these events.
On 5 November, Israeli security forces shot and
killed a 15-year-old Palestinian boy during clashes near
Nablus. According to the Israeli Defense Forces, the
incident is being investigated.
On 16 November, Israeli security forces shot
and killed a 26-year-old Palestinian during a search
operation and subsequent clashes in Tubas. The Israeli
security forces stated their personnel had returned fire
after they were shot at and that an improvised explosive
device was thrown at them from a passing vehicle. No
Israeli security forces were injured in that operation.
Palestinian Islamic Jihad later claimed the man as
a member.
Tensions and clashes between Palestinians and the
Israeli security forces also heightened in and around
Jerusalem’s Old City On 17 November, a 16-year-old
Palestinian from the Al-Issawiya neighbourhood, in
occupied East Jerusalem, stabbed and injured two
Israeli security forces personnel in Jerusalem’s Old City.
In response, an Israeli civilian and the Israeli security
forces shot the perpetrator, who was pronounced dead
shortly afterwards. According to eyewitnesses, the
perpetrator was being restrained when shot.
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 21 November, a Palestinian man opened fire
at Israeli civilians in Jerusalem’s Old City, killing one
Israeli civilian and injuring two others. Israeli security
forces returned fire and killed the attacker. Two Israeli
security forces were injured. Hamas claimed the
assailant as one its members. Following the attack, the
Israeli security forces reportedly conducted searchand-arrest operations in the Shu’fat refugee camp,
where the perpetrator lived, detaining several of his
family members. All were later released.
Violent attacks and acts of terrorism can never be
justified and must be condemned by all.
Settler-related violence remains at alarmingly
high levels amid continued tensions over settlement
expansion and the annual olive harvest season. Since
the harvest began on 4 October, some 3,000 olive trees
have been damaged or have had their harvest stolen.
Physical attacks on Palestinian farmers, volunteers
and humanitarian staff have also been recorded, some
reportedly having taken place in the presence of Israeli
security forces.
Overall, settlers and other Israeli civilians in the
occupied West Bank perpetrated some 54 attacks
against Palestinians, resulting in 26 injuries, including
to five children, and damage to property. Palestinians
perpetrated 41 attacks against Israeli settlers and other
civilians, resulting, as I reported earlier, in one death
and nine injuries, including to one child and one woman,
and damage to property. Most incidents resulting in
injury or damage were caused by stones and Molotov
cocktails thrown at civilian vehicles and buses.

S/PV. 8913

further risk severing the link between East Jerusalem
and Bethlehem.
On 27 October, after a hiatus of some eight
months, Israeli authorities advanced plans for some
3,200 housing units in Area C, with many located in
outlying settlements. I reiterate that all settlements are
illegal under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace.
Meanwhile, in a rare development, on 28 October
and 1 November, Israeli authorities advanced plans
for some 6,000 housing units for Palestinians in the
occupied East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Al-Issawiya
and some 1,300 housing units for Palestinians in
Area C. While such steps are welcome, I urge Israel to
advance more such plans and issue building permits for
all previously approved plans for Palestinians in Area C
and East Jerusalem.
Israeli demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian
homes and other structures continued during the
reporting period. Overall, Israeli authorities demolished,
seized or forced owners to demolish 84 Palestinianowned structures in Area C and 17 in East Jerusalem,
displacing 83 Palestinians, including 24 women and
39 children. The demolitions were carried out due to
the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
On 25 October in Hammamat Al-Maleh, in the
northern Jordan Valley, Israeli authorities confiscated
a medical clinic serving five communities.

On 24 November, a Palestinian man was critically
injured and his 10-year-old son injured after their car
overturned near Al-Mughayyir village in the West
Bank, due to an object thrown from un oncoming car.
According to witnesses, the car was hit by objects
thrown by Israeli settlers. Israeli authorities have
opened an investigation into the incident.

On 2 November, four Palestinian families in the
East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah rejected
a proposal by Israel’s Supreme Court that would have
recognized them as protected tenants in exchange for
nominal rent, payable to the settler corporation seeking
to evict them, significantly delaying their eviction. The
settler corporation also reportedly raised reservations
to the Court’s proposal. The Court had previously
announced that if the parties did not accept its proposal,
it would issue a ruling on the case.

I reiterate that all perpetrators of violence must be
held accountable and swiftly brought to justice.

I urge Israel to cease demolitions and evictions, in
line its obligations under international humanitarian law.

On 24 October, Israeli authorities announced
tenders for some 1,350 housing units in settlements.
About half are in the settlement of Ariel, at the heart
of the northern West Bank. The announcement also
included a reissuance of tenders for some 80 units in the
settlement of Givat Hamatos, where construction would

In another concerning development, on 22 October
the Israeli Ministry of Defence announced the
designation of six Palestinian non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) as terrorist organizations. The
Ministry accused them of constituting “an inseparable
arm” of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine,

21-360273/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

an organization designated as terrorist by Israel,
the United States, Australia, Canada, Japan and the
European Union. The Israeli Defense Forces extended
the applicability of the designations to the occupied
West Bank through military orders on 7 November.
These designated NGOs work closely with the United
Nations and the international community, including on
human rights and humanitarian response, and several
receive a significant portion of their funding from
Member States.
The legal implications of the designations are
potentially wide-ranging and add to increasing
pressures on civil society organizations across the
occupied Palestinian territory. The Secretary-General
has expressed concern about shrinking space for civil
society around the world, including in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory. The United Nations has
engaged with Israeli authorities, the designated NGOs
and donors to receive more information about the
allegations and their implications.
I turn now to Gaza. Humanitarian recovery and
reconstruction efforts continued, alongside steps to
further stabilize the situation on the ground. In October,
some 9,406 truckloads of goods entered Gaza through
the Israeli-controlled Kerem Shalom crossing, some
20 per cent above the pre-escalation monthly average.
In addition, almost 3,000 truckloads entered Gaza
through the Egyptian-controlled Rafah crossing. As of
the end of the reporting period, some 8,500 permits had
been issued for traders and merchants in Gaza to enter
into Israel.
While the gradual easing of restrictions on the
entry of materials and the flow of goods and people
into Gaza is encouraging, the economic, security and
humanitarian situation in the Strip remains of serious
concern. The goal remains the lifting of all closures, in
line with resolution 1860 (2009).
In the meantime, the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism continues to play an important role in
facilitating access for items and materials that would
otherwise not be allowed into Gaza. In a positive
development, on 5 November, Israel began providing
additional water to Gaza through the new Bani Said
connection point, allowing an increase of 5 million
cubic metres of water per year into Gaza.
I welcome the strong support expressed to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) at the ministerial
4/20

30/11/2021

conference co-hosted by Jordan and Sweden earlier
this month. Despite welcome additional pledges, I
am concerned that UNRWA still lacks $60 million
to sustain essential services to 2 million Palestine
refugees across the region until the end of the year. The
Agency has yet to pay the November salaries of over
28,000 United Nations personnel, including teachers,
doctors, nurses and sanitation workers, many of whom
support extended families, particularly in Gaza, where
unemployment is high. I call on Member States to do
everything possible to protect services by urgently
advancing the disbursement of announced pledges and
by providing additional contributions in the coming
days and weeks.
Both parties sent high-level delegations to the
twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
in Glasgow. There is growing Israeli, Palestinian and
regional interest in cooperating on shared environmental
threats and climate change action. In that regard, the
renewed direct engagement, after an extended hiatus,
between Israeli and Palestinian environment ministers
is a welcome step, In a separate positive development,
on 7 November, the Israeli Government approved the
issuance of some 500 permits over the next three years
for Palestinians to work in the Israeli technology sector.
I was encouraged by the engagement between
Israeli and Palestinian delegations at the meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians in Oslo and
took note of the concerns shared by all parties about the
fiscal crisis facing the Palestinian Authority. Moreover,
nearly all participants expressed serious concerns about
the overall trajectory of the conflict.
It is essential that the parties avoid unilateral steps,
reduce flashpoints and violence across the occupied
Palestinian territory, solidify the cessation of hostilities
and support economic development in the Gaza Strip.
Furthermore, steps by all parties are urgently needed
to shore up the economic and institutional stability
of the PA, including through the implementation of
needed reforms.
But even a full and immediate financial package
may not be sufficient or come quickly enough — if at
all — to help buffer the consequences of the current
crisis. I therefore emphasize again the importance of
concerted efforts by the parties to calm things on the
ground. I am concerned that, if we do not act quickly
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and decisively, we risk plunging into another deadly
escalation of violence.
Recent developments on the ground are worrisome.
We need a coordinated approach to encourage all parties
to implement policy shifts and reforms; address quickly
and in parallel the key conflict drivers at the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, in Gaza and those facing the
PA; and restore a political horizon that will help stop
the endless cycle of crisis management and move back
towards meaningful negotiations to end the occupation
and resolve the conflict on the basis of United Nations
resolutions, international law and previous agreements.
The Quartet will continue its consultations with the
parties and key regional actors.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ero.
Ms. Ero: The International Crisis Group is an
organization dedicated to the prevention and resolution
of deadly conflicts. This past year, we noted with alarm
a new outburst of violence in Israel-Palestine. We
believe that the Security Council, and the international
community broadly speaking, has done little to steer
this tragic conflict into calmer waters, to protect its
victims and to push Israelis and Palestinians towards
a just solution. We thank the Council, and the Mexican
presidency in particular, for giving me this opportunity
today to present some ideas about a way forward.
The violence in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories in April and May serves as the latest reminder
of the instability of the status quo. Palestinians — whether
in Gaza, the West Bank, Jerusalem, Israel itself or in
the diaspora — have acquiesced to neither territorial
fragmentation nor political marginalization. To the
contrary, alongside rockets from Gaza, they raised a
collective, if amorphous, voice. Their protests stressed
the dispossession and repression of Palestinians, with
the question of Jerusalem at the core. Among Israeli
Jews, the combination of falling rockets and protests
in their streets furthered hardened their conviction that
there is no political deal to be had.
On both sides of this conflict, as well as among
many Council members, faith in the Middle East peace
process has waned. Israel has grown comfortable with
the status quo. It is imposing its own realities on the
ground in violation of this body’s resolutions. And
it has consistently rejected anything resembling a

S/PV. 8913

plausible two-State outcome, including explicitly under
its present Government. Palestinians have seen Israel
entrench its control under the cover of the peace process,
denying them their rights and freedoms at a gathering
pace. Yet no supplementary or alternative approach has
emerged. For over a decade, my organization has urged
the international community to eschew the Nobel-prize
winning push for a peace deal. Instead, we believe the
international community should work to put in place
the building blocks of a more peaceful and just future
for the generations of Israelis and Palestinians to come.
In the wake of the violent events of last spring,
we renewed that call. In August, we released a report
lamenting the continuing conflict and the high
casualty numbers and destruction, notably among
Palestinians and in Gaza. We urged all parties to the
conflict — Israel, the Palestinian Authority (PA) and
Hamas — to take steps to at least staunch the bleeding.
We challenged the international community not only
to work urgently to lower the temperature by pressing
all sides to cease violent and provocative actions, but
also to undertake a serious effort to rethink the entire
edifice of the peace process. Such a rethinking must
acknowledge the structural power imbalance between
an occupying State and an occupied people, and the
necessity of challenging the impunity Israel has come to
take for granted in its conduct towards the Palestinians.
Unfortunately, we have seen little concrete action
in that direction since then. Arguably, the opposite has
happened. In June, a new Israeli Government came into
office. This Government has given indications about its
willingness to engage on daily measures and security
with the Palestinian Authority, in finding ways to do
what it calls “shrinking” the conflict by improving
economic conditions in the occupied territories
and marginally strengthening the PA itself. Yet the
new Government has continued to expand illegal
settlements in the West Bank and has taken repressive
measures against Palestinians in ways no different
from its predecessors.
In October, the Government outlawed six highly
respected Palestinian civil society organizations
on specious charges of being terrorists. In reality,
these organizations have been active for years, if not
decades, in providing essential services to people in
need — services that Israel, as the occupying Power, has
not provided — and in documenting, reporting on and
advocating for international accountability regarding
Israeli violations of human rights in the occupied

21-360275/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

territories. They receive external funding, especially
from European Governments and others, and have
been active in lobbying the United States Congress and
European capitals, as well as the International Criminal
Court in The Hague, to advance their cause. According
to all available evidence, those organizations have
been carrying out their work in a lawful manner to the
benefit of Palestinian society and in defence of basic
principles of human rights.
These measures give the impression that Israel’s
policy of “shrinking” the conflict and strengthening
the Palestinian Authority in practice goes hand in hand
with de facto annexation.
At the same time, there has been no serious
effort on the Palestinian Authority’s part to refresh
Palestinian politics through elections, which President
Mahmoud Abbas promised earlier this year but
then abruptly cancelled. In the absence of a new
popular mandate, Palestinian politics have become
dangerously ossified, turning the PA — like Hamas
in Gaza — into a governing body with limited powers
that is unresponsive, unaccountable, authoritarian and
repressive. Palestinian governing authorities in both
the West Bank and Gaza have added to restrictions on
the freedoms of their own civil society to organize and
speak out.
The international community is not an innocent
bystander. Through its passive stance, it gives cover to
Israeli Government practices.
Yesterday, the world marked the seventy-fourth
anniversary of General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
more commonly referred to as the United Nations
partition plan. It was thus that the United Nations
gave its imprimatur to the notion of two States for
two peoples. For some three-quarters of a century,
the world has failed to deliver on its promise. In the
tenth preambular paragraph of resolution 2334 (2016),
adopted in 2016, the Council referred to “negative
trends” that are “steadily eroding the two-State
solution and entrenching a one-State reality”. These
words reflect the overall re-evaluation of the partition
paradigm that is taking place in many quarters.
We at Crisis Group strongly believe that the
international community, for now, should focus less on
political paradigms and more on what is happening on
the ground.
6/20

30/11/2021

Ultimately, this conflict will be settled only through
political negotiations, but they will not succeed until
certain basic conditions are in place. The first is Israeli
willingness to engage Palestinians both individually as
equals and as a collective with aspirations to national
self-determination and an external incentive structure
designed with this in mind. The second is a coherent
Palestinian polity with a leadership that can chart a path
forward and challenge the status quo by non-violent
means and in ways consistent with international law.
The third condition is a reversal of on-the-ground, legal
and political measures enacted by Israel that have cost
Palestinians many of their most basic rights.
For many years, the protection of people and
advancing their well-being were subordinated to the
goal of a two-State solution. Today, among global
and regional Powers, pessimism about the possibility
of achieving a two-State solution is having a similar
effect, leading to inaction rather than action. This is not
the right way forward.
It is incumbent on this organ to undertake concrete
action to protect the rights of all people in Israel-Palestine
and Palestinian refugees, even in the absence, for now,
of a viable peace process and regardless of whatever
form an eventual political solution may take. Regarding
that solution, this organ should make clear that, should
Israel continue to obstruct the establishment of a fully
sovereign and viable Palestinian State, any alternative
that emerges in the future will have to respect the right
to full equality and enfranchisement of all those in any
space controlled by Israel.
More immediately, the international community
should push for the following: a long-term truce in
Gaza; a return to the historical status quo arrangement
at Jerusalem’s holy sites, as it was conceived in 1967
when Israel conquered Jerusalem’s Old City, with
modifications only by agreement of all relevant parties;
a halt to eviction orders in East Jerusalem; an end to
settlement activity in the occupied territories; rescission
of the order banning the six Palestinian civil society
organizations; holding Palestinian elections as soon
as possible, with the participation of East Jerusalem
Palestinians; and revision of the international conditions
known as the Quartet principles so as to allow Hamas
to participate in a Palestinian unity Government. The
present approach, in place since 2006, has empowered
Hamas while obstructing Palestinian reconciliation and
political renewal.
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The laws are on the books. The tools are in the
Council’s hands. What is lacking is the willingness
to use these laws and tools to advance peace in
Israel-Palestine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Ero
for her briefing and timely comments.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing and Ms. Ero for her insights.
I visited Israel, the West Bank and Jordan earlier
this month, in part to reaffirm United States support for
a two-State solution, which, we strongly believe, is still
viable — a two-State solution in which a Jewish and
democratic Israel lives in peace alongside a sovereign,
viable Palestinian State. I had an extensive itinerary,
meeting senior Israeli and Palestinian Authority
officials, as well as civil society organizations and
refugees. I saw first-hand how serious the security
situation is for Israel. It is subjected to regular attacks
by terrorist organizations, including Hamas and
Hizbullah, both of which are funded by Iran. The impact
of Iran’s regional malfeasance, nuclear aspirations and
hatred for Israel cannot be ignored.
Israelis also shared with me their concern that the
United Nations is intrinsically biased against Israel.
They interpret the overwhelming focus on Israel in this
organ as a denial of Israel’s right to exist and an unfair
focus on that one country — and they are correct. The
Security Council’s monthly meetings on the situation
in the Middle East, which focus almost exclusively on
Israel, are seen by Israelis as another example of that.
The Council’s attention should reflect all areas that
threaten international peace and security, and we should
have open meetings on Lebanon and meet on Iran more
regularly. Israel does not define the Middle East.
During my visit, I saw how serious the security
situation is for Palestinians. I heard stories about Israeli
settlers attacking Palestinians, ransacking homes and
destroying property in the West Bank. That is an issue
that I discussed extensively with Israeli counterparts.
I was told how many Palestinian families fear eviction
from their homes because it is nearly impossible to get
building permits as settlements expand. United States
disapproval of settlement expansion goes back decades.
That is nothing new for us. But the practice has reached

S/PV. 8913

a critical juncture and is now undermining the very
viability of a negotiated two-State solution.
Meanwhile, civil society organizations in the West
Bank advocating for better governance and freedom
face unprecedented challenges in their work. Israelis
and Palestinians are locked in a spiral of mutual
distrust, preventing the cooperation that could bring
about prosperity, freedom and security for all.
We also cannot ignore the fact that the control
of Hamas over Gaza makes the situation even more
difficult for the Palestinians. Israelis do not believe
they have a partner for peace, and Palestinians are
trapped in despair because they do not see a political
horizon. As Council members know, the animating
principle behind the Biden Administration’s approach
to Middle East peace is that Israelis and Palestinians
deserve equal measures of freedom, dignity, security
and prosperity, which is a goal unto itself and a means to
advance a negotiated two-State solution. But we cannot
make progress towards that end without a modicum of
trust. It is critical to explore opportunities with Israelis
and Palestinians in order to rebuild some degree of
confidence in each other.
Fortunately, my meetings yielded several promising
ideas we can pursue together. Both sides spoke of the
need for confidence-building measures to break down
the walls of distrust. Much of that trust-building
needs to be worked out between the Israelis and the
Palestinians themselves, but the Council can play a
role in facilitating constructive steps. We can enforce
Security Council resolutions intended to constrain Iran’s
regional malign activities, nuclear threats and support
for terrorism organizations like Hamas and Hizbullah.
The Security Council can also speak with one voice in
denouncing incitement to violence, whether by terrorist
organizations or individuals. We can promote steps
to improve the lives of ordinary Palestinians — from
encouraging Israelis to issue more work permits to
granting additional building permits in Area C of
the West Bank. The Council can also demonstrate its
support for new efforts to facilitate humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance to Gaza while ensuring that
protections against diversion to terrorist organizations
are robust.
Finally, the international community can also
provide financial contributions to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) that match the political

21-360277/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support the Agency enjoys. As more States step
up with contributions, they should also join the
United States in urging UNRWA to establish a more
sustainable financing model and to rigorously adhere
to humanitarian principles, including neutrality. In that
connection, during my visit, I personally raised my
concerns with UNRWA leadership about anti-Semitic
references in textbooks used in Agency schools.
When I met with young girls at an UNRWA camp,
I was struck, first and foremost, by their dreams — and
they had big dreams. They told me that they wanted to be
doctors and lawyers and astronauts. I know Israeli girls
and boys have the same hopes and the same dreams.
That is what we mean when we say we want equal
measures of freedom, dignity, security and prosperity.
When a young Palestinian girl and a young Israeli girl
look up into the night sky, their hopes and dreams
should be equally possible, worthwhile and supported.
Now, after my trip, I am more convinced than ever
that the Council must support tangible steps to make a
real difference in the lives of Israelis and Palestinians.
Unfortunately, time is running out. We need to
move now. Let us all commit today to constructive
partnership and concrete progress between Israelis and
Palestinians. That is the only antidote to the despair,
mistrust, insecurity and violence that threaten a twoState solution, which remains our best chance for a
sustainable and just peace.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East. We listened attentively to the statement delivered
by Ms. Ero. It is symbolic that today’s meeting takes
place in the wake of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People.
It is with alarm that we observe the stagnation
in reaching a settlement in the Middle East, with the
unresolved central problem of Palestine, which has
created a permanent source of tension for the entire
Middle East. Unfortunately, we must note the unabated
tensions around the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
The looming risk of large-scale hostilities, such as the
military escalation witnessed in May, remain.
In that context, the international community faces
the urgent tasks of achieving stabilization, providing
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people
and creating conditions for the resumption of the
8/20

30/11/2021

Palestinian-Israeli settlement process on a universally
recognized international legal basis.
We believe it is important to continue efforts to
build international consensus and coordinate joint
actions to promote a fair solution to the Palestinian
problem. In that context, we welcome the outcome
of the ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, held in Oslo. We note
Norway’s contribution in preparing for the event, which
shows that the international community has not turned
its attention away from resolving this problem.
On the margins of the Committee, the first
in-person meeting in several years of Middle East
Quartet members was held. The Quartet remains the
sole internationally recognized mechanism to facilitate
a Palestinian-Israeli settlement. At the end of the
meeting, a statement was adopted in support of efforts
to promote a settlement in the Middle East. We intend to
continue our efforts to step up the work of the Quartet
and call on our Quartet colleagues to examine our wellknown initiatives, including through the holding of a
ministerial meeting and consultations in an extended
format with the participation of the States of the region.
We also count on the support of the international
community for those initiatives.
For our part, we continue to engage with all
parties and international and regional stakeholders.
On 23 November, President Putin and President Abbas
met in Sochi. At that meeting, Russia reaffirmed its
principled position on the Middle East settlement in
favour of a two-State solution within the framework
of the established international parameters. The
Palestinian side also reaffirmed its willingness to
engage in dialogue on a universally recognized basis.
Unfortunately, against that backdrop, illegal
unilateral actions, such as the seizure and demolition
of Palestinian property, the construction of settlements,
arbitrary arrests and detentions and the violation of
the status of the holy sites, continue to have dangerous
consequences. Israel’s announcement of plans to expand
settlement activity in the West Bank and in the Givat
Hamatos neighbourhood of East Jerusalem was deeply
disturbing. The ongoing construction of settlements
and plans to double the number of Israelis living in the
Jordan River Valley by 2026 can be viewed as a de facto
annexation of most of the occupied Palestinian territory.
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We attach great importance to the provision of
comprehensive humanitarian assistance to those in
need in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well as
to Palestinian refugees in neighbouring Arab countries.
Against that backdrop, the continuing precarious
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is extremely worrisome. The Agency’s
activities have not only a humanitarian but also a
political dimension, with an important stabilizing
impact on the Palestinian territories and countries of
the Middle East. The leadership of UNRWA is making
efforts to improve efficiency and reduce costs, which
must be commended. Russia will continue to support
the Agency, and we call on the entire international
community to do likewise.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing and for joining us here
today in person. Let me also thank Ms. Comfort Ero for
her insightful remarks. I will touch on a few points that
Mr. Wennesland brought up.
First, we urged Israel to reverse the recent decisions
to construct more than 3,000 housing units and announce
tenders for the construction of more than 1,300 housing
units in the occupied Palestinian territory. We are deeply
worried that existing plans for illegal settlements — and
those new ones if built — will seriously weaken the
prospect of a contiguous Palestinian State. We also
share the Special Coordinator’s concern about the
destabilizing effect of the possible evictions, including
in Sheikh Jarrah. Norway urges Israel to cease the
evictions in the occupied territories.
Increased settler violence in the West Bank is also
deeply worrying. We expect Israel to stop such violence
and to protect all civilians. Moreover, the recent attacks
in the Old City of Jerusalem by Palestinian militants
are unacceptable. We also remain concerned by the
Israeli designation of six Palestinian non-governmental
organizations as terror organizations. We are
particularly concerned that that will shrink the already
limited space for important civil society engagement
in Palestine. We are following up on the serious
allegations made against such organizations. If we
are not presented in reasonable time with sufficient
information to corroborate those accusations, we will
request Israel to rescind the decision. Norway is also
deeply concerned by the reported use of rubber bullets
and tear gas against schoolchildren in the West Bank.

S/PV. 8913

The right to education must be respected, as emphasized
in recently adopted resolution 2601 (2021).
Palestine needs a stronger Palestinian Authority.
The absence of regular national elections weakens the
legitimacy of the Palestinian Authority. Palestinians
deserve democracy and the rule of law, with security,
equal rights and opportunities for all. The upholding of
space for civil society and respect for human rights are
also key.
Norway is pleased that it was able to convene
a meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians in Oslo earlier this month. The meeting
addressed the critical fiscal situation of the Palestinian
Authority and the risk of further destabilization in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza.
It called for measures to strengthen the Palestinian
Authority, reduce tensions and increase external
financial support commensurate with Palestinian
fiscal reforms. The meeting also called for the removal
of restrictions on access and movement and the
completion of key infrastructure projects. Both parties
came to the meeting with constructive measures and a
positive attitude. The Palestinian Authority announced
its intention to embark on the needed financial reforms.
Israel came with steps to improve the Palestinian
Authority’s economy, starting with an early resumption
of the work of the Joint Economic Committee to
modernize the Paris Protocol.
Improving economic relations between the
Palestinian Authority and Israel is key, as there is
simply not much external aid available. We hope that
the positive meeting in Oslo will contribute to a new
dynamic, including on the political track. A strong
Palestinian Authority that is trusted by the people
and represents all Palestine is vital. The international
conference in Brussels earlier this month also made
welcome commitments to supporting the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, but more is needed. Norway will increase its
funding and urges all others to do the same.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Norway’s continued
support of and belief in the two-State solution on
the basis of the 1967 lines, the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
international law and internationally agreed parameters.

21-360279/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. I also thank
Ms. Ero for her insightful statement.
Estonia reiterates the importance of a continued
dialogue between the Israeli and Palestinian leaders
and encourages them to engage in further practical
cooperation, which would benefit the people of both
sides. It is positively noted that both the Israeli and
the Palestinian delegations were represented at the
ministerial level at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians hosted by Norway on
17 November. We also welcome the statements by Israeli
ministers regarding the importance of supporting the
improvement of the socioeconomic and financial
situation of the Palestinians.
Estonia also supports the international and regional
efforts for reconstruction and the improvement of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. We welcome the recent
steps by Israel to ease the restrictions on Gaza and call
for allowing more movement of goods and people to
and from Gaza, while taking into consideration Israel’s
security concerns.
Regarding the situation in the West Bank, we are
concerned about the continued incidents of violence,
including the clashes between the Palestinians and the
Israeli security forces. We strongly condemn the terror
attacks and violence against civilians, including the
terror attack in Jerusalem’s Old City on 21 November.
We repeat our call on all parties to refrain from violence,
incitement and acts of provocation.
Estonia also remains worried about the continued
Israeli settlement expansions, demolitions and evictions,
as such acts are contrary to international law. We call
upon Israel to refrain from such activities, including
the advancing of tenders and plans for the construction
of several thousand new housing units in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem.
We take the listing of six Palestinian non-governmental
organizations as terrorist organizations by the Israeli
authorities very seriously. We will continue to engage
with Israel on that issue. Civil society’s enjoyment
of the fundamental freedoms is an important part of
democracy and essential to promoting peace efforts
between Israelis and Palestinians.
We welcome the high-level conference on the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
10/20

30/11/2021

Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) organized by
Jordan and Sweden on 16 November and stress the
importance of continued support to the Agency.
UNRWA continues to be an essential lifeline for many
Palestinians and a strong contributor to peace and
stability in the region.
Finally, Estonia confirms its continued support
for all efforts to create favourable conditions for the
resumption of direct meaningful negotiations between
the Israelis and the Palestinians on all final-status
issues. In that context, we welcome the meeting of the
envoys of the Middle East Quartet on 18 November and
express support for their continued consultations with
the parties and key regional actors.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): It is good to see Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland at last in person on this
cold morning. I would also like to thank Ms. Comfort
Ero for her briefing.
During the October open debate (see S/PV.8883)
on this file, Kenya called for the greater recognition
of grass-roots organizations that are constructively
working for peace in the interim and in the long term.
We recognize that, while there may be a lack of progress
in the State and other official channels, there are still
Israelis and Palestinians making vital contributions to
sustaining hope for peace and creating an atmosphere
conducive to it.
We will also continue to call for the cessation of
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and demolitions,
including those that pose a risk to the actualization of
the two-State solution and undermine the territorial
contiguity of a viable Palestinian State based on
the 1967 lines. We urge the Israeli authorities not to
undertake any actions that will further constitute
major obstacles to a political and lasting solution. That
includes the recent announcement of the construction
of 3,100 new settlements in the West Bank. We also
call upon all parties to refrain from actions that will
stand in the way of peace and security for both Israelis
and Palestinians.
Kenya has repeatedly condemned terrorist attacks
and acts conducive to terrorism perpetrated by
Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other affiliated
militant groups against Israeli civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We condemn in the strongest terms the
Hamas gunman killing of Eliyahu David Kay during
the recent terror attack in Jerusalem’s Old City. Our
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

thoughts and prayers are with his family and the family
of those injured. Again, we repeat that no cause can
justify the deliberate targeting of civilians and those
acts of terror must cease.
Beyond condemnation of that and in anticipation
of the December report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), Kenya
looks forward to an update on any ongoing efforts to
combat terrorism, all acts of violence against civilians
and effective operations aimed at confronting all those
engaged in terrorist attacks.
Kenya welcomes progress reflected in the outcomes
of the recent processes aimed at making a difference to
the communities on the ground. We join in the call of
the 16 November international ministerial conference
on the reinforcement of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). UNRWA plays a critical role throughout
the Middle East, including facilitating critical health,
education, social protection, microfinance and other
services in the West Bank, East Jerusalem, Gaza,
Jordan, Syria and Lebanon.
It is also welcome that both Israeli and Palestinian
high-level officials participated in the 17 November
ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians. We urge that spirit of cooperation
and exchange of constructive and practical measures
to continue, especially when it comes to establishing
sustainable development on the ground and addressing
the coronavirus disease pandemic, particularly in Gaza
and the West Bank.
The joint press statement issued on 18 November by
the Middle East Quartet envoys further reinforced the
urgency of all parties to take additional steps to address
the persistent challenges in the Middle East process
and advance a two-State solution. We also welcome the
statement’s emphasis on respect for human rights and
the actions of civil society groups.
We believe that the implementable outcomes of all
those processes, working alongside the constructive
efforts of civil society organizations, are part of the
immediate and long-term steps that will entrench and
root the sustainability of the Middle East peace process.
We take note that the Israeli Government’s
designation on 22 October of the six human rights
and humanitarian non-governmental organizations as

S/PV. 8913

terrorist organizations happened against the backdrop
of the Kenya’s call on 19 October for an independent
civil society voice in the region. When it comes to
the condemnation of terrorism and designation of
terrorist groups, Kenya has been and will continue
to be on record calling for that to happen. However,
designations should also be approached with caution
so as not to grant unwarranted recognition, create a
semblance of strength or encourage eager recruits to
join terrorist organization.
Despite many challenges, we have seen grassroots
organizations continue to offer support and solutions
at the local level to communities — both Israeli and
Palestinian — that continue to be affected by the
ongoing crisis. Kenya therefore reaffirms the need for
the Council to highlight and support that grassroots tier
as a valuable contributor to peacebuilding efforts on
the ground.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing. I
welcome the participation of Ms. Comfort Ero in this
meeting today and thank her for sharing her insights.
I would like to begin by expressing our concerns
over the continued violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in the West Bank. The number of
attacks by settlers in the first 10 months of 2021 was the
highest recorded level of violence in recent years. More
worryingly, we have not seen any effort by the relevant
authorities to reverse that trend.
As the occupying Power, the Israeli Government
and security forces have done too little to stop settlers’
attacks and protect the Palestinians. In fact, Israeli
security guards are using excessive force against
Palestinian protesters. As we have said many times in
the Council, the policy of impunity and discrimination
will not bring about peace. On the contrary, they only
fuel the recurrence of violence and resistance. The
safety of Israelis is definitely important, but Palestinians
deserve equal measures of security and dignity.
Another alarming trend on the ground is the
continued expansion of settlements by Israel in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Several weeks
ago, the Council held an urgent discussion on the issue
with great concern about the new plans (see S/PV.8883).
We cannot emphasize enough that those activities
constitute violations of international law and relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, as
well as undermining the potential to establish a viable

21-3602711/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and contiguous Palestine State. In line with resolution
2334 (2016), we call upon the Israeli authorities to end
all settlement activities and unilateral acts that erode
hopes for a just and sustainable solution to the conflict.
We strongly believe that the two-State solution
is the only path to a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace. In that regard, we welcome the recent statement
and efforts by the Middle East Quartet to advance
the two-State solution. Any progress in that direction
would require more concrete steps by the members of
the Quartet.
We also appreciate the work of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians, particularly
the efforts of Norway to hold the recent meeting to
assist the Palestinian Authority in the face of its acute
financial situation.
We welcome the recent engagement between
senior officials from the Government of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority. We encourage the further
engagement of all stakeholders to create a conducive
environment for broad and significant dialogues
and negotiations.
On the humanitarian front, we note the
improvements of access into and out of Gaza. However,
the relevant parties need to do more to ensure the
sustained and regular opening of crossing points to
facilitate humanitarian and reconstruction efforts.
United Nations staff and members of international
humanitarian organisations should be able to enter and
exit Gaza without any restrictions. We strongly support
the role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and other United
Nations agencies in ensuring the delivery of critical aid
to Palestinians in Gaza and other parts of the occupied
Palestinian territory. However, the humanitarian
situation requires comprehensive, sustainable and longterm solutions.
Before concluding, on the occasion of the United
Nations International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, I would like to reiterate Viet
Nam’s unwavering support for the legitimate struggle
of the Palestinian people and their inalienable rights.
Accordingly, we remain supportive of the establishment
of the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in peaceful coexistence alongside the State
of Israel, with secure and internationally recognized
borders on the basis of the pre-1967 lines and a negotiated
12/20

30/11/2021

settlement and in accordance with international laws,
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
briefing and for the unremitting efforts he has made
to address the Palestinian question. I also listened
attentively to the statement of Ms. Ero.
The question of Palestine concerns regional
peace, international justice and the human conscience.
The international community seeks to promote a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to this problem
at an early date.
China has always attached great importance to the
question of Palestine. Yesterday, for the United Nations
commemoration of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, President Xi Jinping sent
a congratulatory message to the General Assembly
for the ninth consecutive year, reiterating that China
will always uphold justice and actively promote talks
for peace on the question of Palestine; continue to
provide humanitarian, developmental, pandemic and
other assistance to Palestine; and support an active and
constructive role for the United Nations.
China is deeply concerned about the continuing
tension in the occupied Palestinian territory, with
frequent civilian casualties resulting from attacks,
military and police operations and settler violence.
Force does not bring peace and tranquillity, and
violence only begets more hatred. We urge all parties
to remain calm and exercise restraint, refrain from
measures that could lead to further escalation of the
situation, avoid harming civilians and work together to
de-escalate the situation.
Settlements is one of the central issues in the
final-status negotiations on Palestine, which has
implications for the future of the two-State solution.
China is concerned about Israel’s recently announced
construction plans for more than 3,000 settlement
housing units in the West Bank. To date, more than 300
settlements have been built in the occupied Palestinian
territory, and more than 700,000 settlers have moved
in, disrupting the contiguity in the occupied Palestinian
territory and constricting the living space of the
Palestinian people. China urges Israel to cease all
settlement activities in accordance with the Security
Council resolutions.
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

At present, the economic and humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is very
worrisome. The international community needs to
provide humanitarian and developmental assistance
to Palestine through multiple channels to fight the
pandemic and help Gaza recover and rebuild.
For decades, many Palestinian civil society
organizations have made significant contributions to
improving the humanitarian situation in the occupied
territories and upholding the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people. China hopes that all parties
concerned will foster an enabling environment for civil
society to play an active role.
China welcomes the successful hosting of the
ministerial conference on the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) by Jordan and Sweden and looks forward
to its positive role in strengthening the political and
financial support of the international community to
UNRWA. It is essential to help the Palestinian National
Authority to strengthen its governance capacity and
empower it to exercise its sovereign functions in the
areas of security and finances, among other things.
We appreciate the efforts of the Norway-led Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians in response
to the Palestinian financial crisis. We support the
Palestinian factions in strengthening their unity and
achieving internal reconciliation through consultations
and dialogue and welcome the significant role played
by regional countries, such as Egypt, in that regard.
The international community should adhere to
objectivity and fairness, advocate tolerance and mutual
understanding, and take the thirtieth anniversary of the
Madrid Peace Conference as an opportunity to push for
the resumption of dialogue on an equal footing between
the two sides on the basis of the two-State solution. The
Security Council bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and must take robust action to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian problem.
China calls for a United Nations-brokered
international peace conference in which all the
permanent Council members and all stakeholders in
the Middle East peace process participate. Against the
current backdrop, that is more important and urgent
than ever.

S/PV. 8913

As a sincere friend of the Palestinian people and a
strong supporter of peace between Palestine and Israel,
China will continue to work with the international
community to make positive contributions to an
early settlement of the Palestinian question and the
achievement of lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East region.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland and Ms. Ero for
their briefings.
Let me reaffirm at the outset that the United
Kingdom remains firmly committed to a two-State
solution, based on the 1967 lines and with Jerusalem as
a shared capital. In the absence of a political solution,
it is vital that we continue to support efforts to improve
conditions on the ground and promote stability for
Israelis and Palestinians alike.
In that regard, we thank Norway for hosting the
recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians (AHLC) and the parties for the spirit
of cooperation they brought to it. In particular, we
welcome the commitments made to reinvigorate the
Joint Economic Committee and to resolve key technical
issues, including an electronic value added tax pilot by
the end of 2021. Further direct engagement between the
parties, including to progress commitments made at the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting, is essential, and
we should all spare no effort in supporting it.
On 19 November, the Government of the United
Kingdom proscribed Hamas in its entirety as a terrorist
organization, including its political wing. We remain
clear that Hamas must renounce violence, recognize
Israel and accept previously signed agreements. Those
conditions remain the benchmark against which its
intentions should be judged.
I offer my condolences to the family of an Israeli
civilian, Eliyahu Kay, who was killed in Jerusalem on
21 November, reportedly by a member of Hamas. We
condemn Hamas’ continued attacks against civilians,
which are unacceptable and unjustifiable.
The decision by the Israeli authorities to designate
six Palestinian non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), and the evidence which forms the basis of those
designations, is a matter for the Government of Israel.
The United Kingdom maintains its own criteria for
designation. We continue engagement with a number of

21-3602713/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

those organizations on human rights issues and respect
the role that NGOs and civil society organizations play
in upholding human rights and democracy.
We have heard today of rising pressure and risk of
instability in the West Bank, linked to the Palestinian
Authority’s financial crisis, the lack of UNRWA funding
and increasing settler violence. As we reiterated at the
international ministerial conference on 16 November,
the United Kingdom remains a firm supporter
of UNRWA and values its importance as a vital
humanitarian and stabilizing force in the region. We
encourage all efforts to improve the Agency’s serious
financial situation, which threatens its service delivery.
We condemn any incidence of violence by settlers
against Palestinians; that deteriorating trend must be
reversed. We welcome Israeli authorities’ discussion of
how to address this issue, and urge Israel to bring those
responsible to justice and end the culture of impunity.
We continue to call on the Government of Israel to
reverse its decisions of 24 and 27 October to advance
the construction of settlement units in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. The settlements being advanced
around Jerusalem are a threat to the viability of a future
Palestinian State and, therefore, to peace and stability.
Peace will be achieved only through real movement
towards renewed dialogue between the parties. We
encourage further and deeper engagement in that
regard, aimed at creating the foundations for future
progress towards a two-State solution.
Mr. Benaabou (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland and Ms. Comfort
Ero for their briefings.
France is concerned about the increase of negative
signals on the ground, which contrasts with the positive
dynamics of recent months. The Bennett Government’s
first decisions, taken with respect to settlements in
October, with the approval of plans to build several
thousand housing units in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, are of great concern. France recalls its
condemnation of settlement construction, which is
illegal in international law.
We are also concerned about the possible
construction of a new settlement north of Jerusalem,
on the site of the old Atarot/Qalandia airport. We call
on the Israeli authorities not to initiate this planning
process. If the project were approved and implemented
by the Israeli Government, it would mark, as did Givat
14/20

30/11/2021

Hamatos, the creation of a new settlement in East
Jerusalem for the first time in more than 25 years.
We also call on them to reconsider their settlement
expansion plans, especially in sensitive areas like Area
E1, which endanger the two-State solution and directly
undermine the viability of a future Palestinian State.
The increase in settler violence and the
deteriorating situation in Jerusalem also remain a
source of concern. France strongly condemned the
terrorist attack perpetrated on 21 November in the Old
City. We call on all actors to respect the status quo in
the holy places. Evictions of Palestinian families in East
Jerusalem must be permanently suspended in favour of
durable solutions.
Finally, France reiterates its concern after the
designation of six Palestinian non-governmental
organizations as terrorist organizations. That Israeli
decision may have far-reaching consequences for the
continuation of their work by restricting humanitarian
space. We are in contact with the Israeli authorities and
await further clarification.
Faced with the continued high risk of escalation,
more must be done to increase cooperation between
the parties and improve the lives of the people.
France calls on all parties to refrain from unilateral
measures in order to make progress towards that goal.
It welcomes the goodwill displayed by the parties at the
ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians. We call for the implementation of
their commitments and for the rapid convening of the
Joint Economic Committee in order to consider more
ambitious reforms, in particular on the fiscal front.
More must also be done to continue consolidating
the ceasefire in Gaza and facilitate the reconstruction of
the enclave, ensuring that aid reaches its beneficiaries.
We welcome the international community’s support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, reiterated at the
16 November conference. We call on all States, including
the Arab Gulf States, to increase their contributions to
the Agency’s budget.
France will continue to encourage the
implementation of concrete and reciprocal measures
aimed at rebuilding confidence between the parties.
That is the goal we are pursuing with our German,
Egyptian and Jordanian partners as part of the Amman
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8913

group. We call on the Quartet to work in that direction
as well.

Special Coordinator, to advance the political process
towards the two-State solution.

The resumption of dialogue between the parties
and the deepening of their cooperation can permanently
prevent a new cycle of violence only on the condition
of recreating a political horizon. France’s position in
favour of a solution of two States, each with Jerusalem
as its capital, remains unchanged. France calls on the
Council to work actively for its implementation.

While we may once have believed it possible to
detect some beneficial effects that the normalization
of relations between Israel and certain Arab countries
would have had by generating a shift in Israeli policy
in the occupied Palestinian territories, it is clear today
that all hopes have been dashed. It is therefore no longer
possible to continue to turn a blind eye to the ongoing
abuses perpetrated by the occupying Power through
the demolition of Palestinian structures, arbitrary
expropriations and the desecration of holy places, which
absolutely must end — as must the forced displacement,
the expulsions, the transfer of Palestinian civilians and
the expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which are no more and no less than a flagrant
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions
on the issue, including resolution 2334 (2016).

Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin my remarks by thanking Mr. Tor Wennesland
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in the
Middle East. I also thank Ms. Comfort Ero for her rich
and eloquent contribution.
Mr. Wennesland’s briefing this morning was
no different than previous briefings, since it again
established a catalogue of violence, demolition and
expulsion that spares neither women nor children.
And yet, the situation must change if, as the Security
Council and the international community have
always affirmed, the solution to the crisis is the twoState solution. Ms. Ero was right to say that Israel,
the occupying Power, while enjoying the comfort of
impunity, is resolutely pursuing its policy of occupying
and settling Palestinian territories, which allows us to
foresee the day when there is only one State, Israel. We
can never say it often enough — Israel’s right to live
in peace should not deny the Palestinians their right to
their own viable and independent State.
The recent decision of the Israeli authorities
to authorize the construction of more than 3,000
new housing units in the occupied West Bank and
the designation as terrorist organizations of six
Palestinian non-governmental organizations, working
in the humanitarian field and the defence of human
rights, amply illustrate the contempt shown by Israel,
the occupying Power, for the incessant calls on it to
respect international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Council.
The Niger strongly firmly condemns the continuation
of the frenzied settlement policy pursued by Israel for
several decades in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian lands, notably
through the expansion of settlements, has become the
major obstacle to the restoration of trust and peaceful
coexistence with the Palestinian people. This posture
hinders the diplomatic efforts of nations, through the

Moreover, it is the continued settlement process,
injustice and discrimination against the Palestinian
people that breed discontent, revolt and violence. Israel
must face the fact that the security to which it aspires
cannot be sustained through the establishment of a
discriminatory system that perpetuates oppression and
injustice against the neighbouring Palestinian people.
It is equally important, in view of the resumption of
the peace process that has been interrupted for several
years, that the international community show greater
commitment and will, especially as we commemorate
the thirtieth anniversary of the 1991 Madrid conference,
whose success promoted the discussions that led to the
Oslo Accords.
In the context of efforts to restore peace between
Israel and Palestine, the lifting of the illegal blockade
on the Gaza Strip, the improvement of the humanitarian
and economic situation and the general living conditions
in the occupied Palestinian territories also continue to
be priorities that require effective action.
The tense climate in Gaza reflects the deep despair
of a predominantly young population for whom every
aspect of their lives has been undermined by the
prolonged Israeli siege. The situation in the West Bank
is not much better, due to an economic recession caused
by years of stagnant economic activity and the budget
deficit of the Palestinian Authority. All this is happening
against the backdrop of the financial difficulties of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which risk

21-3602715/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

compromising the continuation of aid and assistance
programmes for the 5.5 million Palestinians in Gaza
and the West Bank, as well as for refugees in Jordan,
Syria and Lebanon.
That is why we call on the international community
to be more generous towards these hard-pressed
populations by supporting the financing of the Gaza
reconstruction plan and the continuation of UNRWA’s
vital programmes, but also by providing financial
support to the Palestinian Authority.
We welcome the generous gestures of all donors
and, in particular, the key role played by certain
countries of the region, such as Egypt and Qatar, in
alleviating the suffering of the people living under
Israeli occupation and in maintaining dialogue between
the Palestinian factions.
In conclusion, the Niger believes that only a
return to the internationally accepted parameters for
the resumption of the peace process, with a view to
achieving a two-State solution, can lead to a just and
lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In
that perspective, we salute the tireless efforts of Mr. Tor
Wennesland and all international stakeholders to reach
a successful resolution to this dispute, which has a clear
impact on the peace, stability and security of the entire
Middle East and beyond.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Mr. Tor Wennesland for his briefing and Ms. Comfort
Ero for her great insights from the perspective of the
International Crisis Group.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains alarming. Ireland strongly opposes Israel’s
illegal policy of settlement expansion in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The continual construction of
settlements undermines the viability and territorial
contiguity of a future Palestinian State, violates
international law and damages trust. That is particularly
true in sensitive areas, such as E-1, Givat Hamatos and
Atarot, as well as deep in the West Bank. We urge Israel
to halt all settlement progression and construction and
to comply fully with resolution 2334 (2016). During
his recent visit, Ireland’s Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Simon Coveney, saw first-hand the damaging impact
of settlements.
Ireland is gravely concerned about Israel’s
designation of six Palestinian non-governmental
organizations, including organizations supported by
16/20

30/11/2021

Ireland and the European Union (EU), as terrorist
entities. Ireland and its EU partners take allegations of
terrorism extremely seriously. However, in the absence
of evidence to substantiate those allegations, Ireland
will continue to support those organizations. We are
also concerned about the impact of those designations
for civil society, which plays a critical role in open
democracies. From our own experience in Ireland, we
know the positive contribution that civil society can
make to a peace process. We will continue to support
human rights defenders who promote respect for
international law, peace and accountability.
Other negative trends also give rise to serious
concern. The number of Palestinians injured by Israeli
forces using live ammunition in 2021 is five times
higher than in 2020. We strongly condemn all acts of
violence and terrorism, including in the Old City of
Jerusalem, and remind all parties of their obligations
under international law to ensure the protection of
civilians. In addition, settler violence is reprehensible.
All perpetrators must be held accountable, and the
culture of impunity around such incidents of violence
must end. The threat of demolitions and evictions of
Palestinians in Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan continues
to be troubling. The status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem must be observed.
We welcome the recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians and are pleased that both
parties came to the meeting with a practical attitude in
addressing the Palestinian economic situation, which is
of serious concern. We echo the calls for the parties to
translate that attitude into real change and to address
structural constraints to economic development.
The dire financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) is also a matter of urgent
concern. We must ensure that UNRWA has sufficient,
predictable and sustainable funding so that it can
continue to support the needs of Palestine refugees. At
the recent international ministerial-level conference,
Ireland joined a number of donors in pledging additional
support. We call on other donors, particularly in the
region, to step up and translate political support into
financial commitments.
The situation in Gaza remains deeply worrying.
While we welcome the easing of some restrictions, more
must be done. We renew our call for Israel to end the
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

blockade of Gaza. The support from Qatar and Egypt
is positive, however, humanitarian and reconstruction
relief remains insufficient to meet the needs of the
people of the Gaza Strip.
We call on the parties to build on recent positive
steps, improve cooperation and reduce tensions. Direct
and meaningful negotiations are essential, as is stronger
Quartet engagement. The situation will not be resolved
without sustained and substantive attention from the
Council and the international community.
Finally, Ireland calls for a legitimate political
horizon to end the occupation on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and bilateral
agreements. We believe that a two-State solution, if
implemented, can deliver peace, security, freedom and
justice for Israelis and Palestinians. We must continue
to strive for an independent, democratic, contiguous,
viable and sovereign Palestinian State, living side by
side in peace and security with Israel within secure and
recognized borders on the basis of the pre-1967 lines,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing and continuous efforts to strengthen
the prospects for peace in the Middle East. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his ongoing efforts
to revitalize the peace process in the Middle East and
Ms. Ero for her important briefing.
Yesterday, 29 November, Tunisia, alongside the
international community, celebrated the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, as we
do every year. In that connection, the President sent a
letter of solidarity with the Palestinian people to the
General Assembly. The special meeting held yesterday
by the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People (see A/AC.183/
PV.404) reaffirmed the solidarity of the international
community with the just cause of the Palestinian
people. The special meeting also showed support for
the legitimate demands of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and to ending the brutal occupation
of Palestinian territory, pursuant to the resolutions of
international legitimacy, particularly those adopted by
the Security Council.
It is of paramount importance that the international
community and stakeholders step up their efforts
and pressure in order to change the deteriorating and

S/PV. 8913

tense situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, as a result of Israeli policies
that violate international law and the repressive and
discriminatory practices of the occupying authorities.
In that context, one of the main priorities should be
ending the expansionist settlement activities of the
occupation, the forced displacement of Palestinians,
the confiscation of their homes and lands and attempts
to change the historical, demographic and legal status
of Jerusalem. It is also important to lift the restrictions
imposed on the Gaza Strip for more than 14 years.
Given that situation, we reiterate our call on
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
regarding those grave violations, including by following
up on the implementation of its relevant resolutions,
the most recent of which is resolution 2334 (2016), and
ensuring the accountability of the occupying Power for
its violations of, and disregard for, international law. In
the light of the systematic attacks and repression that
the Palestinian civilian population, including women
and children, suffer, we also reaffirm the need to
provide them with international protection, in line with
United Nations resolutions.
Based on our conviction in the effective contribution
of civil society to efforts to achieve peace in the Middle
East, we stress the importance of civil society in the
occupied Palestinian territories playing its role without
restrictions. In that context, we reject the decision of
the occupation authorities to designate six Palestinian
civil organizations as terrorist entities.
The status quo in the occupied territories is not
sustainable and could lead to further escalation. From
that standpoint, we stress the need to act without further
delay to discuss ways to launch meaningful, credible
and time-bound negotiations in order to establish a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
In that context, Tunisia reiterates its support for
holding an international conference with full powers,
with the participation of all parties concerned, to
engage in a genuine peace process on the basis of
international law, United Nations resolutions, the
relevant international terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative. We also value the engagement of the
members of the Middle East Quartet in the efforts to
revitalize the peace process. We hope that the Quartet’s
role will be strengthened during the upcoming phase so
that we can pave the way for real prospects for peace.

21-3602717/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories remains dire, especially in the
Gaza Strip. In that context, we reiterate the importance
of ensuring the delivery of aid to those in need, lifting
restrictions on freedom of movement and trade and
refraining from undermining reconstruction efforts.
While we thank all international donors for their
support to the humanitarian response efforts in the
occupied territories, we stress the urgent need to secure
additional funding, including to address the financial
deficit in the budget of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA). In
that context, we commend the role of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians and the Jordanian-Swedish
initiative to hold a donor conference for UNRWA on
16 November.
In conclusion, we reiterate Tunisia’s strong support
for the just Palestinian cause. We will continue to stand
by the brotherly Palestinian people in defending their
legitimate rights, which will not expire with the passage
of time, particularly establishing an independent,
sovereign State along the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I thank both briefers for their presentations earlier
this morning.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines joined the
international community yesterday, 29 November, to
observe the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People and focused attention on the fact that
the prospect of the State of Palestine, living in peace
with its neighbour, Israel, is increasingly elusive. That
is not for want of clear, unambiguous resolutions and
international law in favour of the two-State solution, but
rather the failure to ensure the implementation of those
edicts. For too long, the Palestinian people have been
denied the right to self-determination without external
interference, the right to national independence and
sovereignty and the right to return to their homes and
property, from which they were displaced. Instead,
illegal occupiers have continued to thwart the will of
the international community.
It is critical that the countries of the region, the
United Nations, the Middle East Quartet and other
international parties redouble efforts to achieve a
peaceful settlement and stand in solidarity with,
and uphold the rights of, the Palestinian people. Yet
18/20

30/11/2021

again, we reiterate the call by President Abbas for an
international peace conference, with the participation
of all stakeholders in the Middle East peace process.
We remain deeply concerned about the Israeli
authorities’ aggression against the Palestinian people,
especially as they continue to demolish buildings,
plan to build more settlements in the West Bank and
aggressively distribute house demolition notices.
Similarly, the problem of settler violence against
Palestinians remains a long-standing concern. We
call on the Israeli authorities to fulfil their obligations
under international law to maintain public order in the
occupied territory. Palestinians must be protected from
settler violence, and the perpetrators must be held to
account for their actions.
The fragile situation in Gaza, following the 11day siege in May, requires an urgent international
and cross-cutting approach, including addressing the
impact of climate change on crop yields and the quality
of life. The pace of Gaza’s reconstruction needs to be
accelerated. Unhindered humanitarian access to Gaza
is critical in order to address the basic needs of the
Palestinian population and ensure stability. To that end,
we call on the international community to increase its
financial support to United Nations agencies to help
strengthen the Palestinian Authority’s ability to assume
its responsibility in the recovery and reconstruction of
the Gaza Strip. Moreover, every effort should be made
to encourage the fulfilment of assistance pledges made
at the international conference on the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East held in Brussels on 16 November.
Let me conclude by once again emphasizing that
the only option for a comprehensive and just peace in
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is adhering to the longestablished and agreed parameters for a two-State
solution. In our efforts to help bring about the desired
lasting solution to this conflict, we must intensify our
engagement and commitment to assisting Palestinians
and Israelis in reaching the two-State solution.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing. I also
thank Ms. Comfort Ero for her briefing.
India’s support for a peaceful resolution of the
Israel-Palestine conflict is consistent and well known.
We hope for an early resumption of direct negotiations
on the peace process between Israel and Palestine.
21-36027

30/11/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8913

Recent developments on the ground, however, could
pose challenges for the resumption of the peace process.
The continued acts of violence against civilians in both
Israel and Palestine, as well as acts of provocation,
incitement and destruction, are deeply concerning. We
condemn all such acts. Unilateral actions that unduly
alter the status quo on the ground and undercut the
viability of the two-State solution must be avoided in
the interest of peace and stability. I also underscore the
need to respect and maintain the historic status quo of
the holy sites in Jerusalem.

UNRWA ministerial conference in Brussels and
renewed India’s commitment to contribute $5 million
to the Agency in 2022.

We welcome the cooperation between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, as well as with the countries of the
region, to improve the socioeconomic conditions in the
West Bank and Gaza, including coordination through
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians. We
appreciate the work of donor countries and development
partners in the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee.

The international community, and the Middle
East Quartet in particular, has an important role to
play in reviving those negotiations. In that regard,
I welcome the recent meeting of the Quartet Special
Envoys, which is timely. We urge the Quartet and the
international community to engage with the Israeli and
the Palestinian leaderships to kick-start negotiations.
India stands ready to support all efforts aimed at the
resumption of direct negotiations.

India welcomes the measures taken by Israel to
create greater opportunities for the socioeconomic
development of Palestine. On our part, as a committed
development partner of Palestine, India continues to
provide development and humanitarian assistance,
both bilaterally through the Palestinian Authority and
through contributions to the United Nations.
Even during the pandemic, work on development
projects in Palestine — such as the Palestine-India
technology park, the women’s empowerment centre and
the construction of schools — has continued to progress.
On the occasion of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, the Prime Minister of India
extended his best wishes to the people of Palestine in
their endeavour for statehood, peace and prosperity.
In his message, he reaffirmed our relationship with
the Palestinian people, which is based on deep-rooted
historical and people-to-people ties.
We also appreciate the work of the United Nations
and its agencies in ensuring the delivery of critical aid to
the Palestinians. We call for the regular and predictable
transfer of aid, as well as for the appropriate use of such
aid. India remains supportive of the role played by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in human
development and the delivery of humanitarian services.
India has fully disbursed its pledged contribution for
2021. India’s Minister of State for External Affairs,
Mr. Shri. V. Muraleedharan, participated in the recent

I reiterate the urgent need for the resumption
of direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine,
which will provide a sustainable platform to resolve
all final-status issues towards the establishment of a
sovereign, independent and viable State of Palestine,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
I thank Mr. Wennesland and Ms. Ero for their
briefings. As we heard this morning, unfortunately, the
cycle of violence in the Middle East continues and there
really is no lasting solution in sight. I will focus on three
points, namely, the advancement of Israeli settlements,
the ceasefire in Gaza and the human rights situation.
First, Mexico condemns, as it has in the past, the
recent authorization of the construction of new housing
units under the justification of the so-called natural
growth of Israeli settlements. Settlement activities,
including the confiscation and demolition of property,
as well as the construction and expansion of settlements,
are illegal under international law and represent an
obstacle to the two-State solution.
Secondly, with regard to Gaza, we applaud
mediation efforts, especially by Egypt, to consolidate
the ceasefire. We also acknowledge Qatar’s financial
contributions to the population in the Gaza Strip. We
welcome the easing of restrictions by Israel to allow
the regular and predictable flow of basic necessities to
the Palestinian population and call for the definitive
lifting of the blockade. A prosperous and peaceful Gaza
means security for Israel too, so all efforts must bear
that vision in mind.

21-3602719/20

S/PV.8913

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Thirdly, as we heard earlier, the designation of
six Palestinian civil society organizations as terrorist
groups reduces the democratic space and constitutes
a violation of human rights. On 29 July, Israeli law
enforcement authorities raided the offices of Defence
for Children International. Mexico calls on the parties
to respect human rights and refrain from acts of
repression against activists, journalists and human
rights defenders.
We condemn all acts of violence, in particular
attacks in the Old City of Jerusalem, as well as acts
of provocation and attacks by Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians. We condemn the 17 November
attack on a school south of Nablus. We are concerned
that such acts also encourage violence and are used as
an excuse for further attacks against Israeli citizens.
We urge both Israeli and Palestinian leaders to refrain
from the use of inflammatory rhetoric and any acts of
incitement. The current cycle of reciprocal violence
must end as soon as possible.
Mexico welcomes the latest meetings of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians and the Middle
East Quartet.
I reiterate my delegation’s firm conviction that the
only solution to the conflict is a two-State solution that
addresses Israel’s legitimate concerns and allows for the
consolidation of a politically and economically viable
Palestinian State, living side by side in peace with Israel
within secure and internationally recognized borders,
while maintaining the special status of Jerusalem in

20/20

30/11/2021

accordance with international law and the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Finally, I take this opportunity to wish all our
Jewish friends around the world a happy Chanukah.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. My thanks again to Ms. Ero.
Before adjourning the meeting, given that this is the
final scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of November, I wish to express Mexico’s appreciation
to the members of the Council and to the Secretariat
for all the support they have given us. It has certainly
been an intense month, during which we have achieved
consensus on various important issues that fall within
the Council’s field of competence. We could not have
done it alone, or without the hard work, support and
positive contributions of all delegations and the
Secretariat, including the conference staff, interpreters,
translators, verbatim reporters and security staff. I
would like to extend my thanks to them all.
As the Mexican presidency draws to an end, I know
I speak on behalf of all Council members in wishing the
delegation of the Niger the very best for its presidency
of the Council during the month of December.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

21-36027
