S/PRST/2021/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 March 2021
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
On 10 March 2021, in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item
entitled “The situation in Myanmar”, in accordance with the procedure agreed in light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and set out in
S/2020/372, the President of the Security Council issued the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its Press Statement SC/14430 of
4 February 2021, reiterates its deep concern at developments in Myanmar
following the declaration of the state of emergency imposed by the military on
1 February and the arbitrary detention of members of the Government, including
State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi and President Win Myint and others. The
Security Council reiterates its call for their immediate release.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the violence against peaceful
protestors, including against women, youth and children. It expresses deep
concern at restrictions on medical personnel, civil society, labour union
members, journalists and media workers, and calls for the immediate release of
all those detained arbitrarily. The Council calls for the military to exercise
utmost restraint and emphasises that it is following the situation closely.
“The Security Council expresses its continued support for the democratic
transition in Myanmar, and stresses the need to uphold democratic institutions
and processes, refrain from violence, fully respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and uphold the rule of law. It encourages the pu rsuance
of constructive dialogue and reconciliation in accordance with the will and
interests of the people of Myanmar.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for regional
organisations, in particular the Association of Southeast Asian Nation s
(ASEAN) and its readiness to assist Myanmar in a positive, peaceful and
constructive manner. It commends ASEAN’s continued efforts to engage with
all relevant parties in Myanmar. The Council welcomes the recent informal
ASEAN Ministerial meeting on 2 March, and the statements made by the
ASEAN Chair on 2 March and 1 February, which recalled the purposes and
principles of the ASEAN Charter, notably the principle of democracy, adherence
to the rule of law, good governance, the protection of human rights and respect
for fundamental freedoms, called on all parties to exercise utmost restraint and
seek a peaceful solution through constructive dialogue and practical
reconciliation in the interests of the people and their livelihood.

21-03308 (E)

120321

*2103308*

S/PRST/2021/5

“The Security Council also reiterates its support to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General on Myanmar for her good offices, encourages the Special
Envoy to maintain communication and her efforts to engage intensively with all
relevant parties in Myanmar, and to visit Myanmar as soon as possible.
“The Security Council continues to call for safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access to all people in need, and highlights that the current
situation has the potential to exacerbate existing challenges in Rakhine state and
other regions. The Security Council expresses concern that recent developments
pose particular serious challenges for the voluntary, safe, dignified, and
sustainable return of Rohingya refugees and internally displaced persons. It is
vital that the rights of minorities are fully protected.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the people of Myanmar and
its strong commitment to the sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and unity of Myanmar.
“The Security Council remains seized of the matter.”

2/2

21-03308
