_L

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

things, detailed information on the offers of scholarships and training facilities and their actual utilization
and, in cases of non-utilization, the reasons for the
failure of Trust Territories to take advantage of the
offers.
1047th plenary meeting,
6 November 1961.
1644 (XVI). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations and the International
Trusteeship System in the Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1607 (XV) of 21 April 1961
whereby the General Assembly, inter alia:
(a) Requested the Secretary-General to take the
necessary action to establish, wit~out any further d~lay,
in Tanganyika, Ruanda-Urund1 and New Gumea,
United Nations information centres in which the
responsible positions would be occupied by indigenous
inhabitants of the Trust Territories concerned,

( b) Requested the Secretary-General to ensure the
immediate and mass publication and the widest possible
circulation and dissemination, in all the Trust Territories through all media of mass communication, of the
Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples, and to ensure that the information should be disseminated in the principal local languages as well as in the language of the Administering
Authority,

Having perused the report of the Secretary-General11
prepared in accordance with resolution 1607 (XV),
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the establishment
on 16 June 1961 at Dares Salaam, Tanganyika, and at
Usumbura, Ruanda-Urundi, of United Nations information centres and also of the training of qualified
indigenous inhabitants for positions of responsibility
in those two centres ;
2. Takes further note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the dissemination in the Tru~t Territori~s
through all media of mass communication, in the
principal local languages as well as in the language
of the Administering Authority, of the Declaration on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples, of information on the purposes .and operation
of the United Nations and of the International Trusteeship System, and on the principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;
3. Req1tests the Secretary-General to take steps,
in consultation with the Administering Authority concerned, to establish without any further delay in New
Guinea in 1962 a United Nations information centre
in which responsible positions would be occupied by
indigenous inhabitants of the Territory;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventeenth session
a report concerning the implementation of the present
resolution.
1047th plenary meeting,
6 November 1961.
"Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 13, 50
and 51, document A/4864.

35

1645 (XVI). Sub-Committee on the Question•
naire relating to Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling that under General Assembly resolution
751 (VIII) of 9 December 1953 a Sub-Committee was
established to examine the Questionnaire formulated
by the Trusteeship Council, to study such changes as
might be necessary to adapt the Questionnaire to the
special conditions of each Territory, and to submit its
conclusions to the Council,
Noting that the Trusteeship Council has adopted
special questionnaires for certain Trust Territories,
l. Expresses its appreciation of the work accomplished by the Sub-Committee on the Questionnaire;
2. Decides that the Sub-Committee, having completed its work, should be discontinued.
1047th plenary meeting,
6 November 1961.
1646 (XVI). Hearing of petitioners in connexion
with the Trust Territory of Tanganyika

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 1 July 1960 to 19 July
1961,6
Noting that at the sixteenth session of the General
Assembly the Fourth Committee heard petitioners from
Tanganyika,
Noting further that during its twenty-seventh session
the Trusteeship Council heard petitioners from Tanganyika and commended their observations as well as
those of various Member States to the attention of the
Administering Authority for urgent action,
Requests that the Administering Authority take acc?unt o_f the comments and suggestions made during the
discu~s10n of the :eport of the Trusteeship Council at
t~e sixteenth session of the General Assembly, with a
view to extending similar consideration in the matter
of compen~ation for loss of career to all expatriate civil
servants without regard to race, colour, creed or origin.
1047th plenary meeting,
6 November 1961.
1694 (XVI). Social advancement in the Non•
Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by resolutions 643 (VII) of 10 December 1952, 929 (X) of 8 November 1955 and 1326
(XIII) of 12 December 1958 it approved the reports on
social conditions prepared by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories in 1952,7
19558 and 1958,9
"Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/4818).
• Ibid., Seventh Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/2219), part
two.

"Ibid., Tenth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/2908), part

two.

"Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No.15 (A/3837), part

two.

36

General ABsembly-Sixteenth Session

Recalling that in 1960 the Committee included a
survey of social conditions in its observations and conclusions on the report on progress in the Non-Self-Governing Territories since the beginning of the United
Nations, 10
H a-ving received a report on social advancement prepared by the Committee in 1961,11
1. Approves the report on social advancement prepared in 1961 by the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories, and considers that it
should be read with the earlier reports approved in
1952, 1955 and 1958 and with the survey included in
the report on progress achieved in the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit the
1961 report to the Members responsible for the administration of N:on-Self-Governing Territories, to the
Economic and Social Council, to the regional economic
commissions, to the Trusteeship Council and to the
specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration;
3. Expresses its confidence that the Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories will bring the report to the attention of the
appropriate authorities.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1695 (XVI). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Considering that it is essential that the peoples of
the Non-~elf-Governing Territories be widely acquainted with the Declaration,
1. Invites the Administering Members to take immediate steps, with the active participation of the
representative bodies and organizations of the indigenous inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, for the widest possible circulation and dissemination in those Territories of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples;
2. Further invites the Administering Members to
take immediate steps for the inclusion of the Declaration in the curricula of all educational institutions in
all Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
immediate and large-scale circulation and dissemination
of the Declaration, through all the appropriate media
of mass communication, in all the Non-Self-Governing
Territories;
4. Invites the Administering Members to extend to
the Secretary-General their fullest co-operation in the
circulation and dissemination of the Declaration in all
the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
5. Requests that the Declaration be circulated and
disseminated in the principal local languages as well as
in the languages of the Administering Members ;
:11> Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 15
(A/4371),
part two, section C.
11
Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/4785), part
two.
-'

6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on the implementation of the present resolution
for the General Assembly at its seventeenth session.

1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1696 (XVI). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples,
Recognizing the importance of rendering assistance
to colonial countries and peoples in the field of g<:'.neral
and specialized education,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States of study and training
f~cil~ties for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Terntones under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,12
Noting with satisfaction the further response to its
resolution 845 (IX) inviting Member States to extend
their offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Expressing regret that, despite the increased interest
among inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in such offers, a large number of the scholarships offered by Member States remain unutilized,
Further expressing regret that in several instances
students who have been granted scholarships have not
been accorded facilities to leave the Non-Self-Governing Territories in order to take advantage of such
scholarships,
~ecalling paragraph 5 of its resolution 845 (IX) by
~h1ch _the Secretary-General is requested, in consultation ~1th the Administering Members and specialized
age_nc1es concerned, to establish a simple procedure
which would enable offers and applications made
through the United Nations or the specialized agencies
to be brought to the attention of the Administering
Members, and thereafter, in the case of applications,
to the attention of the offering States concerned together with any observations the Administering Members may have submitted,
_C~nsidering that the procedure requiring the transm1_ss10n of observations by the Admiajstering Members
prior to the submission of the application to the offering
Stat~ c~uses a serious delay in the processing of those
applications,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on offers of study and training facilities under General Assembly resolution 843 (IX);
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1540 (XV) of 15 December 1960;
3. invites once again the Administering Members
concerned to take all necessary measures to ensure that
all scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States are utilized by the inhabitants of the NonSelf-Governing Territories and to render effective
assistance to those persons who have applied for, or
u Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 39, 40, 41,
42, 43 and 44, documents A/4862 and Add.l and 2.
