United Nations

A/RES/67/183

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 69 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/457/Add.3 and Corr.1)]

67/183. Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights 1 and relevant international human rights treaties,
including the International Covenants on Human Rights, 2
Recalling its resolutions 66/176 of 19 December 2011, 66/253 A of
16 February 2012 and 66/253 B of 3 August 2012, Human Rights Council
resolutions S-16/1 of 29 April 2011, 3 S-17/1 of 23 August 2011,3 S-18/1 of
2 December 2011, 4 19/1 of 1 March 2012, 5 19/22 of 23 March 2012,5 S-19/1 of
1 June 2012, 6 20/22 of 6 July 2012 7 and 21/26 of 28 September 2012 8 and Security
Council resolutions 2042 (2012) of 14 April 2012 and 2043 (2012) of 21 April 2012,
Recalling also all resolutions of the League of Arab States relating to the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular resolution 7523 of 5 September
2012, in which the League expressed its strong condemnation of the continuing
violence, murder and heinous crimes committed by the Syrian authorities and the
affiliated shabbiha militias against Syrian civilians and the use of heavy weapons,
including tanks, artillery and warplanes in the bombardment of populated
neighbourhoods and villages, as well as arbitrary executions and enforced
disappearances, in flagrant violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and called upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to cease immediately
and completely all forms of killing and violence against the Syrian people,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. I.
4
Ibid., Supplement No. 53B and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.2 and Corr.1), chap. II.
5
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
6
Ibid., chap. V.
7
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. A.
8
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
2

12-48958

*1248958*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/183

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

Welcoming the relevant decisions of the League of Arab States on the
developments in respect of the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic,
Welcoming also Organization of Islamic Cooperation resolution 2/4-EX (IS) of
15 August 2012 on the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, in which the
Organization called for the immediate implementation of the transitional plan and
the development of a peaceful mechanism that would allow the building of a new
Syrian State based on pluralism and a democratic and civilian system, where there
would be equality on the basis of law, citizenship and fundamental freedoms,
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and to the principles of the Charter,
Strongly condemning the shelling as well as the shooting by the Syrian armed
forces into neighbouring countries, which led to casualties and injuries of the
civilians of those countries as well as of Syrian refugees, and underlining that such
incidents violated international law and highlighted the grave impact of the crisis in
the Syrian Arab Republic on the security of its neighbours and on regional peace
and stability,
Expressing grave concern at the escalation of violence in the Syrian Arab
Republic, in particular the continued widespread and systematic gross violations of
human rights and the continued use of heavy weapons and aerial bombardments by
the Syrian authorities against the Syrian population, and the failure of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to protect its population,
Taking note with concern of the report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict, 9 which indicates the occurrence of grave violations against
children in the Syrian Arab Republic, that children were among the victims of
military operations carried out by Government forces, including the Syrian armed
forces, intelligence forces and shabbiha militias, and that children as young as
9 years of age were victims of killing and maiming, arbitrary arrest, detention,
torture and ill-treatment, including sexual violence, and were used as human shields,
Expressing concern at the vulnerable situation of women in this context,
including being subjected to discrimination, sexual and physical abuse, violation of
their privacy and arbitrary arrest and detention in raids, including to force their male
relatives to surrender, and underlining the importance of preventing all sexual
violence and violence based on gender,
Deploring the further deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
failure to ensure safe and timely provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas
affected by the fighting,
Expressing great concern about the escalating violence causing an influx of
Syrian refugees into neighbouring countries and countries of the region,
Expressing its deep concern at the failure to implement the six-point proposal
of the former Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States to Syria, 10 welcoming the appointment of the new Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria, and expressing its full
support for his efforts towards the peaceful transition to a pluralistic, democratic civil
State with equality in citizenship and freedoms,
_______________
9

A/66/782-S/2012/261.
Security Council resolution 2042 (2012), annex.

10

2/4

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

A/RES/67/183

Recalling the statements made by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights before the Human Rights Council and the Security Council that crimes
against humanity are likely to have been committed in the Syrian Arab Republic,
Expressing the urgent need to achieve a cessation of violence and prevent its
further escalation and spread,
1.
Strongly condemns the continued widespread and systematic gross
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms by the Syrian authorities and
the Government-controlled shabbiha militias, such as the use of heavy weapons,
aerial bombardments and force against civilians, massacres, arbitrary executions,
extrajudicial killings, the killing and persecution of protestors, human rights
defenders and journalists, arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances, interference
with access to medical treatment, torture, sexual violence and ill-treatment, including
against children, as well as any human rights abuses by armed opposition groups;
Calls upon the Syrian authorities to immediately put an end to all human
2.
rights violations and attacks against civilians, to protect the population and to fully
comply with their obligations under applicable international law, and calls upon all
parties to put an end to all forms of violence;
Urges the Syrian authorities to release immediately all persons arbitrarily
3.
detained, including the members of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of
Expression, to publish a list of all detention facilities, to ensure that conditions of
detention comply with applicable international law and to immediately allow access
of independent monitors to all detention facilities;
Stresses its support for the aspirations of the Syrian people for a
4.
peaceful, democratic and pluralistic society, in which there is no room for
sectarianism or discrimination on ethnic, religious, linguistic or any other grounds,
based on the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and
fundamental freedoms;
Welcomes the report of the independent international commission of
5.
inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, submitted pursuant to Human Rights Council
resolution 19/22, 11 and the recommendations contained therein;
6.
Regrets the continued non-cooperation of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic with the commission of inquiry;
7.
Demands that the Syrian authorities provide the commission of inquiry
and individuals working on its behalf immediate, full and unfettered entry and
access to all areas of the Syrian Arab Republic, and demands also that all parties
cooperate fully with the commission of inquiry in the performance of its mandate;
Encourages the relevant United Nations bodies to invite the Chair of the
8.
commission of inquiry to brief them on the situation of human rights in the Syrian
Arab Republic;
Stresses the importance of ensuring accountability and the need to end
9.
impunity and hold to account those responsible for human rights violations,
including those violations that may amount to crimes against humanity;
10. Also stresses the need to follow up on the report of the commission of
inquiry and to conduct an international, transparent, independent and prompt
_______________
11

A/HRC/21/50.

3/4

A/RES/67/183

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

investigation into abuses and violations of international law, with a view to holding
to account those responsible for violations and abuses, including those that may
amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes, and encourages members of the
international community to ensure that there is no impunity for such violations
or abuses;
11. Further stresses the important role that international justice could play in
this regard;
12. Calls upon the Syrian authorities to immediately and fully implement the
agreed humanitarian response plan, including by granting immediate, safe, full and
unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to all populations in need of
assistance, in particular to civilian populations in need of evacuation, as well as
safe, full and unimpeded access for affected civilians to humanitarian assistance and
services, and also calls upon all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular the
Syrian authorities, to cooperate fully with the United Nations and relevant
humanitarian organizations to facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance;
13. Strongly condemns intentional and repeated attacks against medical
facilities, personnel and vehicles as well as the use of medical civilian facilities,
including hospitals, for armed purposes, and calls for all medical facilities to be free of
weapons, including heavy weapons, in accordance with applicable international law;
14. Expresses grave concern at the increasing numbers of refugees and
internally displaced persons as a result of the ongoing violence, reiterates its
appreciation of the significant efforts that have been made by neighbouring
countries and the countries of the region to assist those who have fled across the
borders of the Syrian Arab Republic as a consequence of the violence, and urges all
relevant United Nations agencies, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and other donors to provide urgent and
coordinated support to Syrian refugees and their host countries;
15. Urges the international community to provide urgent financial support to
the host countries to enable them to respond to the growing humanitarian needs of
Syrian refugees, while emphasizing the principle of burden-sharing;
16. Urges all donors to provide expeditiously financial support to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat and international
humanitarian organizations, as requested in the humanitarian appeals issued by the
United Nations system and the host countries, so that they can implement more
actively the humanitarian response plan inside the country;
17. Invites Member States to provide all support to the Syrian people, and
encourages Member States to contribute to the United Nations humanitarian
response efforts.
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

4/4
