UNITED NATIONS

*

SECURITY COUN&&D\t
,,.I
OFFICIAL,

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2453rd

MEETING:

NEW

'&31991

15 JUNE 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2453)
Adoption, of the agenda

....................................

1

...............................................

1

The situation in Cyprus: report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/l5812 and Add.1) .............................

1

WPV.2453

:

~2,

!.“?i,

/

.,

‘.

Symbols of United l&tions documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResoZutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fuIly operative on that date.

2453rd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 June 1983, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Elleck Kufakunesu
(Zimbabwe).

MASHINGAIDZE

in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional
procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

It was so decided

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. Members of the
Council have before them the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations operation in Cyprus for
the period 1 December 1982 to 31 May 1983 [S/Z5812 and
Add, 4. Members also have before them a draft resolution
[S/15828& which has been prepared in the course of the
Council’s consultations. It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.

Provisional agenda (UAgendaB453)
1. Adoption
2.

ruies of

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus: report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/158/15812 and Add.1)

A vote was taken by show of ham&.

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.

-The draft resolution was adopted unanimously [resolution
534 (1983)].

Adoption of the agenda
l%e agenda was adopted.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, upon whom I now call.

The situation in Cyprus: report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus (S/U812 and
Add.1)

5. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the high
office of President of the Security Council, a development
which reflects a deserved honour to your country, and to
express my appreciation to you for the skilful manner in
which you have conducted the proceedings of the Council
on the draft resolution for the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP)
for -another period of six months. It is a
source of great satisfaction for our Government and our
people that the presidency of this important organ of the
United Nations is in the talented hands of a distinguished
representative of a very friendly country with which we
share excellent relations.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Security Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Canada, Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in which they request to be’invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in *
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey)
took places at the Council table; Mr. Pelletier (Canada)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. Our congratulations go also to the President of the
Security Council for the month of May, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zaire, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda,
and the representative of Zaire, Mr. Umba di Lutete, for
the impeccable manner in which they conducted the
Council’s deliberations on a number of issues, including
the question of Namibia.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to recall that in the
course of the Council’s consultations members of the
Council agreed that an invitation should be extended to
Mr. Nail Atalay in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall take it that the Council decides to invite Mr. Atalay

7. I should like to thank the members of the Council for
giving me the opportunity to address them and express
my Government’s appreciation for the renewal of the
1

mandate which is essential to the peace-keeping process
with regard to Cyprus.

ment of il our people. The continued presence of the
Turkish occupation troops, contrary to repeated Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, the partitionist and annexationist policies of the occupying Power and
thi: consistent and systematic attempts to consolidate the
fruits of aggression have rendered the problem more
acute, and the need for a just and lasting solution even
more pressing.

8. I have been directed by my Government to reiterate
assurances of full and constructive co-operation with the
Secretary-General and to express to him deep appreciation for his untiring efforts for a just solution of the problem of Cyprus and for his dedication to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. As I recently stated
before the Council on the question of Namibia [245lst
meeting], the Secretary-General in these turbulent times is
being increasingly called upon to take active roles in various parts of the world. This is a tribute to his excellent
personal and diplomatic qualities and evidence of the high
confidence and trust placed in him by the international
community.

13. The Council is faced with a situation where the
occupying power is flouting United Nations resolutions,
clinging to the spoils of occupation, and, in defiance ‘of
world public opinion, proceeding to its goal by changing
the demographic character of the invaded territory of the
Republic and incorporating it politically, economically
and socially into Turkey. In the occupied areas of the
Republic of Cyprus, the Government in Ankara has continued to consolidate further the new series of illegalities
which it initiated last year by establishing a so-called
“Central Bank” -a separatist act per se-by issuing
“Definitive Certificates of Ownership” of the properties
of the refugees to people other than the rightful owners,
and by introducing as of 24 May 1983 the Turkish lira as
the official tender in occupied Cyprus, the latter being a
striking example of the annexationist policy of Turkey.

9. I should also like to commend the significant contribution made by the Under-Secretary-General
for Special
Political Affairs, Mr. Urquhart, and by his colleagues in
the Secretariat and to express our warm ,appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Cyprus,
Mr. Hugo Gobbi, whom I welcome here, and his
assistants for the dedicated and efficient manner in which
they carry out their mission in Cyprus.
10. My Government’s appreciation goes also to the
Commander of UNFICYP,
Major-General
G. Greindl,
whom I also welcome here, and to his officers and men
for the dedicated manner in which they have performed
the duties which the Council has entrusted to them. Our
warm feelings of gratitude and appreciation go also to the
friendly Governments which, through voluntary contributions of personnel and funds, made it possible for
UNFICYP to continue rendering its valuable assistance to
peace-keeping in Cyprus.

14. A month ago, on 13 May, the General Assembly,
during its resumed thirty-seventh session, adopted resolution 37/253, on the question of Cyprus, by an overwhelming majority of 103 in favour, 5 against, with 20
abstentions.
15. This fair and balanced resolution, apart from reaffirming basic United Nations positions of principle on the
question of Cyprus-namely,
respect for the sovereignty,
independence,
territorial
integrity, unity and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus, the immediate withdrawal of the occupation forces, the retui-n of the refugees
to their ancestral homes and lands in safety and continuation of the intercommunal talks on the internal aspects of
the question of Cyprus in a meaningful, result-oriented,
constructive and substantive manner-contains
an additional positive paragraph which welcomes the intention
of the Secretary-General to pursue a renewed personal
involvement in the quest for a solution of the problem
of Cyprus.

11. The Security Council meetings on the renewal of
the mandate of UNFICYP are of necessity occasions for
examining the tragic situation prevailing in my country, a
non-ahgned State Member of the United Nations, situated
in the strategic and volatile eastern Mediterranean.
Cyprus, whose destiny is to be a bridge of co-operation
and understanding between the three continents that surround it, is today going through one of the most critical
periods of its long history, with 37 per cent of its territory
under Turkish occupation, almost 200,000 of its people
uprooted from. their ancestral homes and lands and with
hundreds missing since the Turkish invasion of JulyAugust 1974. These Council meetings constitute also a
sad reminder that United Nations resolutions-especially
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
adopted
unanimously and later endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 365 (1974bare as far from being implemented as ever, and that as a result the problem of Cyprus
continues to pose a grave threat to the peace of the region
and to international peace and security in general.

16. Since then. Turkev and the Turkish Cypriot leader,
Mr. Rauf Denk&, reaiting with utter disre$d and outright contempt to this pronouncement of the international
community, have embarked on new secessionist and pa&itionist steps directed against the territorial integrity and
unity of my country, at the same time undermining the
Secretary-General’s initiative and the intercommunal
talks. Furthermore, Mr. Denktaq has been arguing that
the Turkish Cypriot community has the right to separate
self-determination and that this development will meet
with the approval of Turkey. One would expect more
consistency from the Government of Turkey, a country
that is represented in the United Nations Council for Namibia and that purports to be a supporter of that country’s unity and territorial integrity.

12. Regrettably, not only has progress not been made
during the period under consideration toward a just solution of the problem of Cyprus, but a deterioration of the
situation has taken place since the last renewal of the
mandate of UNFICYP on 14 December 1982, to the detri2

23. In Cynrus, lofty principles and universal values are
at stake. yhe principle of the unity of the State is challenged by the Turkish policies of division based on ethnic
criteria, The upholding of these principles is of vital
importance to the members of the world community at
large if the peoples of the world are to enjoy freely their
civil, political and human rights.

17. The Turkish argument now for such secessionist
positions is that intemationalization
of the question of
Cyprus by my Government while negotiations are going
on is contrary to the spirit of the intercommunal talks.
Turkey forgets, however, or intends to forget that the
talks are held to solve the internal aspects of the problem
of Cyprus. The international aspects of the problemnamely, the invasion and occupation and the violation of
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
unity of Cyprus, which have been continuing since July
1974-are matters rightly to be considered by the United
Nations, which has the competence to deal with intemational issues affecting world peace and security.

24. For our part we steadfastly hold that the unity and
territorial integrity of Cyprus cannot be allowed to be
shattered by discredited partitionist policies. What was
created as one and undivided must not be split by force of
arms or outmoded partitionist policies, because division
runs counter to the moral flow of the universe. To these
high goals is directed the core of the peaceful endeavours
of our people.

18, Furthermore. the talks are the offsming of Securitv
Council and General Assembly resoluiionc To report
back to the General Assembly, the body that called for
the talks, could hardly be regarded as an act inconsistent
with them. On the contrary, it was an appropriate and
necessary act on the part of my Government to apprise
that body that called for the talks of the impediments
encountered and to request its further assistance in the
search for a just and lasting solution, in accordance with
United Nations principles. Paragraph 16 of General
Assembly resolution
37/253, which welcomes the
intended initiative of the Secretary-General, is a positive
and constructive outcome of the debate and as such it was
universally hailed.

25. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus has
given its consent to the renewal of the mandate of
UNFICYP
because it believes that the United Nations
Force contributes to the preservation of calm and assists
in the maintenance of peace, factors which have a positive effect on the intercommunal
talks.
26. With regard to the talks, I have been directed by
my Government to place again on record that we support the continuation of free, meaningful, constructive
and result-oriented negotiations under the auspices of
the Secretary-General.
Furthermore,
as Mr. Spyros
Kyprianou, the President of the Republic of Cyprus, has
stated, we welcome the intended initiative
of the
Secretary-General
for a personal involvement in the
quest for a solution, and to this end we extend the full
co-operation of the Government of the Republic.

19. It is regrettable that the Turkish side, instead of demonstrating good will and a constructive attitude, has, after
the adoption of that paragraph, refused to attend the talks
and has even failed to respond to the Secretary-General’s
call for a meeting to discuss his intention to pursue a
renewed personal involvement.

27. We hope that new, forward-looking
thoughts will
finally prevail on the Turkish side on the many positive
elements of resolution 37/253 and that we may proceed
in a constructive spirit to assist the Secretary-General in
his intended initiative for a solution of this problem.

20. With such unacceptable positions being propagated
by Turkey, it is no wonder that no progress has been
achieved on any substantive issue on the internal aspects
of the question of Cyprus, a development that is much
regretted by my Government. However, so long as cardinal truths are disregarded, so long as the obvious is
clouded by the mist of chauvinistic sophistries, there cannot be any progress. Even the right of human beings to
know the whereabouts of their loved ones, a purely
humanitarian issue completely separate from the political
aspects of the problem of Cyprus, is continuously being
frustrated.

28. I wish to conclude by making an appeal to the
Turkish side to abandon its present policies and to work
at the negotiating table with determination and in good
faith to reach speedily a just and durable solution based
on relevant United Nations resolutions and high-level
agreements.
29. My Government is ready for such a solution. We
owe that much to the people of Cyprus as a whole. I feel
that the time has come to put an end to their suffering
and depravation. The people of Cyprus fervently yearn
to share their future together, as they have always done
for centuries. They dream and anxiously await the
moment
when the imposed artificial
barriers of
segregation-the
barbed wire and the check-points-will
be removed and the military outposts will be dismantled. They pray for the moment when they will be
able to embrace each other again in our island, where
there will be no foreign armies, no refugees and no lines
of separation.

21. The solution of the problem of Cyprus is not diffrcult if universal principles and cardinal truths are recognixed and applied.
22. About 100 years ago, a State that is a permanent
member of the Council went through a civil war in which
millions of lives were lost. Still, the principle of “one
nation, indivisible,
with liberty and justice for all”
emerged strengthened. Why should Cyprus be an exception? Is there any country that has not tasted internal
upheaval? Must they be split because of these sad
developments?
3

30. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Greece, on whom I now call.

36. Furthermore, in his most recent report to the Security Council, the Secretary-General states:

31. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you and the other members of the Council
for acceding to my request to participate in this debate.
Allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June. In you we honour not only an able
and experienced leader, but also the country. you
represent-a
relatively new Member of the United
Nations and one whose multi-faceted tradition guarantees a valuable contribution
to the work of the
Organization.

“I further suggested‘that time appeared to be closing
the ‘window of opportunity’ to resolve the Cyprus problem. In an endeavour to arrest his continuing process of
erosion, I have undertaken to strengthen my personal
involvement within the framework of my mission of
good offices.” [See Wl58Z2, par-a. 61.1
He further states: “I also wish to appeal again to all concerned to show the utmost restraint and to assist me in my
efforts.*’ [ibid, para. 63.1
37. On behalf of my Government, Mr. President, I wish
to assure you, .and through you the Secretary-General,
that Greece will spare no effort in lending the SecretaryGeneral every possible assistance in order to facilitate the
discharge of his difficult mission. It is our strong wish that
the Government of Turkey will also show a constructive
attitude in order to help him in his endeavours.

32. The perpetuation of the Cyprus problem, which has
developed into a major international anomaly, has made
it almost a ritual for the Security Council to hear, twice a
year, on the occasion of the renewal of the mandate of
UNFICYP, the views of the Government of the Republic
of Cyprus before it gives its consent to this renewal, as
well as the.views of other parties which have a concern
with the developments in Cyprus. Thus, it is with regret
that I have asked once again to speak on a matter so well
known to Council members.

38. I have stressed our wish that Turkey would cooperate in the search for a solution because the continued personal involvement of the Secretary-General
could perhaps offer a chance for an answer to the problem. Let us take advantage of this opportunity. Indeed,
it is high time that an all-out effort were exerted in the
direction of a solution. The world can no longer tolerate
inertia. It demands a quick restoration of legality and
subsequent normalcy in the Republic of Cyprus.

33. My Government fully concurs with the’ consent
given by the Government of Cyprus to the renewal of the
mandate of UNFICYP
for another six months. We
believe that the conditions prevailing in the Republic of
Cyprus are still such as to justify fully the presence there
of the Peace-keeping Force, which greatly contributes to
the maintenance of peace in the area.

39. In conclusion,-1 should like to express our appreciation and gratitude to Major-General.Greindl
and the
officers and men of UNFICYP
for the efficiency and
dedication with which they are discharging the important mission entrusted to Australia, Austria, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Sweden and. the United
Kingdom, which are contributing contingents, as well as
to those Governments which are helping with financial
contributions. It would be an omission if I did not mention in this context the untiring and dynamic activity of
Mr. Gobbi, the Secretary-General’s Special Representative in the island. Last but not least ,I should like to
reiterate once more my Government’s high esteem for
and trust in the Secretary-General.

34. I shall refrain from indulging in an extensive analysis
of the situation in the Republic of Cyprus. The facts were
recentlv nut forward to the Members of the United
Nation; once more on the occasion of the debate on the
question of Cyprus held at the thirty-seventh session of
the General Assembly four weeks ago. At the Assembly’s
116th meeting, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cyprus, as the representative of Cyprus has just done
here, made a thorough presentation of the realities which
have unfortunately been plaguing his country without any
change since the Turkish aggression in 1974 and the subsequent continuing occupation of part of the territory of the
Republic by Turkish troops in flagrant violation of international law. To go through these events again would
indeed be redundant. I would only be taking the Council’s
time without adding anything new to what everybody
already knows.

40. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Nail
Atalay, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
in accordance with rule 39 .of its provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

35. Recognizing these realities and the dangers they harbour, the General Assembly most recently adopted by an
overwhelming majority-and
one representing a wide
spectrum-its
resolution 37/253. That resolution contains, in our view, a balanced assessment of the situation,
points to the major elements of the problem and requests
the Secretary-General to continue his efforts towards
creating conditions conducive to progress in the intercommunal talks with a view to fmding a just and viable solution to this long-pending problem.

41. Mr. ATALAY:
I thank you, Mr. President, and
through you the other members of the Council for having given me this opportunity
to participate in the
debate on behalf of the Turkish people of Cyprus, who,
although they were partners in and co-founders of the
Republic of Cyprus, have been the object of attacks by
the Greek Cypriots ever since 1963. The destruction has
continued to this very day, and the co-founder partner
community
of the island-the
Turkish Cypriot com4

munity-has had to seize every opportunity to make its case
known to the highest body of this world assembly.

which human beings are entitled. It has defied this hostile
administration because it deemed it its duty to do so.

42. I cannot promise to be brief, but this is not because
of a lack of respect or because of a lack of awareness of
the long and frustrating hours that have been spent trying to bring about an agreement; quite the contrary. I do
feel, however, that the Turkish Cypriot cause needs to
be presented with all reasonable vigour and clarity so
that events from this time forWard will not be considered
the responsibility of the Turkish Cypriot community,
which has throughout its life and its struggle in Cyprus
done nothing but react to what the Greek Cypriots have
tried to do to Cyprus.

48. The facts of this recent past are recorded in newspaper archives and in earlier reports of the SecretaryGeneral, and they are there for all to see. But they are still
vividly apparent to anyone visiting Cyprus. There the past
is recorded in every Turkish Cypriot household, which
still mourns a dead father, or child, or aged
grandparent-pathetic
victims of the Greek Cypriot grim
determination to unite the island with Greece. The past is
recorded in the mass graves of Aloa, Maratha and Sandallari, where 16-day-old infants are buried in the arms of
their mothers, grandmothers and grandfathers, where elementary schools are shut because the entire elementary
school population was lined up and ruthlessly shot and
then buried in crude communal graves.

43. There is no Government of Cyprus. There has been
none since 21 December 1963, when the legitimate Govemment ceased to exist after the Greek Cypriots attacked us
and expelled the Turkish Cypriot representation from the
ruling body and rejected the Turkish Cypriot community as
co-founder partner community. This state of affairs continues to this very day. That is why I say before this Council,
on behalf of the Turkish Cypriot community, that there is
no Cyprus Government.
44. If there is a Cyprus problem today, it is because there
is no government by consent of the two communities in
Cyprus.
45. A quarter of the. population of the island is under
another jurisdiction, one that is not that of the Greek
Cypriot administration.
Yet the latter calls itself the
Government of Cyprus without being in any way a binational Government as envisaged by the 1960 Constitution
and the international agreements. The Greek section of
this Government did arm itself and, according to plan, did
launch Bn attack on the Turkish Cypriot people with a
view to turning Cyprus into a Greek island. Twenty years
later, after all the trials and tribulations endured in
Cyprus, we have heard them address the General Assembly, then the Assembly’s Special Political Committee and
now the Security Council for and on bellalf of Cyprus,
trying to speak also for and on behalf of the Turkish
Cypriots. My mere presence here speaking in the Council
is indisputably the clearest demonstration of the fact that
they do not represent, nor do they speak on behalf of, the
Turkish Cypriots.
46. The Charter of the United Nations stands for
democracy, for government under the rule of law and for
government with the sanction of those governed. It stands
for human rights and for the sanctity of international treaties. All those concepts were utterly trampled underfoot in
1963 by Greek Cypriot armed elements, under the leadership of Archbishop Makarios and directly armed by
Greece, attempting to destroy the Turkish Cypriot people
and the independence of Cyprus.
47. Since then, the Turkish Cypriot people has ruled
itself, in defiance of the hostile Greek Cypriot administration, establishing its own jurisdiction in those areas where
it had not been eliminated. It has lived cut off from all the
privileges of statehood-cut
off from all the rights to

49. The whole world knows the facts. Should the Turkish Cypriots really bring newspaper clippings to
remind the world of these events and can the Greeks
seriously allege that the Turkish Cypriots are responsible for what has befallen them during the last 20 years?
50. The Turkish Cypriot must be convinced that those
on the other side of the bench are people who really have
undergone a change of heart, who truly seek peace and
who are not bent on furthering their policy of unilaterally dominating
Cyprus by all means, fair and foul.
51. We have tried to alert the Members of the United
Nations to the fact that the title of “Government
of
Cyprus’* was being used as a tool of aggression against a
quarter of the population of Cyprus and that, if a resolution along the lines desired by the Greek Cypriots
emerged from the General Assembly, then further intercommunal negotiations for the solution of the problem
of Cyprus would thereby be hampered rather than
helped.
52. Our prediction came true. The General Assembly
adopted a one-sided resolution, which the Greek and
Greek Cypriot side immediately used to avoid negotiations and to poison the climate in which negotiations
were to have taken place. They immediately boasted of
the number of votes obtained, claimed that the General
Assembly was with them and counted the resolutions of
the non-aligned countries as favouring the Greeks. All
this was a futile attempt to change the past. Those were
one-sided resolutions and they cannot change the past.
53. As the Greek philosopher Aristotle said, “Even the
gods cannot change the past”. It is a fact; no one can
change the past.
54. We have here a binational country where one of
the national communities-the
‘ Greek Cypriot community-has
tried to destroy the other-the
Turkish
Cypriot community-and
where this victimized party
finds itself barred from all assemblies, all commissions
and all conferences. Indeed, this situation can be likened
to a football match, where the Greek Cypriot team is
free to score against an opposing team whose goalkeeper

is bound hand and foot; and then they would have the
world believe that they are playing a fair game on terms
of equality and that they are the winners.

selves that question, I am sure they will see the situation in
its true light. Had Turkey not moved at my community’s
request, the picture would have been a much broader
vista of the horrors I have already mentioned: mass
graves, hundreds of young people taken into the police
stations for questioning and liquidation,
passers-by
arrested in the streets and not heard from for 20 years.
Interference indeed! Stopping that kind of conduct for
and on behalf of one of the communities which signed an
agreement is called interference in the internal affairs of
cyPn=*

55. They have to convince us that they are our partners
and that they are willing to play the game with us, not to
score points in the international field but to bring peace to
Cyprus. Indeed, scoring points through propaganda,
deceit, untruths and misstatements of facts cannot and
will not bring about a lasting reconciliation of the two
peoples of Cyprus. Without reconciliation, there can be
no peace in Cyprus.

62. Furthermore, the Greek Cypriots say that they have
no ambitions-and
this has been said many times up to
today-because of the small size of the island of Cyprus.
Let us be grateful for this news, because we thought that
uniting Cyprus as a whole to Greece was an ambition
compatible with the size of the Greek Cypriot population.
Uniting Cyprus as a whole with Greece in spite of the
objections of one quarter of the population, if necessary
by eliminating all the Turkish Cypriots, seems to be no
ambition at all.

56. Whenever the Greek and Greek Cypriot leaders
speak, they use the terms “justice” and “injustice”. How
unfortunate that in Cyprus these terms have different
meanings for the Turks and for the Greeks. “Justice*’
for the Greeks means the Greek colonization of Cyprus
and Greek domination in Cyprus, leaving the Turkish
Cypriots without any guarantees or defence, to live at
their mercy as hostages in what they call “pre-aggression
conditions”, meaning those that prevailed before 1974,
when the Turkish Cypriots lived from hand to mouth
not knowing what the next day would bring.

63. I should like to refer to a statement made by the
late Archbishop Makarios on 21 August 1964 in which
he said:

57. The Turkish Cypriot community has been waiting
for justice for 20 years-waiting for the re-establishment
of a binational Cyprus, where the security of the Turkish
Cypriots would no longer be threatened, where the Greek
Cypriots would no longer use us as hostages or blackmail
Turkey by saying that, if it dared to come to save the
threatened Turks, it would find no Turks to save in
Cyprus.

“Mv ambition
is to accomDlish the union of
Cyprus with Greece. I will uniie Cyprus integrally
with Greece and then the borders of Greece will
extend to the shores of North Africa.*’
A small country with no ambitions,
no better.

58. The Greek and Greek Cypriot leaders want the
implementation
of ‘the relevant United Nations resolutions. Who does not? Where would this world be if United
Nations resolutions were not translated into reality by all
those who are affected by them? But those who, by
‘manoeuvre and propaganda, have brought about the
adoption of one-sided resolutions which, if implemented,
would mean the destruction of the innocent, the destruction of a binational country and even the destruction of
independence have no right to claim that such resolutions
should be implemented, because their implementation
would spell the doom of every principle the Charter of the
United Nations was meant to protect and to foster.

of course, could do

64. It would seem that we should see no wrongful or
harmful ambition in the attempt by the Greek Cypriot
wing of this binational Government to project itself for
20 years as the Government of Cyprus. That is not
ambition.
They assert that they can speak for and
defend the Turkish Cypriots; that is not ambition either.
A small and ‘defenceless country, we are told, was
attacked by a major Power and destroyed and it is seeking justice at the hands of the Council.
65. Smallness and strength are comparative terms.
When we faced more than 30,000 fully armed Greek
Cypriots helped by the Greek army from the mainland
for years and years, we had to contend with massive
strength-tanks
and all possible weapons from all over
the world. Turkey came in to stop those people destroying the Turkish Cypriot people. Turkey could not come
into the country with walking-sticks. It could not match
those forces without arms of its own. And now we are
told that Turkey used force in upholding the independence of Cyprus.

59. We constantly witness attempts at dividing the issue
into the internal aspect of the problem, that is, the constitutional and territorial issue, and the external aspect,
namely, the question of aggression and foreign interference.
60. Is it interference when, under an international treaty
and under the legitimate principle of self-defence, one of
the Guarantor Powers risks everything in order to honour
that treaty for the purpose of saving one of the two communities that brought about the Republic of Cyprus?

66. I should like to quote another passage by Archbishop Makarios. He said this on 29 July 1970. I quote
him because the new leader of the Greek Cypriot community, Mr. Kyprianou, has repeatedly stated that his
policy and his way are the policy ,and the way of the
Archbishop. Here is the passage:

61. Let us ponder for a moment what would have happened to Cyprus and to the Turkish Cypriots if Turkey
had not moved. If representatives will merely ask them6

‘The hearts of the Greeks of Cyprus; of Rhodes,
and of all the Dodecanese Islands have a common
beat. You have achieved your aspirations, but we,
beset by difficulties
and frustrated by foreign
meddlers, are still struggling for ours. But despite all
difficulties, Cyprus will march on to Hellenism.”

population which, in the last phases, we carried out with
the help of UNFICYP, we now live in our own sector, and
if the Greek Cypriots dare attack us again, they will have
to suffer the consequences much more than we shall.
72. With a deep feeling of disappointment, I should like
to read out to the Council a quotation from the destructive statement Mr. Karamanlis made when, two months
ago, he toasted Mr. Kyprianou, as reported in the Athens
News Agency Bulletin dated 11 April 1983:

67. A “foreign meddler” frustrated that march on to
Hellenism. The “foreign meddler” is none other than
Turkey. The Turkish Cypriot community, which defended
its independence, its inalienable rights and the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus, is immediately labelled
the agent of Turkey, and everything is done to stop it being
heard in the international arena.

“The Cyprus struggle, as known, was conducted, up
to 1960 in common and in agreement with Makarios.
And we arrived, after many painful adventures, at the
independence of the island: an independence which
would allow Cyprus to develop as an exemplary State
in the eastern Mediterranean, without dismissing the
hope of union with Greece, under certain conditions
and basically under the condition of the defining by
Athens and ‘Nicosia of a parallel foreign policy.*’

68. But for that “foreign meddling*‘, Cyprus would
have been a part of Greece by now. To the Greeks that is
liberty, that is justice, that is freedom-that
is a beautiful thing. No one asks what this is to the Turkish community of Cyprus-and
this is the problem of Cyprus.

What a lovely statement from the President of Greece.

69. Furthermore, to split the problem into an internal
and an external factor-as my colleague on the other
side of the table has said today-which
the Greeks and
some other countries have tried to do, is an attempt to
prevent what they call “foreign meddlers”-meaning
Turkey and the Turkish Cypriots-from
arresting that
march forward to Hellenism. From my nine years of
experience at the United Nations and the 30 years I have
spent on this issue, I can tell the members of the Council
that, after 20 years, there is no change of heart in the
Greek Cypriot leadership, that the votes they have contrived to obtain from the General Assembly have hardened them in their march forward to Hellenism. The
architects of the Akritas Plan [see S/12722, annex] have
not changed their vision of Cyprus. Even the threats are
the same. What is more, they are desperate, because
“foreign meddlers** have stopped their spurious march
forward to Hellenism, because the agents of “foreign
meddlers”, the Turkish Cypriots, have dared defend
their rights to the independence and sovereignty of
Cyprus and have refused to bow to brute force.

73, It is ironic also that Mr. Karamanlis was the leader
who had signed the Zurich and London Agreements,’
which ostensibly had closed the road to eno.sis and partition. It is extremely disappointing to have it confirmed
that that signature by Greece was only a ruse to get power
in Cyprus for use against the Turkish Cypriot partners
with a view to uniting Cyprus with Greece. In this context
it is worthwhile to remember this excerpt from the joint
communique
issued on 2 February 1966and
it still
exists-at the end of Archbishop Makarios’ visit to
Athens: “The two Governments object to any solution
ruling out the island’s union with Greece.*’
74. That is why the intercommunal
talks during the
1968 to 1974 period did not result in a compromise
settlement-because
the Turkish side insisted then, as
it insists now, that enosis in any form with any country should continue to be outlawed. Unfortunately, the
latest Athens visit by Mr. Kyprianou underlined once
again the fact that the expansionist aims of Greece
continue to guide the Greek Cypriot leadership. For a
better appreciation of the eulogy to enosis-the union of
Cyprus with Greece-and
the treatment of the Cyprus
problem as a problem of pan-Hellenism which must continue until the final consummation, Mr. Karamanlis’ statement, as it appeared in the Athens News Agency Bulletin, was
attached to my letter distributed in Security Council document S/15717 of 21 April 1983.

70. They do not even want us to talk about our plight
from 1963 to 1974. During those years we lived, throughout Cyprus, among the Greek population and we suffered
because of it. The same threat forms the basis of the Akritas Plan. We heard the same threat again from Archbishop Makarios, who said at Rizokarpaso on 26 May
1965:
“The whole of Cyprus is to be united with Greece, or
it will become a holocaust. The road to fulfilment of
national aspirations may be full of difficulties, but we
shall reach the goal, enosis, alive or dead.”

75. But we hope that common sense and the experience gathered during the long years of suffering will
have taught them a few lessons. I hope one lesson they
have learned is that Cyprus has never been and never
will be a Greek Cypriot island. It is destined to become a
Cypriot island on which Greeks and Turks will live side
by side and co-operate on an equal basis. The two communities will live side by side and co-operate until such
time as a stage is reached when trust and confidence
begin to grow. Will this be understood by the Greek

The fact that on that march to the goal Turkish Cypriots
would suffer and would die was, of course, irrelevant. The
Greek Cypriots do not like the fact that we objected to
being killed in the name of that glorious march.
71. Now, however, such threats no longer affect us.
Thanks to our redemption, thanks to the exchange of

_

7

Cypriot side? I do not know, but I should like to hope it
will be.

81. Turkey’s timely intervention in 1974 in exercise of its
rights and obligations under the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee? and of the legitimate principle of self-defence embodied in the Charter of the United Nations not only
safeguarded the independence of the Republic of Cyprus,
which was in danger of coming to an end through its
annexation to Greece, but saved the Turkish Cypriot community, which was in grave danger of being annihilated
by Greek and Greek Cypriot armed elements.

76. Now I should like to refer to the statement which
Mr. Rolandis, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Greek Cypriot administration,
made on 10 May, at the
116th meeting of the resumed thirty-seventh session of
the General Assembly. It is a typical repetition of the
well-known misleading
Greek Cypriot propaganda
regarding the Cyprus question.

82. Turkey’s operation was therefore rather a liberation
of part of Cyprus for and on behalf of the Turkish
Cypriot co-founding partner of the Republic of Cyprus,
entitled to equal rights in the matter of the independence
and sovereignty of Cyprus. That part of Cyprus would
have been completely eliminated had it not been for the
Turkish intervention. By coming to Cyprus the Turkish
army in fact pushed back the Greek Cypriot and Greek
mainland forces of conspiracy, which had been waging a
war that threatened the very existence of a binational independent Cyprus since 1963.

77. If, as Mr. Rolandis alleges, “the problem of Cyprus
is one of the issues which tarnish the ethical infrastructure of the world”, and if it is a “dark cloud in the
brightness of the eastern Mediterranean”,
it is surely
Greece and Greek Cypriots that are to blame for creating the Cyprus problem-in
the first place through their
age-old struggle to unite Cyprus to Greece, which goes
back to the 19th century, a struggle that took a violent
turn in 1955 with the activities of the undergound
EOKA terrorist movement that started that year.
78. If we are to believe Greek propaganda claiming
that the Cyprus problem started in 1974 with the Turkish intervention and that the problem will be solved
with the withdrawal of Turkish troops and the return of
all refugees to their homes-that
is, by putting back the
clock to pre-July 1974 conditions-then
presumably
there was no problem before 1974. If that is the case,
what has UNFICYP
been doing in Cyprus since 19647
Why have hundreds of Turks been killed and thousands
of Turkish Cypriots turned into refugees since 1963, and
what has EOKA been doing since 1955? After all, there
were no Turkish troops in Cyprus before 1974, other
than the Turkish contingent, also authorized under the
1960 treaties. Are we to assume that there was no problem before 1974, and that tragic events did not take
place prior to 1974?

83. The troops of a country which is permitted and
required to station personnel in the Republic of Cyprus
under article IV of the 1960 Treaty of Alliance3 cannot
reasonably be considered as “foreign”, nor as “an occupying force”. To suggest that Turkish Cypriots might regard
Turkish troops as “foreign’* or, for that matter, that any
Greek Cypriot should regard Greek troops as “foreign” is
to be completely ignorant of the nature of the Cyprus
problem. The Zurich and London Agreements and the
1960 Constitution based on those Agreements contain
provisions that treat Turkey and Greece as the respective
motherlands of the two Cypriot communities.
84. The Turkish peace-force presence in Cyprus today
aims solely at providing security to the Turkish Cypriot
community, thus preventing a recurrence of the lighting
between the two communities, and ‘maintaining peace and
stability, pending a definitive solution of the problem.

79. Today the world knows that the Cyprus problem
did not start with the Turkish action of July 1974 and
that the problem will not be solved by merely going back
to the pre-1974 days. The root-causes of the problem go
as far back as l821 and f878, to the “‘MegafiIdea”-the
Great Idea-of Greece and the struggle for the union of
Cyprus with Greece.

85. The Turkish Government has repeatedly stated
officially, at the highest level, that Turkey would withdraw its forces from the island once a settlement acceptable to both communities
is found, within the
framework of security arrangements to be agreed upon
by the parties concerned. Until then, it will be appreciated that the need for protecting the Turkish Cypriot
community remains. The presence of the Turkish forces
today on the island, at the request of the Turkish
Cypriot community, is the only. effective guarantee for
safeguarding the lives and property of the Turkish
Cypriots, who were the victims of relentless Greek
armed attacks between 1963 and 1974, a time of virtual
occupation by over 20,000 Greek mainland troops, who
had landed on the island clandestinely to assist the
Greek Cypriots in their enosis campaign.

80. The Greek and Greek Cypriot propaganda has
again today tried to project the Cyprus problem as being
simply one of invasion and occupation. When one looks
at the facts and events which led to Turkey’s operation in
1974, it is clear that that is far from the case. Turkey
exhibited remarkable restraint and patience in the face of
internal pressures and a humanitarian urge to act during
the preceding 11 years. It’had no alternative but to intervene following the Greek and Greek Cypriot coup of 15
July 1974 and the assumption of the presidency by the
killer Nicos Sampson. Indeed, as the late Archbishop
Makarios himself pointed out in his address to the Security Council on 19 July 1974 [178&h meerirzg], it was that
coup of 15 July, instigated and planned by .the Govemment of Greece, that had in fact constituted an invasion
which violated the independence and the sovereignty of
the Republic of Cyprus.

86. How very deceptive and misleading therefore it is
for Mr. Rolandis, now assuming the part of a wolf in
sheep’s clothing, to misrepresent Turkey’s legitimate
and timely intervention in Cyprus as a situation where
the Greek Cypriots and Cyprus are being “devoured by
8

Greek Cypriot leaders and Greek leaders of Greece prefer
to engage in further propaganda, in the absence of the
Turkish Cypriot side, in order to keep the issue of Cyprus
alive as part of their “internationalization”
campaign,
instead of disposing of the matter in a definitive manner,
before it is too late, at the negotiating table of the Nicosia
intercommunal talks.

a much bigger and mightier neighbour”. This can hardly
deceive anyone who is at all familiar with the real causes
and the history of the Cyprus problem and the events that
made Turkey’s intervention necessary in 1974.
87. It is also distressing to hear Mr. Rolandis allege that
“Iife was diverted from its normal course” in 1974. He
assumes that the years of strife and suffering of the Turkish
Cypriots between 1963 and 1974 were the “normal course’*.
What may be normal for Mr. Rolandis and what Mr.
Kyprianou described as “those happy years” was in fact a
period of intense suffering for the Turkish Cypriots, whose
human rights were violated by the Greek Cypriots, as part
of a deliberate policy of subjugation and domination.

91. I should like to turn now to the issue of missing
persons in Cyprus. This is a matter which the Turkish
Cypriots consider as a humanitarian concern, yet the
Greek Cypriots consider it as a political issue, and it is still
unresolved because they wish to exploit the matter for
propaganda purposes. This is what I stated on 14 December 1982, in this Chamber:

88. It is regrettable that Mr. Rolandis denigrated the
efforts’ by the Turkish Cypriots in the north, when he
referred to “institutions with no constitutional or legal
foundation**. The Turkish Cypriot administration and the
institutions lawfully created by its constitutional organs
are just as legal as the Greek Cypriot administration and
its institutions in southern Cyprus. It should be remembered that since the Greek Cypriots were responsible for
the disruption of the constitutional order in 1963, it is their
administration and their institutions that dwell under a
cloud of false legality. The fact is that the Greek Cypriots
usurped, or “hijacked”, at the end of the 196Os,the govemmental machinery of the 1960 binational partnership
Republic of Cyprus, by force of arms, relying on their
military superiority on the island, and such actions can
scarcely claim any semblance of legality.

“The only entity competent to discuss the issue of
missing persons on the island is the Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus (CMP), an autonomous
intercommunal
body. It was not established, nor is it
governed by the United Nations, but stems solely from
the agreement between the Turkish Cypriot and Greek
Cypriot communities. Its autonomous character was
acknowledged by the Secretary-General himself in a
press release on 10 November 1981. Issue in Nicosia, it
states that measures to facilitate the work of the Committee ‘could be finalized only by the Committee,
which functions autonomously’.
All the attempts by
the Greek side to raise the question of missing persons
in forums other than the CMP violate its terms of reference and the agreement that served to create it.

89. Mr. Rolandis furthermore alleges that there is a
“silent majority of Turkish Cypriots” in the north who do
not support the just cause of the Turkish Cypriot community, as expounded by its leaders and as presented at the
intercommunal talks. He cannot be deceiving anyone but
himself. We hope that he and his colleagues will not be too
late in facing the fact that all Turkish Cypriots are united
in their determination to live in their own homeland in
peace and security. If his allegation were true, how does he
account for the fact that thousands of Turkish Cypriots
chose to move from the south to freedom in the north
during the 1974-75 period, at considerable risk to their
lives, when Greek Cypriots were doing all they could to
stop the flow, before the population exchange agreement
of 2 August 1975 [s&z S/11789, annex] was implemented
by UNFICYP?

“Therefore, any statement on the missing persons
issue anywhere but in the Committee infringes the
CMP’s competence and is therefore totally unacceptable to the Turkish Cypriot community.
“Available evidence on the so-called missing Greek
Cypriots indicates that they in fact perished during
the coup staged in Cyprus by Greece on 15 July 1974.
-The Secretary General of the Greek Cypriot Communist Party, Mr. Ezakias Papaiannou, revealed at a
public meeting on 28 November . . . that during the
armed Greek anti-Makarios
coup many Greek Cypriots had been killed by those responsible for the coup,
who had even buried some of them alive. This statement appeared in the Greek Cypriot newspaper
Haravgi on 29 November 1982.

90. Then Mr. Rolandis claimed that their recourse to the
General Assembly was “not at all aimed at disrupting the
intercommunal process*‘. It was probably because the case
was such that Mr. Rolandis felt the need to give that
unconvincing explanation. It is difftcult to see what
advantage there can be for the Greek Cypriot side to leave
the negotiating table at Nicosia and bring the issue to New
York for yet another futile recourse to the General Assembly. The Cyprus problem cannot be solved by one-sided
resolutions in the General Assembly or elsewhere, but, as
the Secretary-General has pointed out time and again, it
can only be solved and settled through direct intercommunal talks between the two parties. The only explanation
can be that Mr. Rolandis, Mr. Kyprianou and other

“Evidently the Greek Cvnriot side does not want to
solve the missing persons issue within the CMP. They
have boycotted its meetings and done everything else
to undermine and sabotage the CMP. Confidential
CMP documents, including its terms of reference,
have been disclosed. The Greek Cypriots have taken
this humanitarian
issue to ‘every forum except the
CMP itself.
“No solution is feasible for this humanitarian
problem as long as the Greek Cypriot side continues
to exploit it internationally
for political
propaganda.” [See 2405th meeting, paras. 72-76.1
9

i

92. Today again, it has been alleged by the Greek
Cypriot representative that settlers are being brought
from Turkey and established in Cyprus. This is erroneous, and the object of the allegation is obviously to draw
political profit from misleading public opinion into
believing that Turkey is colonizing Cyprus. In fact, these
are simply devious tactics designed to make everyone
forget those who have really been guilty of trying to
colonize Cyprus for decades, plunging the island into a
bloodbath in the process.
93. Many false statements have been made also about
the granting of title deeds to Greek Cypriots in the
north. It is true that there is indeed a law on immovable
property, and the fact is that it was designed in order to
find a solution to the social and economic problems and
difficulties experienced by the Greek Cypriots arriving
in considerable numbers from the south as refugees. In
order to meet the investment and maintenance capital
needs that such large-scale arrivals created and to make. ’
them productive, persons having the required qualificsi~
tions were enabled by law to transfer possession rights
to such property to others. This adjustment was the
result of a search for a solution and is in no way aimed
at instituting any compulsory confiscation of ownership
rights, nor does it contradict international
law or the
rules of transfer of ownership.
94. In another area requiring urgent attention, namely,
the monetary and financial field, the Greek Cypriot
again today has attempted grossly to distort the efforts
of my authorities to establish limited banking institutions and to introduce the use of the Turkish lira. Once
again these accusations need to be rebutted by the facts
being stated quite clearly: the Turkish Federated State
of Kibris, in fulfilment of its obligation to develop the
economy and improve the people’s standard of living,
has decided to establish a development and central bank
endowed with limited
functions-i’
will not issue
currency-and
intended to implement the State’s monetary and credit uolicies.
95. This move was made necessary by the fact that the
holdings of the Greek Cypriot part-owners of the development bank in the south were peremptorily
expropriated. Furthermore, the currency measures taken by the
Turkish Cypriot community were also the result of arbitrary action by the Greek Cypriot-controlled
Central
Bank, which confiscated the Cyprus pounds deposited
by Turkish Cypriots in Turkish banks. Another unit of
currency had to be introduced to allow normal transactions to continue, and the Turkish lira was adopted in
the north pending a final solution.
96. These unwarranted protests of the Greek Cypriots
are nothing other than flagrant interference in the internal
affairs of the Turkish Cypriot community. The Greek
Cypriot community, which has five times the per capita
income of the Turkish Cypriot community,
protests
against the Turkish Cypriot efforts at bridging this economic gap; and yet we all know that finding a social and
economic balance between the two communities will be
one of the bases on which to build a viable political solution of the Cyprus problem.

97. Such is the context in which the Turkish Cypriot
community’s decisions to establish its own central and
development bank, as well as to introduce the Turkish
lira, are to be seen, and attempts by the Greek Cypriot
representative to make the situation appear otherwise are
totally unfounded.
98. At this point I wish to state categorically that General
Assembly resolution 37/253, adopted on 13 May 1983, is
totally unacceptable to us. That resolution, as a whole,
constitutes a serious threat to the continuation of the intercommunal talks. Therefore it is our understanding that if
and when the negotiations start, that resolution will not be
taken into consideration. I feel it only right that I should
inform members of the Council that decisions of the United
Nations and of other international bodies which ignore the
rights and status of the co-founding partner Turkish
Cypriot community of the Republic of Cyprus and the
realities of the Cyprus problem do not, in fact, help matters
and only make the finding of an agreed political settlement
more difficult.
99. Therefore, if resolution 37/253, which, inter alia, calls
upon all States to “support and help the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus’*-that
is, the Greek Cypriot
administration--to
exercise sovereignty and control over
the entire territory of Cyprus, were to be implemented, it
would mean that the Turkish Cypriot community would
completely lose all its lawful rights and partnership status
which it has been defending at all costs for 20 years and be
reduced to serfdom under a Greekdominated
Cyprus, in
flagrant violation of all principles of natural justice’ and
humanity. Furthermore, this mandate to the Greek Cypriots of a bicommunal State, in view of the Greek Cypriot
mentality and policy regarding Cyprus, is a mandate entitling them to complete their acts of genocide attempted
during the years 1963 to 1974 with absolute impunity and
under the guise of implementing United Nations resolutions. To this my peoole will never bow.
100. The Turkish Federated State of Kibris has decided
to reassess its position in the light of the gravely defective
resolution 37/253. When the competent organs of the
Turkish Federated State of Kibris have completed their
assessment, their views will appropriately be communicated to the Secretary-General.
101. For the past 20 years the presence of UNFICYP
between the two national communities has been deemed
essential. Yet we have heard the Greek Cypriot and Greek
representatives say that the problem in Cyprus dates back
to 1974 and is therefore only nine years old. They completely ignore the period from 1963 to 1974, and we are
bound to ask ourselves whether such arguments are really
given in good faith.
102. Today, as members of the Council well know, I
am participating in the Council’s deliberations on the
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP for a further six
months, in order to express the views of the Turkish
Cypriot people, exclusively represented by the Turkish
Federated State of Kibris. In so doing I wish also to
express my gratitude and that of my Government to the
Secretary-Generai for his outstanding dedication and
10.

for his efforts at resolving the Cyprus conflict, a matter
which has been on the Council’s agenda since the Greek
Cypriot onslaught of 1963. Our appreciation goes also
to the members of the Secretariat and to the staff in the
field, particularly Mr. Urquhart, Mr. Gobbi, MajorGeneral Greindl, Mr. Sherry, Mr. Schiittler-Silva,
Mr.
Holger and Mr. Picco. We also thank especi$lly the military and civilian personnel who have discharged their
important responsibilities with outstanding competence
and unimpeachable impartiality.

Council. The intercommunal talks have continued in
Nicosia on a regnlar basis, although the frequency of
the meetings was adjusted as necessary.‘*-naturally,
this was because of the Greek Cypriots--“The
‘evalua.,tion’ paper submitted by my Special Representative in
November 1981 continued to be used as a structured,
“‘substantive method of discussion. The Special Representative reports that the open agenda pattern adopted
at the beginning of this year has been helpful in the
conduct of the discussions. I continue to hold to the
view, which I have consistently expressed, that the
intercommunal
talks represent the best available
means of pursuing a concrete and effective negotiating
process ainied at achieving an agreed, just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus question.” [S/15812, para.
60.1

103. I take this opportunity to express our deep gratitude to Turkey for its whole-hearted contribution
to
intercommunal
peace in Cyprus arid to the security and
economic development of the Turkish community still
under Greek Cypriot embargo.
104. The Security Council has just adopted its resolution 534 (1983), extending the mandate of the Force
until 15 December 1983. In spite of ‘our irrefutable
objections the third preambular paragraph still carries a
reference to the so-called Government of Cyprus. As I
have stated, and as members of the Council know well,
this is a name that the Greek Cypriot faction of the
bicommunal Government of Cyprus has arrogated unto
itself without any right to the title.

107. Furthermore, the substantive paragraphs of the
report of the Secretary-General, particularly paragraphs
48,49,51 and 60 to 63, are of a nature that underlines once
again thi fact that the intercommunal talks constitute the
best way of resolving the question of Cyprus and that
these talks are proceeding in accordance with the Security
Council resolutions and on the basis of the high-level
agreements of 1977 and 1979, on the basis of the bilateral
intercommunity
agreements ‘and on the basis of the
Secretary-General’s “evaluation”
paper. We fmd the
approach of the Secretary-General as expressed in these
paragraphs constructive and reassuring.

105. As I stated earlier, there has been no government
legitimately representative of Cyprus as a whole, legally
or politically, since the disruption of the bicommunal
partnership Government in 1963. We object to the use
of that term because it is utterly misleading, since it
reflects neither the legal nor the actual reality of the
situation in the island. The two national communities of
the island have been the constituent elements of the
Cyprus dispute since December 1963. This dispute arose
as a consequence of the Greek Cypriot armed attempt to
destroy the bicommunal
partnership and incorporate
Cyprus into Greece. Therefore, to refer to the Greek
Cypriot element. of the bicommunal
Government of
Cyprus as “the Government of Cyprus” runs counter to
the Basic Articles of the 1960 Constitution.
It would
seem to give the Greek Cypriot side, at the expense of
the Turkish Cypriot side, what the Greek Cypriots have
failed to acquire by force since 1963.

108. But I am sure that the Council will agree with me
that the fifth preambular paragraph and paragraph 2 of
its resolution 534 (1983) do not accurately reflect the
actual basis on which the talks are continuing. Nevertheless, I have been empowered to give consent, on behalf of
the Government of the Turkish Cypriot community, to
the extension of the mandate of the Force until 15 December 1983, We shall continue, as we have done in the past,
to co-operate with the Force and to help in the successful
execution of its task.
109. As I have repeatedly stressed in Security Council
meetings in the past, we continue to hope that the Force’s
mandate and modus operandi will be revised in accordance
with the present realities ixi Cyprus.
110. Moreover, the Turkish Cypriot people deplores the
fact that some of the States .which contribute troops to
UNFICYP chose to depart from their traditional posture
of maintaining equal distance and voted in favour of General Assembly resolution 37/253. We hope that those
countries will return to their position of not taking sides
in the dispute ‘if they wish to retain their impartiality,
which is so essential to the carrying out of peace-keeping
operations in Cyprus.

106. In paragraph 3 of resolution 534 (1983), the
Council requests the Secretary-General to continue his
mission of good offices. My Government welcomes and
supports this request. We shall continue to co-operate
fully with the dedicated Secretary-General in his mission. As Council members know well, the intercommunal talks continue on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
opening statement of 9 August 1980, annexed to document S/14100, incorporating the high-level agreements of
1977 [see S/12323, para. 5J and 1979 [see S/13369, para.
511 and the bilateral intercommunity
agrEements, as well
as on the basis of the Secretary-General’s “evaluation’*
paper. In his current report, the Secretary-General
states:

111. Let me now express my Government’s views in
connection with the Secretary-General’s
report under
consideration by the Council. The repeated use of the
term “the Government of Cyprus” while referring to the
Greek Cypriot administration
is regrettable, for there
exists no entity in Cyprus at present which could constitutionally or legitimately
represent both the Turkish

“During the period under review, I have pursued the
mission of good off&zesentrusted to me by the Security
11

Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot peoples of Cyprus. As
Council members are fully aware, talks between the two
national communities are continuing, within the context
of the Secretary-General’s
good offices, in order to
establish a legitimate Government of Cyprus representing both national communities.
The treatment of the
Greek Cypriot side as “the Government”, therefore, at a
time when the talks are under way+ prejudges the outcome of these talks and prejudices the chances of their
success. Furthermore,
the reference to the Turkish
Cypriot component
of the binational
Republic of
Cyprus in the same context as merely “the Turkish
Cypriot community”
constitutes a grave injustice to the
Turkish Cypriot people, which is entitled-legally,
morally and legitimately-to
a status equal with that of the
Greek Cypriot people. This inequitable attitude is also
reflected in references to the respective leaders of the
two peoples of Cyprus.

alleged “harassment of Greek Cypriots** in the north, I
wish to stress once more that there is not, and there has
never been, any question of anybody being subjected to
any harassment in the north and that a11allegations in this
regard-past or present-are totally untrue.
117. Finally, concerning the report, I wish to express
our full agreement with the Secretary-General’s statement
in paragraph 60, as follows:
“I continue to hold to the view, which I have consistently expressed, that the intercommunal talks represent
the best available means of pursuing a concrete and
effective negotiating process aimed at achieving an
agreed, just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
question.‘*.
I wish also to stress the Turkish Cypriots’ determination to
continue the bilateral negotiating process in a spirit of good
.will and with a constructive attitude.

112. After December 1983 Archbishop Makarios ruled
the land in accordance with his whims and fancies, and
never within the context of any constitution
or legal
authority. Pending the establishment of constitutional
order, UNFICYP
was sent to Cyprus in March 1964 at
the request, and with the consent, of the two communities, and it is with the explicit consent of the two communities that UNFICYP
continues to function in the
island today.

118. The concept of equal partnership is inherent in the
sovereignty and independence of Cyprus, and in view of
the record of Greek violations of this basic principle since
1963, the Turkish Cypriot people will be justified in taking the necessary measures to defend its rights. The ultimate responsibility in this matter rests with the Greek
Cypriot leadership.
119. I have listened to the presentation made by the
Greek Cypriot representative. I simply cannot understand his behaviour and his political motive. The Greek
origin of the word “diplomacy”
seems to have been
sadly betrayed again today when we heard extraordinary manipulations
of the facts. One cannot deny the
fact that Greece is the only country responsiblewhether under democratically elected Governments or
junta regimes-for
all the calamities that have befallen
the island of Cyprus since the 188Os, a century ago. The
annals of the United Nations are full of the atrocities
committed by the Greeks in Cyprus against my people,
the Turkish Cypriot community. I shall therefore refrain
from answering their baseless and false accusations in
detail. Let history be the judge.

113. Furthermore, the summit meetings between Archbishop Makarios and Mr. Denktas on 12 February 1977
and between Mr. Kyprianou and Mr. De&as on 19 May
1979 were not meetings between the President of one side
and the communal leader of the other side, respectively,
but between people of equal status representing their
respective communities. Archbishop Makarios lost his status as President of Cyprus when he Iaunched his ignominious attack on the Turkish Cypriots and ousted from the
legitimate
Cyprus Government
its Turkish Cypriot
component.
114. The take-over and continuation
of the office of
“President of Cyprus’*, first in July 1974 by Mr. Glafcos
Clerides and then by Archbishop Makarios, followed by
Mr. Kyprianou, is as devoid of any legal and constitutional substance as the take-over of that post by the
notorious killer Nicos Sampson on 15 July 1974. It is my
duty to reaffh-m once again, therefore, that, as far as the,
Turkish Cypriot people is concerned, the re-establishment of the legitimacy of the Cyprus Government,
which was destroyed by the 21 December 1963 coup
perpetrated by Archbishop Makarios, can come about
only with the final agreement of the two peoples of
Cyprus on the new constitution of the island.

120. In concluding, I must confirm once again before
this body that the sincere hope of the Turkish people in
Cyprus is that the Greek Cypriot leadership will come to
the negotiating table with the resolute intention of developing the bizonal federal system in Cyprus in a spirit of
equal partnership and on the basis of the SecretaryGeneral’s opening statement of 9 August 1980.
121. The Turkish people of Cyprus and its Govemment have been doing and will continue to do their
utmost in order to bring about such a solution. However, in spite of the repeated assertions by the Greek
Cypriot leadership that sovereignty in Cyprus belongs
exclusively to them, the Turkish Cypriot people must
-also assert that, in reality, the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus can be the outcome only of an equal
partnership between the two communities. And I must
warn ail concerned that every time the Greek Cypriot
people rejects this partnership by word or by deed, each
time’it violates the inalienable rights and status of the

115. In the light of the foregoing, it is our earnest
wish-and
we believe it is our legitimate right-to
expect that one side should not be upgraded in the
reports of the Secretary-General at the expense-of the
other.
116. With regard to the reference, in paragraph 29 of the
Secretary-General’s latest report to complaints about
12

Turkish people of Cyprus, my community will, as a last
resort, consider itself at liberty, and even dutv-bound. to
do everything possible to defend its right of partnership
and its inherent right to self-determination.
The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.

NOTES

I Conference on Cyprus: Documents signed and initialled at Lancaster
House on 19 February 1959, Cmnd. 679 (London,
Her Majesty’s
Stationery
Office.
19591.
* ULited
N&ions,‘Treafy
Series, vol. 382. No. 5475.
‘) Treaty of Alliance
between the Kingdom
of Greece, the Republic
of Turkey
and the Republic
of Cyprus
(ibid., vol. 397, No. 5712).

+.ll

;.. b

+I

. 4Wl

.I2

. &+

@

J cj+lt,,*

$ ,I L$yJ+

d&J

;*

,p-..l

. .dl

4 &I

iLl;il

,L’
49,

4’;+

J6. ,+

: J! 2,

)

q&

;A
-L&G

$

ku~iilRn&xB~lii&!iilm
88~~t~bf~~8~~~RW~~~~8~~~~

~~irWLWdSf~!fll?1l!5~t3ctJfi8~

txbl3sitc%ie

how
TO OBTAIN
UNITED
NATIONS
PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UkIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaircs
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-rous
a : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

I-lOJlYYMTb

kiWlaHM$l

OpraHa3auWi

COMO

COtiSEGUIR

M’JflAHMR

OP~AHM3AUMM

06%enHHeHHblX
H areurcraax
80 ncex paRoHax rmpa.
Mara3HHe
HJIH nmuwre
no anpecy:
nponamce
Ii3RaHMft.
HbK)-ROpK
WIH

PUBLICACIONES

HauM
Haeonwe
OpraHti3ausr
XCHeBa.

OFbEllMHEHHblX

HAUMH

MOKHO
Ky”“Tb
S KHIIXiHbtX
MaraWHaS
CnpasKs
06 If3naHwIX
B BauJeM
K~lli~~0~1
06&eDkiHeHHblX
HaunIt,
Cexults
II0

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS’

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas pattes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho
.

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-60205-July

1991~2,050
