UiVITEDNATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING:
NEW

28MARCH

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1994) , . . . . . . . , . . . I , . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

....,...,................,............

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12295) .

1

Adoption of the agenda

SIPV. 1994

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

19944th MEETING
Meld in New York on Monday,

28 March 1977, at 10.30 a.m,

President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG
(United States of America).

Mr. S. A. Salim (United Peppublic oj’ Tanzania), Mr. J. Petrid
(Yugoslavia), Mr. Umba di Lutete (Zaire) and Mr. D. W.
Kamana [Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
.United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I should like to inform
members of the Council that letters have been received
from the representatives of Cuba, Mongolia and Togo, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the question on the agenda. Accordingly, I
propose, in accordance with the usual practice and with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
under the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l994)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12295)

3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table whenever they wish to address
the Council.

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.tn.

Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. Alarcon (Cuba),
Mr. I: Pun tsagnorov (Mongolia) and Mr. A. Kodjovi (Togo)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/l 2295)

4. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Republic): Mr. President,
first of all I should like to welcome and congratulate you
on both your new assignment as the Permanent Representative of the United States to the United Nations and
your assumption of the presidency of this august body, the
Security Council, during the current month.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council [1988th-1991st meetingsj,
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Botswana,
Egypt, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zaire and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the usual understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they wish to address the
Council.

5. I should like, on behalf of my delegation, to avail
myself of this opportunity
to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Murray, the Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, for the excellent manner in which
he conducted the proceedings of the Council during the
month of February.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. S. M. Al Saffar (Bahrain), Mr. IT 770~ (Botswana),
Mr. A. E, Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. T B. Sam (Ghana),
Mr. M. S. Camara [Guinea), Mr. A. Marpaung (Indonesia),
Mr. F. M. Kasina (Kenya), Mrs. A. Brooks-Randolph (Liberia), Mr. H. Rasolondraibe (Madagascar), Mr. M. El Hussen
(Mauritania), Mr. L. 0. Harriman (Nigeria), Mr. M. Fall
(Senegal), Mrs. S. Y. Gbujama (Sierra Leone), Mr. I. B.
Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. M. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic),

6. Also, I should like to take this occasion to express the
sympathy of my delegation and my Government as well as
of my people to the people and Government of the
Socialist Republic of Romania on the news of the earthquake that has recently tragically devastated parts of that
country. May I also be allowed to request our colleague, the
representative of the Socialist Republic of Romania, to
forward these heart-felt expressions of sympathy to the
Romanian Government and people.

1

12. The policy of apartheid is rejected and condemned by
both the Security Council and the General Assembly, as
well as by the whole international community which
considers it a crime against the dignity of the human being,
constituting a source of tension imperilling international
peace and security.

7. We have been saddened by the death of His Excellency,
Mr. Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, President of India. The noble
efforts and devotion to duty displayed by him are a tribute
not only to his own person but also to the noble and great
country that he led. His memory will be honoured for a
long time to come. I ask that our colleague, the Permanent
Representative or India, convey these sentiments and the
condolences of my delegation, my Government and my
people to the Government and people of India.

13. In order to maintain itself and its domination of the
African people in South Africa and in order to deceive
world public opinion, the racist regime in South Africa has
resorted to its policy of so-called African homelands or
bantustans. The creation of those so-called bantustans is
directed at the division of the African people into tribal
entities and they are so arranged as to become mini-hostage
States, completely dependent upon and prisoners of the
white minority racist regime of South Africa. In such a
manner, the economies of those so-called homelands will
serve mainly the purposes and ambitions of that racist
minority.

8. The tragic death just a few days ago of the President of
the People’s Republic of the Congo, Commander Marien
Ngouabi, also saddened us for, as fellow members of the
Organization of African Unity, we have come to appreciate
his own and his Government’s progress on our continent.
We are confident that the people of the People’s Republic
of the Congo will endure with patience their sorrow and the
loss of their great leader,
9. Seventeen years have elapsed since the brutal massacre
at Sharpeville of unarmed Africans demonstrating against
the inhuman treatment inflicted upon them by the racist
rCgime of South Africa. Since that time, the African people
in South Africa have intensified their struggle against the
inhuman policy of apartheid. The United Nations has
adopted several resolutions demanding that the racist
rBgime of South Africa respect the principles of humanity
and its international obligations under the Charter. Yet,
instead of complying with those resolutions, the racist
minority rCgime of South Africa has consistently defied the
international community and intensified its racist oppression against the indigenous people of South Africa. The
Soweto massacre of 16 June 1976, which was strongly
condemned by Security Council resolution 392 (1976), was
a clear indication that that racist rkgime intended to
continue its evil policy of apartheid.

14. The racist minority regime at Pretoria seeks to achieve
many objectives through its bantustan policy. Among those
objectives are the following.
15. First, it seeks to mislead world public opinion and
deceive the international community into believing that the
racist minority regime is attempting to provide those
so-called homelands with their independence and their right
to provide those so-called homelands with their independence and their right to self-determination. But the world
community has not been deceived and has taken a strong
stand against those manoeuvres. In fact, that policy has
been shattered by the General Assembly, in its resolution
31/6 A, calling for non-recognition of the Transkei. In this
regard, it is worth noting here that the General Assembly’s
declaration was preceded by those of the thirteentfl
Summit Meeting of the Organization of African Unity, held
in Mauritius, and the fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Covermnent of Non-Aligned Countries held at Colombo,
both of which called for non-recognition of that counterfeit
entity.

10. In Namibia, the racist minority rCgime continues its
illegal occupation of that Territory in defiance of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. Such illegal
occupation prevents the United Nations from exercising its
responsibility for the people and Territory of Namibia. The
racist rCgime continues to establish military installations in
the Territory for use as a springboard to commit aggression
after aggression against neighbouring States. In this regard,
the Security Council, in its resolutions 38’7 (i976) and
393 (1976), has condemned the racist rdgime of South
Africa for its flagrant aggressions against the People’s
Republic of Angola and the Republic of Zambia during the
past year.

16. Secondly, it aims to divide the indigenous inhabitants
of South Africa on the basis of tribalism in order to portray
them as belonging to different communities not related one
to another and as not being related to one country or one
nation. In this manner, the white racist minority would be
presented as being the largest single group when indi.
vidually compared with the different African tribes. In fact,
these attempts were blatantly revealed by Mr. Comic P.
Mulder, Minister of Information of the Vorster rggirne,
when he said “The white population in South Africa is not
a minority but a majority since the four million whites
outnumber each tribe,”

11. There can be no doubt that the situation in South
Africa is extremely grave and at a stage where it threatens
international peace and security, and there can be no doubt
that the cause of *that tension is the nature of the ruling
racist establishment in South Africa. That racist rbgime
perpetrates the inhuman policies of racial discrimination
and apartheid and is determined to continue perpetrating
those policies which contravene the principles of the
Charter, those principles which express the hope and faith
of mankind in human rights and in the dignity and value of
the individual without distinction of any kind as to race,
colour, sex, language or religion.

17. Thirdly, the rkgime seeks a continuation of the
economic exploitation of the inhabitants of those so-called
homelands. Those African people are obliged to work for
the benefit of the economy of the white areas, in mines, in
agriculture and in industry, with wages so low that they are
in most cases below the poverty line. Furthermore, those
so-called homelands have been allocated arid and poor areas
for the express purpose of making their inhabitants
completely dependent on work in the mines and factories
2

of the white inhabitants of South Africa, On this occasion,
it iS Of interest to quote Mr. Vorster who, in 1968, said in
Parliament,

Zionist rCgime in occupied Palestine. The relationship and
co-operation between the two racist regimes was presented
in detail in the report of the Special Committee Against
Apartheid.1 That report clearly shows how the rapid
growth and expansion of the relations between those two
racist r&imes reached a higher level after the visit of the
Prime Minister of South Africa to the’ Zionist entity in
occupied Palestine in April of last year. Also, on 15 March
1977, The Christian Science Monitor referred to that
co-operation between the two racist y&mes. It said:

“It is true that there are blacks working for us. They
Will Continue to work for us for generations. . , , The fact
of the matter is this: we need them because they work for
us. . I . Under no circumstances can we grant them those
political rights, neither now nor ever.”
IS. The so-called homelands policy pursued by the Pretoria regime to deprive and oppress the indigenous inhabitants of South Africa is a corner-stone of the overall
policy of apartheid. Like the overall policy of apartheid,
that policy has faced extensive criticism and fierce opposition both inside and outside South Africa.

“South Africa has long been purchasing arms from
Israel, supplying it with diamonds and other raw materials, and sharing technology in such areas as railroads,
development of gas energy from coal, and arms manufacture.”

19. Inside South Africa, there have been demonstrations
and riots in which various sectors of the inhabitants of
South Africa have participated, including students, workers,
members of sporting clubs and many others. Those riots
and demonstrations, which have occurred throughout the
country, beginning at Soweto and then at Johannesburg
and Cape Town, can only be viewed as an unambiguous
indicator of the opposition of the inhabitants to the policy
of apartheid and therefore to the policy of so-called
homelands, Those riots and demonstrations and the turmoil
South Africa is experiencing, are the expected and inevitable result of the oppression and deprivation that has faced
the African people over the years and still faces them
today. The minority rCgirne in South Africa opposed those
demonstrations with force and violence in the mistaken
belief that it could thereby further suppress and control
the African peoples of Soweto and elsewhere. However, the
demonstrations continued and in fact spread to all parts of
South Africa, indicating beyond all shadow of a doubt that
the people of South Africa were determined to persevere in
their struggle against the policies of apartheid.

The same newspaper continued:
“The Israeli daily newspaper Maariv reported last
December 9 that Israel’s Tadiran electronics firm, a
subsidiary of Israel Aircraft Industries, has built a plant at
Rosalene, near Pretoria, in partnership with a South
African group underthe nameConsolidatedPower.”
This relationshipof co-operationwasstrongly condemned
by the GeneralAssemblyin its resolution31/6 E. I should
also like to quote from the first Afro-Arab Summit
ConferenceMeeting,held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March 1977,
which declared:
“The Afro-Arab Summit Conferencedecidesthat increasedefforts shouldbe madewithin the Organizationof
African Unity, the Le’agueof Arab Statesand the United
Nations and all other international forums to find the
most effective ways and meansof accentuating,at the
international level, the political andeconomicisolationof
Israel, South Africa and Rhodesia,so long asthe rCgimes
of thesecountriespersistin their racist,expansionistand
aggressive
policies.To this effect, the Conferenceaffirms
the need to continueto imposea total boycott, political,
diplomatic, cultural, sporting and economic and, in
particular, the oil embargo against these r&me%”
[S/12298, annex,para.8./

20. The policy of so-called homelands is opposed even by
the chiefs of the African tribes and by leaders of the
so-called homelands themselves. In this regard, I should like
to draw the attention of the Council to the conference of
the chiefs of the eight remaining so-called homelands, held
in the middle of November 1974. At that conference, the
proposal to grant autonomy to those so-called homelands
was rejected. Instead the chiefs demanded equal rights with
the white-minority inhabitants within the framework of a
single State in South Africa. That demand was well
expressed by Chief Gasunkulu of Transvaal when he stated
that if the indigenous African people were to agree to the
so-called bantustan scheme, they would lose their claims to
South Africa’s wealth and they would have to abandon
their claims to an economy which they had helped to
build up. At the same conference, Chief Buthelezi declared “South Africa is one country. It has one destiny.
Those who are attempting to divide the land of our birth
are attempting to stem the tide of history.”

22. The Vorster racist regimewould not be ableto defy
United Nations resolutionsand world public opinion were
it not for the material and moral supportit obtainsfrom
the sameindustrialized countries.It is indeedabsurdthat
those Powers,while claimingto be opposedto apartheid,
are increasing their support for Vorster and his racist
rkgime. They are defendinghim in the GeneralAssembly
and in the Security Council in order to prevent any
international decisionon the implementationof effective
nieasuresagainstthe racist rCgime.TheseStatesand others
which continue their non-compliancewith United Nations
resolutionsand which continue to expandtheir economic
relationswith the racistentity must bemadeawareof their
responsibilitiesto the internationalcommunity.Thosewho
aid and abet the racist rkgimesin Africa must know that
they are aiding the enemiesof Africa, and that they will

21. With the collapse of the Portuguese racist r6gime in
April 1974, the Vorster racist r6gime lost a very important
ally. Since then, the racist regime of South Africa has
spared no effort to strengthen its relations with the racist

1 See Official
Records of the General Assembly, lIirWfirst
Session, Supplemetzr No. 22A.
3

face the consequences of their actions. They must c~mose
between Africa and the enemies of Africa. These countries
must be made aware that the Africans, supported by all
peace-loving peoples, will never forgive these irresponsible
and sometimes criminal actions.
23. On 7 March, Time magazine published an interview
with Vorster. Asked if he was still convinced that his Policy
of creating black homelandswithin South Africa wasthe
way to solve the country’s racial discrimination,Vorster
said: “I absolutely believe that this is the only solution.
Any other solution will lead to chaos.”In reply to another
question-why it wasnot possiblefor blacks to have the
vote within South Africa itself-he answered:“I’m prepared
to give them all the opportunitesfor local government,for
recreation and social activities. But political rights in the
white area,no.”

29. Mr. SAM (Ghana): The question of South Africa has
remainedintractable for SO long,and COntainS elementsso
provocative of seriousthreats to the peace of southern
Africa, and, progressively,that of Africa and of the entire
world, that no apology should be necessary for the
increasingpreoccupationof both the GeneralAsselhblyand
the Security Council, not to speak of other international
organizationsand bodies, with the consideration of all
possibleways of resolvingit. The delegation of Ghanahas
requestedto be allowed to participate in the Council’s
debatein the hope that its views wtiI contribute to a final
solutionto the problem.

30. I should like to expressmy delegation’sgratitude to
you, Sir, and the membersof the Security Council for
agreeingto listen to our views. It is a refreshingexperience
for my delegationto addressthis most distinguishedbody
under your presidency.We of the Ghana delegationhave
studied with care and have been impressedby the state24. Certainly, the racist regimein South Africa persistsin
its criminal racist policy becauseof the help, encourage- ments which you have madesinceyour assumptionof the
duty of PermanentRepresentativeof the United Statesof
merit and protection receivedfrom its partnersamongthe
America
to the United Nations. My delegationis honoured
Westernindustrialized Powers.
by the opportunity to work with a man of suchdistinction,
imbuedasyou are with a dedication to the strugglefor the
25. Both experienceandhistory teachus that there canbe restorationof the rights of individuals.There is 11-o doubt in
no peacewithout justiceand that justice cannot be attained
our minds that the rights of the majority population of
except in the context of equality. A peacethat is imposed South Africa will commandeven greater attention frowna
and enforced by force of arms is not peaceat all; it is man of your calibre and from the Government which you
surrender and subjugation.Thosepeoplewho are struggling
represent.
to achieve freedom and independence
will never bow down
and allow themselvesto be subjugated.In order to ensure
31. The Governmentof the United States, underPresident
peace in southern Africa, the African people of South
Carter’sleadership,has inspirednew hopes for justice and
Africa, Zimbabwe and Namibia must obtain justice with
peace.My country hasnoted with considerablesatisfaction
self-determinationandindependence.
the stupendousrole which the President has played in
persuadingthe United StatesSenateto reimposethe banon
26. At this critical stage,the Security Councilis bound to
the importation of chromefrom Rhodesia.tihana therefore
carry out its responsibility to maintain peaceand security, hopesthat henceforth, ‘and through United States leader.
and in particular, first, to condemn strongly the racist ship, the Westernworld in particular will begin to adopt a
regime of South Africa for resorting to massiveviolence more realisticand positive attitude to African aspirations
and repressionagainstthe African people and demandthat
and concerns, particularly those affecting the African
this racist rBgimeend and abolishits policy of bantustani- population of South Africa. Werecall in this conncxion the
iation, abandon its policy of apartheidand work to achieve following noble words usedby PresidentCarter during his
majority rule basedon justice and equality’; secondly, to
inaugurationaddress:
take the necessary measuresunder Chapter VII of the
Charter to end the defianceby this racist regimeof United
“Becausewe are free we cannever be indifferent to the
Nations resolutions and to end its illegal occupation of
fate of freedom elsewhere.Our moral sensedictates a
Namibia; thirdly, to demandthat all Statesceaseforthwith
clear-cut preferencefor those societieswhich sharewith
the sale and shipment of all kinds of armsto the racist
US an abidingrespectfor individual human rights.”
r&&me of South Africa, and that those which have not yet
done so, severforthwith all relationswith this racist regime;
fourthly, to support and assistthe people of southern We of Ghana translate those words to meana declaration
that the announced clear-cut preference cannot possibly
Africa and their authentic liberation movementsin their
apply to South Africa, which, asis common knowledge,can
strugglefor the dignity and freedomof man.
be accusedof anything but an attachment to the fate of
freedomor respectfor individual human rights, or both.
2’7. In concIusion, I should like to assureyou that my
country will continue, as it has always done, to give
vigorous support and assistanceto the peopleof southern 32. The history of the problemscreated by white settlers
in South Africa and their predecessors
is so well known and
Africa in their struggleagainstracismand apartheid andfor
has
been
so
often
repeated
in
the
Council
and other organs
freedom, self-determinationand independence.
of the United Nations, that my delegation should be
excusedfor not wanting to give the Council another lecture
28. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the represen. on the history of South Africa. It is sufficient to recall that
tative of Ghana. I invite him to take a placeat the Council the sole purpose of the long list of atrocities which the
table and to make hisstatement.
racist minority regime and its supporters both within and
4

outside South Africa have continued to perpetrate against
the indigenous Africans of that country, and indeed agaifist
all people who are neither European in descent nor
obviously white, is to perpetuate their greed at the
incalculable expense of non-whites on the basis of the
disgraceful myth that would have their whiteness viewed as
synonymous with some divine right to racial superiority.
But for this greed and penchant for materialism to the
exclusion of all other considerations, it would be totally
illogical for the racist minority regime of South Africa. even
when it suited its purposes, to bestow, among other things,
the dubious accolade of ‘Lhonourary whites” upon nonwhites of any type, no matter how considerable the latter’s
economic weight or clout might be.

lation, the scales would tip in favour of South Africa-that
is, in favour of the racist system in that unhappy country.
The consequences of such a development would be too
ghastly for the civilized world to contemplate. Thus my
delegation wishes to tell the West to act now and to save
themselves from that unhappy dilemma.
37. The considered view of the delegation of Ghana, as
might well imagine, is that investments in South Africa
are investments in support of racism, oppression and
inhuman and degrading treatment. They are therefore a
threat to peace and security. As the custodian of international peace and security, the Council is faced with the
choice of one of only two options: either to act now to
stave off future conflict of huge dimensions, or to fail to
act now and thus make such a conflict inevitable, This is
the rationale behind our call to the Council to impose an
embargo on all further investments in South Africa and to
ensure the institution of machinery for the supervision of
the total withdrawal from that country of all past investments as well.
YOU

33. It is that combination of uncontrolled greed and a
consciously and systematically ingrained racism which
makes the rdgime of South Africa, like Hitler’s Nazi rkgime,
a serious danger to world peace and security. The veritable
threat to peace posed by South Africa is made more serious
by the fact that South Africa has in recent years, again like
Hitler’s Ggime, pursued a policy of aggression against
neighbouring African States, in a futile effort to cow them
into submitting to its domination and to its brand of racist
exploitation. Through that policy, South African troops
have launched attacks against the new Republic of Angola
and against Zambia, and continue to occupy the United
Nations Territory of Namibia. Further, it is largely through
South African encouragement and open assistance,that the
illegal rtSgime of Ian Smith has had the audacity to launch
attacks on Mozambique, Botswana and Zambia.

38. The persistent intransigence of South Africa also
derives from the encouragement it has always received to
view itself as a protector of Western strategic interests in
the South Atlantic and Indian Oceans. The premise of this
argument would seem to be that any black African
government in South Africa, however democratic it might
be, even in Western terms, and however studiously faithful
it might be to all the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, could only be regarded as an enemy of the West,
My delegation viewsthis as a most sickening proposition. If
this is not a clear case of giving a dog a bad name for the
sole purpose of hanging it, I do now know what else is.

34. South Africa’s desperate policy to add to its already
huge arsenal of weapons can be intended to achieve only
one objective: that of creating a situation which will, the
regime hopes, undermine or stifle the determination of the
vast majority of its population to continue to resist the
archaic, immoral and dangerous policy and practice of
apartheid. Fortunately, the will of the indigenous people of
South Africa has prevailed and shown that apartheid has no
future and is therefore bound to fail.

39. It is this blind theory which has been mainly responsible for the support which the West has continued to give
to the racist rggime, and which has prolonged the suffering
and nightmares of the African population. The time has
come when, all of us have to examine our consciences
critically. Freedom and justice under majority rule are the
stakes in South Africa-not any one ideology. The idea that
the indigenous people of South Africa are struggling for
majority rule only to surrender their freedom to another
foreign Power is too offensive, too insulting and too
thoughtless for my delegation to wish even to argue against
it. If freedom and justice cannot be attained through any
other means than by armed struggle, then armed struggle is
legitimate and help received from any quarters for that
purpose can only be welcome and considered asfriendly. It
is for this reason that we are most grateful to our friends of
the socialist world for their continued assistance in this
regard. We appeal to them to continue to offer such
assistance.

3.5. The question has all too often been asked-but it will
bear another repetition-;-as to why South Africa has always
felt so secure in its policy of defiance of international
opinion. There can be only one answer. That answeris that
it has been encouraged in that feeling by its very powerful
friends. Those powerful-mainly Western-countries continue to insist that the huge investments they have made in
that country and what in their view constitute their
strategic interests can only be protected and made secure
by a r6gime as autocratic, as offensive, as racist, as
murderous and as determined as the South African regime
to oppress its majority population and keep them working
at starvation wages, without any regard whatsoever for any
of their human rights-least of all, their political rights.

40. Other friends who aid the African struggle for independence and majority rule through their humanitarian
assistance, however, insist that the struggle is permissible
only if it is carried out by peaceful means. But they do not
indicate what means will be so peaceful as no longer to
endanger the lives of the majority population of South
Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe. All the avenues for
peaceful change in those territories, and particularly in

36. My delegation shudders at the thought that, if the
situation should arise-and such a situation is fast approaching-in which the industrialized countries of the West
were faced with a choice between defending their investments in South Africa and supporting the legitimate
demands, through struggle, of the oppressed African popu5

aparfheid South Africa, have been tried. From 1910 to the
Sharpeville massacres in 1960 and those at Soweto only last
year, the South African rBgime has had only one set Of
answers to struggle by peaceful means. The rggime’s answer
has been more imprisonments, more banishments, more
bans, more oppression and repression and more murders of
the unarmed. Thirty-one years of discussions and resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council
have proved equally futile. It is no wonder then that the
patience of the people of South Africa is now at its lowest
ebb. A people can never allow itself, and indeed has no
right, to remain peaceful in the face of all determined
efforts either to decimate it or to keep it enslaved forever.
41. At this point I would remind the Colmcil of a
statement attributed to Mr. Connie Mulder, the lnformation and Interior Minister of the racist minority regime of
South Africa. The statement appeared in an article written
by Mr. Jim Hoagland in The Washirzgton Post of 16 February under the title “South Africa, with U.S. Aid, Near
A-Bomb”. Without denying or confirming the alleged
United States assistance to South Africa in its development
of nuclear technology to within two to four years of
manufacturing an atomic bomb, Mr, Mulder stated:
“Let me just say that if we are attacked, no rules apply
at all if it comes to a question of our existence. We will
use all means at our disposal, whatever they may be.”
He then added, rather pointedly:
“It is true that we have just completed our own pilot
plant that uses very advanced technology, and that we
have major uranium resources.”
42. One may well ask who this potential attacker of South
Africa could be? Is it an African country or some other
foreign Power? It is obvious to my delegation that the
attack that the racists of South Africa have in mind can
come only from within South Africa itself and only from
the long-disenfranchised majority. Now we have further
proof of the intentions behind the rapid arms buildup and
development of atomic energy. Those weapons are to be
used to wipe out the indigenous Africans if needed. This is
the additional reason for the racist rCgime’s herding those
Africans into bantustans which will provide easy targets.
43. At last the opportunity that protagonists of peaceful
change have always sought has arrived. This is the last
opportunity for peaceful means, Those means lie within
Chapter VII of the Charter. Let those protagonists have the
courage and foresight to decide upon a mandatory embargo
of arms and shipments to and investments in South Africa in
accordance with the numerous wishes expressed by the vast
majority of the international community, particularly in
General Assembly resolution 31/6 of only three months
ago.
44. In this connexion, my delegation feels proud also to
draw attention once again to the resolution adopted at
Accra by the young men and women of the World
Federation of United Nations Associations, at the session of
their Executive Committee held from 19 to 21 March this

year, That resolution which, on the instructions of my
Government, I have had the honour to communicate to the
Secretary-General for the attention of both the General
Asselnbly and the Security Council, has since been published as an official document. With your permission, I shall
quote that resolution:
[par the text, see S/l 2305 of 24 March 19 77.1
45. My delegation is of the view that this is one time when
the Council should not conclude its debates without
Failure to adopt a decision would
adopting a reSOh.diOn.
necessarily be seen as proof of the Council’s unwillingness
to have the question of South Africa resolved without
further bloodshed and suffering; it would be too obvious an
invitation to an intensification of the armed struggle and to
unnecessary sacrifice of lives, not only in South Africa but
also in Namibia, Zimbabwe and the entire southern African
area. The Council’s failure to adopt a firm resolution in
support of total sanctions, particularly including a total
mandatory embargo on investments in and arms for South
Africa, would be too cynical and too cruel an invitation to
a racial war, with unforseeable consequences for the peace
of Africa and probably of the entire world. History could
never forgive such callousness.
46. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Kenya, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
4,7. Mr. KASINA (Kenya): Mr. President, first 1 should
like to convey to you my delegation’s warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month. Secondly, I should like to thank
you and the members of the Council for allowing my
delegation to participate in this important debate, ovel
which it gives me great pleasure to seeyou presiding. Your
contribution to the cause of human rights in your own
country is well known and admired by the peopleof Kenya
and indeed the world over. It is really fitting that you
should be in the Chair when we are discussing tne problem
of political and human rights which are so indiscriminately
violated in southern Africa.
48. The situation in South Africa continues to threaten
international peace and security. The attention of the
Security CounciI has been drawn to that grave situation cm
numerous occasions by many States and international
organizations and yet the Council has not come up with a
final solution. The reason for this failure is mainly that
friends and supporters of the racist r&me have continued
to resist world opinion against the rigirne.
49. For the last 31 years, the United Nations has been
seized of the problem of the policies of apartheid in South
Africa. Numerous resolutions have been adopted each year
in which the South African regime has been requested to
abandon its policies ofapartheicl. It is all clear to US that, in
contravention of international appeals, the racist r&ime
continues its ruthless oppression of the black people and
the opponents of apartheid in South Africa.
50. We are witnessing today one of the most reprehensible
of the evils confronting mankind in the last quarter of the

twentieth century. The policies of apartheid represent the
most flagrant and glaring violations of human rights and a
system of racial tyranny without equal in human history.
51. The barbaric Sharpeville massacre I7 years ago is a
reminder that South Africa was determined to enforce its
policies of apartheid by the use of ‘force and police
brutality, Though South Africa was condemned by this
body for the Sharpeville massacre, it was quite clear that
such condemnation was not enough to deter the racist
rdgime from such heinous crime. We warned then that
unless South Africa was punished for that crime, it would
be encouraged and would continue to perpetrate further
atrocities against the innocent Africans. Apologists of the
Vorster rbgime were quick to come to its defence. They
told us that the Sharpeville massacre was only an isolated
incident and that, in any case, it was an action taken to
preserve law and order.
52. No sane person can claim that the brutal police killing
that has been going on in South Africa since that massacre
is a step taken to maintain law and order. It is systematic
police brutality to force the black people to accept the
inhuman policies of apartheid. That wanton and brutal
suppression culminated in the wave of mass killings of
innocent people at Soweto on 16 June last year. What
happened at Soweto, Cape Town and other areas, was an
act of courage on the part of non-whites in South Africa.
The demonstrators were not rioters, as the racist r6gime
tried. to convince the world. The recent mass uprising at
Soweto, Cape Town and other areas of South Africa, has
been a spontaneous reaction of the people against oppression, repression, continued exploitation and the denial of
their fundamental human rights and dignity. The war for
freedom has set foot on Azania. Vorster and his collaborators must realize that Azania will be free. No amount of
brutal murders, suppression and detention of black and
non-white will turn back the hands of the clock of freedom
inXi&ia.
53. The apartheid system, in the disguise of what Vorster
calls “separate development”, is the biggest fraud ever
conceived by the rigime. This is the creation of the
so-called bantustans or homelands for black people. The
blacks are being forced into the so-called homelands, which
are economically non-viable and non-contiguous tracts of
empty veld. The so-called homelands are scattered among
the so-called white areas. The fraudulent aspect of this
exercise is the fact that the whites, with less than 17 per
cent of the country’s population, have 87 per cent of its
land reserved for them by law. The non-white 83 per cent
of the population is left to share only 13 per cent of the
land.
54. Is it possible for anyone to envisage the homelands as
flourishing independent countries whatever their shape and
size? They are mostly unwanted land-what was left by the
pioneer white farmers and miners-with
virtually no industries. What is more, nearly half of South Africa’s Africans
do not live in those so-called homelands. By the system of
bantustanization, if ever it were to be accepted, more than
half the black population of South Africa would automatically be condemned to become stateless people in their own

country. How is it possible for anyone to accept, this as a
proposal to create “independent”
African States inside
South Africa? At its thirtieth session, the General Assembly adopted a resolution rejecting South Africa’s policy
of bantustans and calling upon Member States not to
“independent”
recognize
such
Slates [resolution
3411 D (XXX)/.
It is really ironical that some Members
could not support the resoIution calling for non-recognition
of the so-called homelands.
55. The system of apartheid of the racist regime of South
Africa has been extended to Namibia. The regime continues
to occupy
and colonize Namibia, in defiance of the United
Nations and international opinion, This situation is intolerable. The illegal occupation and the imposition of the
abhorrent apartheid system are not only a violation of
fundamental human rights but also the denial of the
Namibians’ inalienable right to self-determination. Condemnation of the illegal occupation is not enough. We have
condemned it many times. What is needed now is positive
action to dislodge and end the illegal occupation of
Namibia by South Africa. Effective means, such as economic and other sanctions, must be taken to force South
Africa to comply with the decisions of the international
community. We request all countries to put the interests of
human dignity above short-term economic interests and to
cut their economic lies with South Africa so long as that
rCgime continues its defiance of the United Nations as
manifested by its illegal occupation of Namibia.
56. The internal problems of South Africa are not
confined within the country; the regime has tried on many
occasions to extend its policies of aggression to independent African States. Immediatety after the collapse of
Portuguese colonialism in Africa, the racist rdgime of South
Africa was quick to rush its troops to Angola to establish its
own type of colonialism, and to prevent the consolidation
of an independent State of Angola. Last year, in the
Council, we heard a record of well-documented acts of
aggression committed by this rCgime against the Republic
of Zambia. In the same year, again in the Council, we heard
the complaint of the Government of Lesotho, when the
same rCgime closed its borders with Lesotho, with the
obvious intention of forcing that country to recognize its
policies of bantustanization. Such acts of aggression convince us that South Africa, in its effort to perpetuate its
racist policies inside the country, is prepared to carry the
war to the neighbouring independent States, which are
strongly opposed to its apartheid policies. Such acts must
be condemned by the international community.
57. The recent military expansion by the South African
regime is a proper reflection of its aggressive policies in
southern Africa. The enlargement of the military budget
has been carried out to safeguard the security of the
apartheid system. The actions of the regime do not give
signs of a search for possible means of peaceful change. On
the contrary, it has chosen to live in an armed camp
portraying military aggressiveness to maintain the status
quo, no matter what the cost, in both human and economic
terms. My delegation would like to urge the world
community, collectively, to persuade or to force South
Africa to face the inevitable. The will of the people is

stronger than the gun and, in the end, it is the will of the
people that will triumph. This fact has been demonstrated
in human history many times.
58. For its military and economic strength South Africa Is
almost, if not wholly, dependent on certain Western
countries. With the military and economic supPort, which
South Africa obtains from certain Western countries, it has
been able to build a powerful military force which has
made it feel comfortable enough to defy any resolution of
the United Nations. As long as Members of this Organkation, and particularly those Western countries contjnue to
supply South Africa with arms and to trade and invest in
that country, WC shall not be able to persuade the racist
rCgime to change its racial policies.
59. It is lamentable that, despite numerous appeals by the
United Nations to all Member States to cut their economic
ties with South Africa, trade between certain Western
countries and that regime has increased tremendously.
Indications are that there is a massive flow of foreign
capital into South Africa in long-term loans to both
government and private sectors. The South African Government is certainly using this expansion of trade and foreign
loans to acquire more armaments. Such economic transactions directly and concretely help to perpetuate the
repugnant policies of apartheid and colonialism. How can
we the Members of this Organization force the South
African regime to abandon its bmtal policies when certain
powerful Members contribute so much to its economic
growth and military strength’? Respect for human dignity
and the principles of human rights should not be mortgaged
simply because of short-term economic gains. Those States
should subscribe to the noble ideals of the promotion and
protection of human rights. Therefore, no Member of the
Organization should trade with a country that has in its
legal system legislation for the enslavement of the majority
of its people.
60. My delegation cannot, nor indeed can Africa and the
entire group of the non-aligned countries, be accused of not
having explored all channels for a peaceful political
settlement in southern Africa. The Lusaka Manifesto2 and
the Dar es Salaam Declaration on Southern Africa, both of
which the racist regime spurned with impunity, speak for
themselves. Having exhausted all the channels for a settlement, my delegation sees no other way open to us now
except that of requesting the Council to invoke Chapter VII
of the Charter and to ensure the complete cessation on the
part of all States of the supply of arms, ammunition,
military vehicles and spare parts thereof and any other
military equipment to South Africa. It will be recalled that
this stand was adopted by the General Assembly last year h
resolution 31/6 D, and that that resolution transmitted
recommendations to the Council, A mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa is not, in my delegation’s
opinion, a violent proposal. It should create no problem for
those delegations which have persistently advocated a
peaceful solution. The imposition of a mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa is the minimum that the
Council could do to solve a problem that has preoccupied
2 Ibid.,

TwenfY-foUrfh

ment A/1154.

Session,Ai~nexes,agenda item 106, docu-

be Counciland the United Nations in generalfor the last
31 years.
61. ~~ delegationwishest0 appealto thosePowerswhich
havein the pastvetoed mandatory armsembargoes
against
south Africa to desistfro111 usingtheir Veto to protect the
apartheidrigime. This is an appealthat wasmadeby tie
&nerd Assembly to the ~O~fXlllnents of France, the
United Kingdomand the United States. After 31 yearsof
appealsto the racist rhgime,the Council should adopta
moreeffective way of finding a solution to this problem,
Furthermore,the Council should adopt lV.GiSUres
to dis.
courage
any foreign inVeStIIlelltS 01 lOaIlS t0 the South
African racist r&ime, We should all realize that the racist
rbgme’sexistencedependson those who trade andmain.
tain trade relationswith it. Thosecountrieswhich maintain
economicrelationswith South Africa must realizethat, in
so doing, they are directly helping South Africa to
prpetuate its abhorrentpoliciesand practicesof apartheid,
62, The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representa.
tive of Mongolia.I invite him to take a place at the Council
tableandto makehisstatement.
63, Mr. PUNTSAGNOROV (Mongolia) (z’W?rpretatjon
from &s&n): Mr, President,first of all I shotild like to
expressmy gratitude to you and the other membersof the
Security council for the opportunity you havegivenmeto
speakon the questionof South Africa. I shouldalsoliketo
congratulateyou on your appointment to the postaf
PermanentRepresentativeof the United Statesof America
to the United Nations and your
assumption of the
importantpost of Presidentof the Security Council for this
month,
64. The Mongolian delegationwould like to expressits
great sympathy to the representative of the Socialist
Republicof Romaniain personand to the friendly people
andGovernmentof Romaniaandalsoto the representative
of Iran in connexion with the recent earthquakeswhich
havecausedsomuchlossof life and materialdamage.
65. The fact that the Security Council, upon the initiative
of the African countries, is once again discussing
the
situation in South Africa, confirms once more the great
seriousness
of a problemwhich hasbeenawaitinga solution
for morethan three decades,
The explosivesituationin that
part of the world, which hasarisenasa result of the policy
andpracticeof apartheidpursuedby the Pretoria rbgime,is
in sharpcontrastto the backgroundof the contemporary
internationalsituation, which is marked by the expansion
and deepeningof the easingof international tension.The
inhumanpolicy of apartheid,which defiesthe lofty goals
of
the Charter of the United Nations, the principlesof the
historic Declarationon the Granting of Independence
to
ColonialCountriesand Peoplesand the UniversalDeclarti
tion of Human Rights, and also disregardsnumerous
resolutionsand decisionsof the’ Council and the General
Assembly,has now becomea dangeroussourceof intap
national tension fraught with the most Serious
consequences.
66. As we are well aware,the apartheid rigime of South
Africa is a system of violence practised by the white

I

minority against the overwhehiling majority of the indigenous inhabitants who have been deprived of the larger
part of their ancestral lands and the most elementary civil
rights and freedoms, and are subjected to oppression and
exploitation on the basis of a system which has been
elevated to the status of state policy, that is, the barbarous
ideology of racism.

of 243 and of the Special Committee against Apartheid, the
most flagrant violations of human rights, arbitrary arrests
and torture have become everyday practices in that
Territory which is groaning under the yoke of the South
African racists.
72. Pretoria, along with the minority rCgimein Southern
Rhodesia, is playing the role of an advance post of
imperiilisrn and neo-colonialism in Africa. The Smith
rigime, in its attempts to preserve its power over the
6 million Africans of Zimbabwe, is relying on support from
the South African racists, It is no secret that the racist
rCgimes in southern Africa are being maintained so far by
the political, economic, financial and military support and
assistance rendered to them by certain WesternPowers and
their transnational monopolies. Such broad co-operation
with the racist regimes on the part of a number of Western
countries can be viewed only as direct encouragement of
Pretoria in the pursuit of its policy and the implementation
of apartheid. It is quite obvious, that the vast natural
resources, cheap labour and extremely high profits from the
exploitation of those resources, as well as their global
military and strategic goals, are reasons for the special
interest Western Powers and their monopolies take in
maintaining Vorster’s racist regime.

67. Naturally, the consequences of such a situation-which
is entirely incompatible with the spirit of our times-have
aroused deep concern on the part of States, regardless of
their geographical location. The course of events has shown
that the problem of eliminating racist rBgimes in southern
Africa not only affects the interests of the peoples of that
area and the African continent as a whole, but has also
become a matter of concern to all States of the world and
all people of goodwill, It is no accident that the movement
of the opponents of apartheid has assumed such a broad
international character.
68. It is precisely within that context that the Mongolian
delegation attaches particular significance to the efforts
aimed at the liberation of almost 20 million Africans from
racist and colonialist oppression. It is quite obvious that a
just solution to the southern African problems would
eliminate one of the sourceswhich poison the international
political atmosphere and would substantially facilitate the
establishment of stable peace in Africa and the final and
total elimination of the last remnants of colonialism on
earth.

73. Legitimate alarm has been aroused by the intensive
growth of the military potential of the racist regime which
represents a real threat to international peace and security.
Thanks to arms deliveries by certain Western Powers, the
South African racists possess a well-equipped army and
police force, which are used to suppress the national
liberation movement in South Africa and in the Territory
of Namibia which it occupies. In addition, the racists are
threatening the sovereignty of neighbouring independent
African States and have frequently committed acts of
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola and
Zambia.

69. It should be pointed out that, in recent years, great
changes have occurred in the direction of the total
elimination of the remaining bastions of colonialism and
racism in Africa. That is demonstrated by the collapse of
the Portuguese colonial empire and the emergence of new
progressive States in the southern part of Africa. However,
the racists are doing everything in their power to maintain
their domination and are stepping up their repressive
measures in an attempt to curb the intensifying liberation
struggle in southern Africa.

74. The Mongolian delegation associates itself with the
demands addressed to the Western Powers to desist from all
military and military-technical co-operation with the racist
Ggime. We call upon the Security Council to take effective
measures to establish an embargo on arms deliveries to
South Africa.

70. As we are aware, last year the warId once again
witnessed bloody repression by the South African racists of
participants in a peaceful demonstration of schoolchildren
at Soweto who were protesting against inhumane apurtheid
laws. In June 1976, although the Security Council at a
special series of meetings adopted a resolution [resolution
392 (197611calling on the Pretoria rBgime immediately to
cease violence against the African population and to take
urgent measures to eliminate apartheid and racial discrimination, the racist regime of South Africa disregarded
that resolution and the appeals of world public opinion.
Furthermore, it actually stepped up its policy of apartheid
by creating the Transkei, one of the homelands which,
according to the calculations of the racists, are meant to
split the Africans along ethnic lines and prevent the
formation of a single, united front of anti-apartheid
fighters.

75. The attack on Benin, the dastardly murder of the
President of the People’s Republic of the Congo, Marien
Ngouabi, and other distressing acts have reminded the
peace-loving peoples of Africa and other continents that it
is still necessary to maintain vigilance with regard to the
designs of the imperialists and reactionary forces.
76. The Mongolian People’s Republic, like so many other
States, believes that the time has come to adopt more
decisive and effective international measures against the
racist Ggimes, pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The position of the Mongolian People’s
Republic on the question of the situation in South Africa
has repeatedly been set forth in official documents and

71. In addition, the Vorster racists are persisting in their
occupation of the international Territory of Namibia and
extending to that Territory their shameful system of
apartheid. As shown by the documents of the Committee

3 Special Committee on the Situation with regardto the Implementahn of the Declaration on the Grantingof Independence
to
Colonial Countries andPeoples.
9

statements. The Mongolian People’s Republic categorically
supports the peoples of southern Africa which are struggling for their national liberation and free and independent
development along the road to social progress, and calls for
the cessation of racism and apa~heid in South Africa,
freedom for Namibia and the unreserved transfer of power
to the people of Zimbabwe. We express our solidarity with
those fighting against apartheid and recognize as 1egitimat.e
the liberation struggle of the indigenous population of
South Africa.

that it is the problem of apartheid-the establishment of the
system of apartheid, the persistence of that system, its evil
consequences and the measures to which its advocates have
to resort in order to perpetuate it-which,
in our view,
constitutes the central element of the situation in southern
Africa and which determines the overall evolution of that
situation.
82. The problem of apartheid is one of those which, in all
logic, should best have lent itself to effective action on the
part of the international community, bearing in mind the
unanimity with which the apartheid rCgime has always been
condemned. I would add that action designed to eliminate
such a rCgime would
certainly have received unprecedented support from the world public, almost all of
which is perfectly well informed on this problem and which
never misses an opportunity to express its hostility to a
racist system which clashes so violently with the most
fLmdamenta1 concepts of our civilization.

77. Guided by our policy which is designed to promote
the national and social liberation of oppressed peoples, our
country has been giving and will continue to give all the
assistance that lies within
its power to the national
liberation movements of South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe. The Mongolian People’s Repub ic was one of the
first States to sign and ratify the Intem.itional Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid, adopted at the twenty-eighth
session of the
General Assembly [resolution 3068 (XXVIIJ)].
That policy
of Mongolia flows from the very essence of our social
system, in which the exploitation of man by man does not
exist and in which denials of national and racial equality
and the instigation of racial hostility are penalized by
national legislation.

83. In the multiracial society of mankind, and in our
world which is growing smaller every day, it must be
obvious to all that the very existence and persistence of a
system like that of apartheid represents one of the most
serious threats to the maintenance of peace. Nothing could
be more dangerous, in our view, than to confine ourselves
to considering apartheid as an instit,ution that is certainly
immoral and inhuman, but that is at the same time a
geographically limited phenomenon without any immediate
effect on the rest of the world. The question &apartheid is
not just a question of individual or social ethics; it is not
merely a question of respect for the human person. It is a
question which goes well beyond the strict framework of
morality or human rights, and while its social aspect is the
most obvious one, its immediate and long-term political
implications represent a real danger to Africa and certainly
to the whole world,

78. In conclusion, I should like to express the hope that
the decisions which emerge from this series of meetings of
the Security Council will be an important step towards the
elimination of the remnants of colonialism and racism in
southern Africa.
79. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the Cou&
table and to make his statement.
80. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, before making the contribution
of my
delegation to this debate, I should like to express my
personal satisfaction at seeing you in the President’s chair at
the time when the Security Council is discussing the
situation in southern Africa. I should also like to take this
opportunity to welcome you to the diplomatic family of
the United Nations, where your reputation has preceded
your arrival. It is a reputation which depicts you as a man
of goodwill, imagination and action, free of prejudice and
anxious to understand before condemning, to verify before
judging and to listen to the voice of reason rather than the
voice of power. I wish to assure you that, in this, you will
meet with not only whole-hearted sympathy and co-operation from my delegation, but also with a desire, no less
strong than your own, to engage in sincere and constructive
dialogue based on mutual esteem and confidence and on
the inexhaustible will to solve the problems between us and
to narrow our differences by seeking beyond them for the
elements of better harmony between our peoples and in the
world at large.

84. The question of apartheid cannot therefore be considered as falling exclusively within the ambit of the
domestic politics of South Africa. The debates here and
elsewhere on this problem make it clear that there is no
controversy on this subject. The racist regime of Pretoria
realizes how much hostility surrounds it, not only on its
immediate frontiers but, in the world at large. It also knows
that the African population, which it is exploiting through
its policy of racial discrimination and human degradation,
w,ill never accept that situation passively. Its constant
resistance to apartheid is something it has never been
possible to crush completely, in spite of police repression
whose excesses and ferocity are familiar to everyone. On
the contrary, that resistance has been strengthened from
year to year and has finally become a conscious and
organized revolutionary movement which nothing can now
check. The Pretoria rdgime also knows that in the fight
between it and the black people of South Africa, the rest of
Africa will continue to provide whole-hearted and effective
sup’port to those whose final objective is the restoration of
the dignity and freedom of the Africans. We should not be
surprised, therefore, at the attempts of the racist leaders of
Pretoria to extend their direct or indirect control over
neighbouring areas and thus to create a security belt for
their own protection.
The problems of Namibia and
Rhodesia are thus closely linked with that of apartheid in

81. The question of South Africa, which is the subject of
this debate in the Security Council, in fact embraces several
problems which the Council and the General Assembly have
already had many opportunites to discuss and on which
innumerable decisions have been taken. It is cIear, however,
10

South Africa. More precisely, Namibia and Rhodesia
represent for Pretoria outer defences for the protection of
the apartheid rhgime.

Africa belongs to the Africans themselves. Apartheid is a
rBgime doomed sooner or later to disappear. ln banking on
apartheid, those who have these economic interests are in
fact sacrificing, for the sake of immediate profit, much
longer lasting and much more secure advantages.

85. The accession to independence of Mozambique and
Angola and the beginning of 8n essentially revolutionary
movement in South Africa, in Namibia and in Zimbabwe
b.ave brought the situation in southern Africa to the
forefront of international affairs. The renewed interest that
has been shown recently in the quest for a settlement of the
Rhodesian problem is perhaps proof that the situation in
southern Africa has finally been viewed in its proper
perspective and is considered a danger to peace in the area.
We have already had occasion to applaud the moves that
were made at that time. We have stressed their merits and
have pointed out that we should judge them only by their
results. If those initiatives were to develop and lead to a
solution that would satisfy the aspirations of the African
majority, we should of course give this our whole-hearted
support.

89. Strategically speaking, certain Wes’tern countries make
no attempt to conceal their concern to prevent the
emergence in the countries of southern Africa of movements or Governments hostile to Western policy in a
general way. It is no secret that the Pretoria rkgime has
always proclaimed itself the representative and champion,
at the southern point of Africa, of Christian civilization and
the security of the Western world, May we be permitted to
say how disappointing that attitude is to us, in that it shows
that the most powerful of the world have really learned
nothing from all the experience of recent years. For, after
all, why should they always be at such pains to categorize
the liberation movements in the third-world
countries as
friends or enemies of the West? Can they not understand
that the Africans of Namibia, Rhodesia or South Africa
have but one goal: that of their own liberation, their own
dignity, the restoration of their own identity as peoples and
nations; and that, in order to achieve that goal, they are
ready to accept any assistance, from whatever source. They
do not want their freedom for the purpose of becoming
pro-western or anti-Western; they want their freedom above
all in order to be themselves, to be Africans, to be men.

86. But, having made that quite clear, we feel it our duty
to say and to repeat here that we are convinced that no
attempt can be made to solve the problems of Rhodesia and
Namibia without dealing directly with the problem of
apartheid. Moreover, it seems to us an illusion to imagine
that we could associate the representatives of Pretoria with
the settlement of the problems of southern Africa without
directly-whether
wittingly or unwittingly is another matter-giving a certain guarantee to the apartheid rBgime. And
not merely a guarantee, for how could the representatives
of Pretoria offer sincere co-operation in the search for a
solution to a crisis in which what 1s finally at stake is
nothing other than the very survival of the system of
apartheid or its disappearance?

90. The African countries have come once again to the
Security Council to ask it to live up to its responsibilities in
a situation the dangers of which they have ceaselessly
denounced, a situation which in their view constitutes an
imminent and grave threat to world peace. Like all the
members of the Council, we prefer peaceful solutions to
violent ones; we understand the virtues of patience and we
even find in our material weakness further reason to have
recourse to persuasion rather than threats or invective.
Throughout these years we have heard these appeals to
reason, even to resignation. But where does reason lie? Is it
in the tame acceptance of a situation unworthy
of any
self-respecting people? Indeed, has it not been necessary to
have new uprisings, new murders, new victims, and-why
not say it-the fear that the extension of these disorders
may endanger strategic positions or--sources of supply of
raw materials, in order,that the need to act should finally
become apparent? And not even to act decisively, to
provide a final cure to the ill, but to go on attempting to do
things “cm the cheap”, to preserve from the old system
those advantages that can be salvaged and thus to transform
what could have been the victory of civilization, of human
brotherhood, of the great ideals of our Organization into an
interminable succession of horse-trades without dignity and
probably without honour.

87. I am sure we shall be forgiven for once expressing our
puzzlement at the attitude of the Western Powers with
regard to the situation in southern Africa and our difficulty
in understanding the real reasons for what so manifestly
appears to be a flagrant contradiction between their
declared and confirmed condemnation of South African
policy and their individual or collective attitude as expressed in the relations they maintain with Pretoria.
88. We are aware of the important economic links
between South Africa and certain Western countries; we are
also aware of the assistance South Africa continues to
receive for the strengthening of its armaments and even for
the acquisition of nuclear power. We are in a good position
to know that those who are pursuing economic and
material interests are generally not much bothered by
idealistic or philanthropic considerations. Their deals with
the racist regime at Pretoria have, as we are aware, as their
sole purpose the guaranteeing of their profits and the
satisfaction of their greed. So, when we call upon them
today to reconsider their position and to check their
calculations, we have not the least Intention of attempting
to stir their feelings or of arousing in them any sympathy
-which would, in any case, come very late in the day-for
the Africans, We are calling upon them to display vision and
clear-sightedness in terms of their own interests and the
guarantee of any profits they may expect; for they should
not for a single moment doubt that the future of southern

91. The struggle against the system of apartheid, as we
have already said, embraces the settlement of problems
which arise from that system or are the consequence of the
system, in particular the problem of Namibia and that of
Zimbabwe, It is by taking action with regard to the very
regime that underlies these problems that WC shall be
embarking upon the course of their effective solution.
However that may be, this struggle, which is first and
11

96. I trust you will forgive me, Mr. President, for having
devoted so lengthy an introduction to you personally, but
in so doing I wanted to indicate the kinds of hopes that YOU
had aroused and, finally, how delicate your task was, even
though all Africans and all people that love peace and
justice, had taken a common stand on this question. We do
not doubt for a moment that you will live up to these
expectations and that the new Administration
that you
represent will do likewise.

foremost the struggle of Africans, has ceased to be
exclusively theirs, It is a struggle of the entire international
community. It represents a test of the will of our
Organization to remain faithful to its vocation and worthy
of its mission. This struggle is also-and everyone should
understand this clearly-a testing ground for all Governments, whatever their tendencies and whatever the size of
their responsibilities, a criterion for the measure of their
sincerity and their determination to carry out their commitments and to make their deeds match their words.

97. Some may be surprised to hear me speaking so
cheerfully in the Council at a time when my people and I
are in mourning and when my people is binding its wounds.
I should be shedding tears over the desolation wrought by
the wanton, barbaric aggression against my country. That
aggression is the work of bogymen, of ideology-mongers, of
mercenaries of a false latter-day crusade, of werewolves
masquerading as liberators. For he who arms a murderer is
himself a murderer, and indeed of the worst kind. Why?
Because he is a coward and a criminal working on the sly,
for he will not show his true face.

92. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the represen‘* tative of Zaire. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
93, Mr. UMBA DI LUTETE (Zaire) (ititerpretation from
As this is the first time, Sir, ihat I have had the
opportunity to speak before the Security Council in this
month of March, may I be allowed to join the previous
speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, For reasons
beyond our control, it has not been possible, in spite of our
desire to do so, to tell you personally how pleased my
delegation, like others, has been to see you assuming the
important and delicate functions of Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United
Nations. May I therefore take this opportunity to extend to
you our congratulations and best wishes.

Aznch):

98. If I have nevertheless been anxious to speak on this
question, it is because the situation in southern Africa is
not the kind of question on which one can remain silent or
to which one can be indifferent: it is too important and
serious a matter. I also wanted to show, at this decisive
moment, the closeness and solidarity which my people feels
with the masses in Azania, whose dignity and self-respect
have been wounded, because even if our respective persew
tutors belong to different camps, they are basically the
same because they are equally cynical; they are unprincipled and lawless.

94, It may perhaps be felt-and rightly so, I believe-that
the debate on this burning problem, coming as it does
under your presidency, could not be better timed. I say
that becuase, to our way of thinking, you represent a
certain image, a certain hope. Indeed, everyone here is
familiar with your record as a staunch and active militant of
the worthy cause of human dignity. We are all aware of the
personal interest you have constantly shown for the
problems of human rights, equality and human dignity.
Thus you have not only made your mark on the history of
civil rights in your country, but, in addition, you have
always taken an interest in the problems of our African
brothers who still live in ignominious bondage.

99. The problem of South Africa currently before the
Security Council was with us even before the days of the
United Nations. It is not something new. How many times
has this problem been taken up in the Security Council, the
General Assembly, and even in the specialized agencies?
And yet the problem remains intact. It may even be said
that, to a certain extent, the problem of southern Africa is,
with that of the Middle East, one of the two thorniest
problems that our Organization has ever had to deal with.
The fact that there has not yet been even a semblance of a
solution casts doubt on the prestige of the United Nations,
to such an extent that some even wonder, albeit somewhat
perfidiously, about the utility of the Organization, Perhaps
they forget that, in the end, the worth of the United
Nations is only the worth of its Members. If the Members
are not business-like, if they are not sincere, then we cannot
expect very much of the Organization.

95. As a member of Congress, you often went to Africa
for meetings of the African-American Institute, whose
debates have frequently focused on those problems. I
remember, in 1975, at the session at Kinshasa, when I was
presiding over some of the meetings, being much impressed
by your keen insight and by your passion for the right and
your idealism, not the blind passion or the idealism so
typical of the young, but rather the kind of passion and
idealism that betoken a nobility of spirit. I also remember,
at the end of last year, your going to Lesotho, on the very
threshold of the lion’s den of South Africa. Could anyone
express greater interest? Finally, at the beginning of this
year, when you had just assumed your present post, you
went to Africa, where you had a number of working
meetings with heads of African States on the problems of
southern Africa. So it is, Sir, that you not only are familiar
with the problems of southern Africa, but, what is more,
you know our aspirations, and certainly your convictions
are based on a solid foundation.

100. Nevertheless, at the end of last year the General
Assembly did have occasion to devote several plenary
meetings to these questions and a number of pertinent
resolutions on the subject were adopted. But since then, has
the problem of South Africa begun to be solved? Not at
all: on the contrary, it must be noted that South Africa is
more arrogant than ever, for it even dares to pose as the
guardian of Rhodesia.
101. In these circumstances, one wonders whether the
current Security Council debate is at all useful. One may
I2

also wonder whether the resolutions adopted will be
implemented in any way. I believe that, despite everything,
it is important, because the strength of the United Nations
is different from other types of strength, in that it is not
based on hired mercenaries or paid assassins; the United
Nations does not have any atomic bonbs or other weapons
of that kind. But at least the United Nations has a clear
conscience and is sure of having right on its side. Why?
Because it represents the universal conscience, which as the
representative of Algeria has just pointed out, unremittingly
condemns South Africa.

respecting the resolutions which we adopt after loud
debates in which we have often made the most noise?
Listening to us anyone would come to the conclusion that
we were all saints, and yet how often have we denounced
the practices of cer:ain States in co-operating or trading
with South Africa? Each time we have been answered by
cries of indignation and statements denying all contact with
South Africa. I think that we should condemn that policy
of duplicity and also denounce the convenient ploy, which
has frequently been used, of arguing that our official
Government has no contact with South Africa but that
private companies, by virtue of the very principle of
freedom, escape condemnation. I think that is a specious
and indeed scandalous argument.

102. But what has been lacking in past years, I believe, is
cohesion and unanimity in the Security Council, for the
reluctance on the part of some of the more prominent
members of the Council to condemn the South African
regime and to implement the sanctions which could have
weakened and isolated it, can only strengthen its stubbornness, arrogance and scorn.

107. Many of the States represented here have strict
legislation on drugs for example, and those who raise funds
for drug pedlars, when they are aware of the unlawful
activity, are considered accomplices and are thereby liable
to harsh penalties. I believe that the Security Council
should also adopt a resolution inviting States to enact
legislation banning not only the sale of arms to South
Africa but also any transfer of capital to that country,
because Iending money to South Africa, when one knows
that that money is going to be used to perpetuate
apartheid, is even more criminal, if anything, than financing
trade in drugs.

103. Hence, we believe the time has come for South
Africa no longer to be allowed to enjoy any protection that
might tend to perpetuate its wayward, sinister policies. I
say this because we have been encouraged by the intentions
so often expressed by President Carter to take a firm moral
stance in defence of human dignity and human rights.
Could one name any other country in the world where
human rights and human dignity were so disregarded and
flouted as in South Africa? It is understandable, in these
circumstances, that some have stressed that the problem at
present before us ln the Council could be a real test and
might answer our question of whether this moral stance in
defence of human dignity applies to the world as a whole or
whether it is a selective policy. Why? Because the draft
resolutions which will be presented to the Council will have
the aim not only of isolating South Africa but also of
safeguarding the dignity of the black man in South Africa.
Vorster and his clique of henchmen must be made to feel
that their regime is ostracized by the entire world.

108. South Africa is not only a signatory of the Charter
of the United Nations, which recognizes equal rights, but it
is also a signatory of the Inter-Allied Declaration of 12 June
1941, signed in London, which is generally considered to be
the first of the actions which led to the creation of the
United Nations. That Declaration affirmed in particular
that:
“The only true basis of enduring peace is the willing
co-operation of free peoples”-and
I stress “free peopies”-“in
a world in which, relieved of the menace of
aggression”, and I also stress “the menace of aggression”-“all may enjoy economic and social security.”

104. If South Africa has been able to pursue its brazen
policies, it is because it has always felt supported. It
receives highly sophisticated weapons, the better to defy
the United Nations, threaten and attack the independent
States of Africa and oppress the blacks who are its own
citizens. It receives various funds to promote the prosperity
of the minority which exploits the black majority.

We have inevitably found that everything that South Africa
does is the very antithesis of that commitment, and that
means that the leaders of that State can be neither excused
nor spared. Still less can they be encouraged in their
criminal enterprise.
109. Mr. President, I am confident in your presidency. I
have confidence in the members of the Security Council
and I hope that the draft resolutions which will be
introduced here will be not only unanimously adopted but
also implemented by all the members of the Council, above
all, the permanent members, and by all the Members of the
United Nations. To what must these resolutions finally
lead? Not only to the economic, political and military
embargo. They must also lead to the restoration of human
dignity in South Africa, the restoration of the rights of the
majority and the independence of Namibia.

105. We believe that now the time is ripe for the
unanimous adoption of the draft resolutions to be introduced by the African Group and the Group of Non-aligned
Countries in the Council. The result of those resolutions
must be the complete isolation of the barbarous regime of
Pretoria. A total economic, financial, oil and military
embargo must be imposed on South Africa.
106. However, it is not enough merely to condemn South
Africa. That is much too easy, It is too convenient. South
Africa, after all, is not even represented here. Minimum
honesty requires that we examine our own conscience and
engage in self criticism. To what degree are we, certain of
us-and not necessarily those who spring instantly to
mind-not also guilty of encouraging South Africa by not

110. The PRESIDENT: The final speaker is the representative of Indonesia, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
13

111. Mr. MARPAUNG (Indonesia): Mr. President, allow
me to congratulate you upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of March.
My delegation is hopeful that, under the leadership of a
diplomat known for a career dedicated to the advancement
of racial justice and hurllan welI-being, the Council will be
able to make progress in dealing with ‘the grave problem
represented by South Africa’s racial policies.

Africans have not been cowed by such repression, however.
The disturbances at Soweto last year sparked a chain of
demonstrations and a spirit of resistance among the
repressed majority of the South African people which has
since increased in strength and spread throughout the
country. Each week adds new names to the lists of martyrs
who have been killed by the police or have died while in
detention, Hundreds more are arrested and senter.ced to
long prison terms while the normal social and economic life
of the country is thrown into chaos.

112. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
the members of the Council for having invited my
delegation to participate in and make a modest contribution to this debate.

117. Despite this rising evidence of internal resistance to
its policies, the Pretoria rCgime has continued with its plan
to enforce apartheid in South Africa. The keystone of that
policy-the establishment of the system of bantustans
throughout the country-was once again condemned by the
General Assembly in resolution 31/6 A. It is significant that
no member of the international community has seen fit to
recognize the independence of the first of those wholly
artificial so-called homelands, the Transkei.

113. The situation in southern Africa as a whole and in
South Africa in particular has now entered a crisis stage,
both for the people of that region and for the members of
the international community. It has been 31 years since the
delegation of India raised the question of racial discrimination at the United Nations. Since that pioneering effort,
the international community has made it clear time and
again that the practice of racial discrimination in any form
whatsoever is repugnant to the generally accepted standards
of international conduct.

118. South Africa has been able to continue its policies of
oppression and violence solely because it has received
substantial economic support from certain members of the
international community. While many of those States
publicly condemn South African racial policies, they have
continued to trade with that country, providing it with the
essential economic underpinning for its odious social
structure. The representative of Mauritius, speaking in the
name of the President of the Organization of African Unity,
has provided the Council [1988th meeting] with a picture
of the growth of trade with South Africa which has taken
place during the last 20 years, the increase in economic
development and, particularly, the growth of the military
establishment. As he pointed out, a thirty-fold increase in
military expenditure has taken place in less than two
decades.

114. Despite the numerous resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council condemning
the practice of all forms of racial discrimination and despite
other international efforts to convince the Government of
South Africa to alter its policies, it has persisted stubbornly
in implementing its odious system of apartheid and in
relegating the vast majority of the people of South Africa
to the status of second-classcitizens. Its callous and obdurate
attitude has been responsible for inhuman suffering inflicted on untold millions of people for generations, That
policy has separated husbands from their wives and children
from their parents and has meant that black Africans are
treated as intruders in the very land of their birth-the
home of their ancestors for uninterrupted generations. In
short, as a result of that policy, black South Africans are
totally denied their basic and fimdaniental human rights.

119. While that large amount of trade and investment has
been responsible for considerable advances in the economic
well-being of white South Africans, its benefits have largely
been denied to the black majority in accordance with the
apartheid doctrines. It is a fact that that economic advance
has relied very heavily on foreign trade and investments. In
the light of this consideration, my delegation would like to
take this opportunity once again to urge the trading
partners of South Africa to use their influence to bring
about a change in its policies, Indeed, it is our view that
such nations have a special obligation to humanity at large
to do their utmost to induce the South African Government to accede to the just demands of the black majority.

115. The Indonesian people, as a people which once
suffered three and a half centuries of colonialist oppression
and racial discrimination, deeply sympathize with the plight
of the South African people, In our view, the violation of
their fundamental rights and dignity constitutes an assault
upon the rights and dignity of human kind, It should
therefore be universally opposed, In this context, it seems
important to my delegation to emphasize the fact that the
demands of the people of South Africa are indeed very
moderate ones. They simply desire their basic right to be
free, free from oppression and from starvation. They simply
desire their elementary right to live as human beings and to
control their own destinies, a right which has been
recognized as a fundamental principle of justice and equity
throughout the world and one upon which this Organization is founded.

120. In this connexion, we must ask ourselves why it is
that a violation of the human rights of 10 or 15 people in
certain countries can raise an international outcry, while far
more extreme violations and more inhuman oppression
affecting 20 million black people in South Africa are
invisible to the Pretoria rigime’s trading partners. Is it
because of the black skin of the victims? Is it because the
oppressors and their supporters in foreign countries share
the same skin colour? Why should it be so difficult to
apply the same criteria to all people regardless of their race,
colour or creed? Whatever the reason, the international

116. Nevertheless, the South African r6gime has persisted
in its policy of oppression and in its refusal to countenance
the just demands of the black majority. Increasing resistance has been met by even more repression. Black South
14

community can no longer accept the application of such an
odious double standard where the fundamental human
rights of the black majority in South Africa are concerned.

zation]. Moreover, thosetroops have committed aggression
againstpeacefulneighbouringcountries. No objectiveobserver can fail to conclude that these activities representa
preparation for war againstthe unarmed black population
of Namibia, recogLzed as the rightful owners of the
Territory by the membersof the international community,
at least in speeches
and statementsat the United Nations.

121. It is important to recognize, in the view of my
delegation, that the situation in Namibia and Zimbabwe is
inseparably linked with that in South Africa and that it
arises from the same racist and colonialist mentality that
has conceived and fostered the odious system of apartheid
itself. It has been Pretoria’s aid and support alone which
have made the perpetuation of racist and colonialist
practicespossiblein Southern Rhodesia;it hasbeen South
Africa’s racist ideology and economic interest which have
sustainedits illegal occupation of Namibia.
122. The violence and massiverepressionwhich South
Africa has practised against its black population have also
been extended to the peoplesof Namibia and Zimbabwe.
Recognizing this, the General Assembly revoked South
Africa’s Mandate over Namibia in its resolution
214.5(XXI) and assumed direct responsibility for the
Uaited Nations in the administration of the Territory.
Although this resolution’s validity hasbeen reaffirmed on
many occasionsby the Security Council, as well asby the
International Court of Justice in its Advisory Opinion of
1971,4 South Africa has never compliedwith its provisions;
it adamantly refusesto withdraw from the Territory and
continuesto implement its policies of repressionand racial
discriminationthere. Through the years, those’policieshave
included arbitrary arrests, imprisonment and judicial
murder of freedom fighters and civil rights leaders who
representthe genuine aspirationsof the Namibian people.
Even women and children have been imprisoned and
tortured. The illegal occupying rBgimehas also sought to
imposeits systemof bantustansupon the Territory, seeking
to fragment its people and their land and thereby consolidate its illegal rule through the use of classiccolonialist
tactics. Recently it has pursued this aim through the
convening of a sham“constitutional conference”, which is
designedto rubber-stamp the decisionsof the occupying
rkgime.

124. The situation in Zimbabwe is equally serious.Since
its illegal unilateral declaration of independencein 1965,
the Smith rigime has managed to survive despite the
condemnation of the international community and the
sanctionsvoted by the Council, largely becauseof the vital
aid with which it hasbeen suppliedby the South African
Government. All its essentialimports of military equipment
and the bulk of its exports have moved through South
Africa. At varioustimes, South Africa has providedmilitary
personnel to assist the Smith rBgime in its repressive
policies. In addition, members of the South African
Government have on various occasionsvoiced the threat of
intervening in the situation in Rhodesia should the
Zimbabwe freedom fighters gain the upper hand. As recent
reports make clear, that eventuality is growing more
probable with each passingday, as the freedom fighters
increasetheir forays into every part of the Territory. The
Smith regimehaslaunchedattacks, alsowith South African
aid, on the territories and populations of peacefulneigh”
bouring States. Those acts representan additional distinct
and growing threat to the peaceand security of southern
Africa, stemmingdirectly from the racist and colonialist
policy pursued by the Pretoria rkgime. As many speakers
have pointed out, the problemwhich confronts the Council
at this critical juncture is thus a much broader one than
that of the apartheidsystemalone.
125. The consequencesof a failure on the part of the
international community to act in the face of suchthreats
can only be of the most seriousnature. At the very least,it
would mean a long period of protracted war betweenthe
black majority and their oppressors.We already seethe
beginningsof such a struggleby the people of Zimbabwe.
Should such a conflict assumefull-scale proportionsin all
three countries, the human suffering and bloodshedwould
be horrible indeed. Even more sobering,however,is the
prospect that a desperateand defeated South Africa might
resort to the useof the most terrible weaponsof modern
warfare with literally unimaginableconsequences.
It is
therefore imperative that the international community take
stepsto end this dangerat once, for the time availablefor
action is very short.

123. The list of the South African rdgime’s crimeshas
beenrepeatedso often in this chamberthat we know it by
heart and become sick after each sessionon apartheid,
Namibiaand Zimbabwe. I have no intention of torturing us
much longer, but must mention that in addition to the
foregoing measures,the Pretoria rCgime has instituted a
massivemilitary buildup in Namibia. Reliable sources
report that South Africa has substantially reinforced its
troops already stationed in Namibia. Those troops are
provided with the most modern weaponsof war, aswe11as
126. In accordancewith the provisions of ChapterVII of
with undergroundbunkers and aircraft hangars.A no man’s
the Charter, the Security Council is empoweredto impose
zone has been created in the northern part of Namibia
mandatory economic sanctions in such cases.We have
wherethousandsof innocent peoplehave beendriven from
already noted the vulnerability of the South African
their homesand land in order to permit the illegal r&&me t0
economy to suchmeasures.
In view of the PretoriarCgime’s
strengthenits hold on the Territory by cutting off the flow
unaltered refusal to comply with the decisionsof the
of aid to the freedom fighters in Namibia under the
international community, my delegationwishesto take this
leadershipof SWAP0 [South WestAfrica People’sorganiopportunity to urge the Councilmost strongly to take such
action, as an appropriate responseto this obdurate de4 Legal Consequellces for States of the Continued Presence of
fiance. In addition to that, we should like to urge the
Sout/, Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
members
of the Council to consider seriously the imposiSecurity
Council Resolution
276 (1970), Advisory Opinion* Lc*Jtion
of
an
arms embargo against South Africa as an
Reports 1971, p. 16.
15

appropriate means of stemming the rising tide of violence
and killing, which has already afflicted a number of
peaceful neighbouring States, In my delegation’s view, it is
imperative that the Council take action now to avert a crisis
which possessesthe potential for developing into a conflagration which could spread even beyond the borders of the
African continent itself, It is only by decisive action that
such a disaster can be prevented.
127. For its part, the Government of Indonesia will
steadfastly continue to provide moral and material support
to the struggling people of South Africa. In this connexion,
I should like to quote from the messagesent by President
Suharto of Indonesia to the Secretary-General and the

16

Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid on
the occasion of the International Day for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination:
“On behalf of the Indonesian people, and on my own
behalf, I reaffirm this historic commitment to the cause
of freedom and racial equality, and express their deter.
mination to continue to assist those oppressed by racism
and colonialism until the last vestiges of those twin evilq
..”
are efadicated from the face of the earth.“5
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
5 See A/AC.llS/L.462.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world,
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS
may
your

PURLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Uniee sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondc enticr. Informer-vous
aupr&a de votre libraire
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Gcneve.

M3ffaHHfl

OprFMIE3aUHli

am-tax
sameM

Litho

,,

i

in United

Nations,

06%2JJHH,?HHbIx

Halraft

MOW40

KynHTb

I-IayllB,

n arenrcrnax
so ncex pahonax
~lipft.
H~~BORHTE
Cnp&nKH
xmm~oM
hlara3nne
tinti ~I~ILIHT~
no anpecy:
Oprartusaqus
Cf3KqHfI
II0
nponaHte
laajqamii?, ~b&o-l%prC
Wnn Xetiena.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

B

et lea agencea
ou adreesen-voua

KHHWHblX
06

M&l-&UDA&HHIIX

n

O@benkttteHHbIx

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de 1~s Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en Was
partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventns, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New

in other

York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

77.70001-Jnnuary

1978-2,200
