S/2017/541

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 June 2017
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the fortieth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as
from other Syrian and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 31 May 2017.
Box 1
Key points in May 2017
(1) On 4 May, Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Russian Federation and Turkey
signed a memorandum on the creation of four de-escalation areas, where hostilities
between the conflicting parties are to cease (including the use of aerial assets). It
aims to facilitate rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access and create
conditions for the voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
(2) Only three inter-agency cross-line convoys were deployed in May. Of those,
only one, a convoy to Duma on 2 May, deployed to a besieged area.
(3) Evacuations out of the Wa‘r district in Homs city were completed on 21 May.
Since a local agreement between Government and non-State armed opposition
groups to evacuate reached on 13 March, a total of 13 rounds of evacuation took
place; around 20,000 persons left the district, with most going to Aleppo and Idlib.
(4) The Syrian Democratic Forces, supported by the international counter-ISIL
coalition led by the United States of America, continued the advance towards
Raqqah city amid heavy air strikes and increased ground fighting, reaching an area
within five km of Raqqah city by 31 May.

17-10012 (E) 280617

*1710012*

S/2017/541

(5) On 7 May, the United Nations resumed life-saving humanitarian assistance at
the berm between the Syrian Arab Republic and Jordan with a second aid
distribution cycle. Throughout the month of May, food and essential items have
been delivered to approximately 27,600 individuals in the Rukban community in
preparation for the summer months.

II. Major developments
3.
At a high-level meeting convened in Astana on 3 and 4 May, Iran (Islamic
Republic of) the Russian Federation and Turkey signed a memorandum on the
creation of four de-escalation areas, where hostilities between the conflicting parties
are to cease (including the use of aerial assets). One of the aims of the memorandum
is to facilitate rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access and create conditions
for the voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons. At the same
time, the fight against Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Nusrah Front
is to continue both within and outside the de-escalation areas. The four areas
identified are (a) Idlib governorate and certain parts of neighbouring Ladhiqiyah,
Hama and Aleppo governorate, (b) parts of northern rural Homs governorate,
(c) eastern Ghutah in Rif Dimashq, and (d) certain parts of southern Syria (Dar‘a
and Qunaytirah governorates). An expert-level joint working group on de-escalation
was formed among the guarantors to map the de-escalation areas, separate the
moderate armed opposition groups from terrorist groups, and resolve remaining
operational issues. The joint working group met in Ankara on 18 May and again on
24 and 25 May.
4.
Following the agreement of the memorandum, on 4 May, violence decreased in
the areas likely to be included in de-escalation areas. Hostilities in Dar‘a, despite its
status as a de-escalation area, increased during the month. In addition, some military
activities continued to be reported inside and outside d e-escalation areas throughout
the reporting period. Air strikes and artillery shelling were reported in the
governorates of Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Hama, Dar‘a, Qunaytirah, Aleppo, Idlib,
Homs and Ladhiqiyah.
5.
At the same time as some areas saw a de-escalation, anti-ISIL operations
appear to have intensified in eastern parts of the country. Pro-government forces,
non-State armed opposition groups, Syrian Democratic Forces led by the Kurdish
People’s Protection Units and the United States-led international coalition to
counter ISIL all continued their offensives against ISIL targets in Raqqah, Homs and
Dayr al-Zawr governorates. On 18 May, the United States military struck a convoy
of Government forces and allied militias that was moving towards Tanf, near the
Syrian Arab Republic’s border with Iraq and Jordan. United States officials
described this as a defensive action while the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic strongly criticized it as a violation of its sovereignty.
6.
Local agreements between the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
non-State armed opposition groups in besieged areas continued to be reached and
implemented throughout the month of May. The United Nations has not been
involved in the negotiations, agreements or subsequent evac uations surrounding
these local agreements. Some of the initiatives raise concerns owing to the reported
absence of adequate consultation with the civilian populations living in areas
covered by such agreements and the reported lack of adequate safety and security
guarantees and procedures to protect the rights of those affected.

2/19

17-10012

S/2017/541

Figure I
Key dates in May 2017

7.
Following a local agreement between the Government and non-State armed
opposition groups in the Wa‘r district in Homs city on 13 March, 13 evacuations
were conducted, with a total of 19,822 persons evacuated from Wa‘r district to
Aleppo and Idlib governorates and to northern rural Homs during the period
between 13 March and 21 May. After completion of those evacuations on 21 May,
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic assumed full control of the district.
Since the conclusion of the evacuations, a few d ozen evacuees have returned from
Jarabulus to Wa‘r, citing dire humanitarian conditions.
Box 2
The berm between the Syrian Arab Republic and Jordan
(1) Since 2012, small numbers of Syrians have fled to Rukban and Hadalat along
Jordan’s north-eastern border with the Syrian Arab Republic (referred to as the
berm). More Syrians began seeking to cross into north -eastern Jordan around
September 2015, as aerial bombardments intensified across the country; pressure
peaked at the berm in May 2016, when over 100,000 people were estimated to be
amassing between the two locations. There are currently an estimated 60,000 people
present in the area.
(2) Following an attack on the border guard post at Rukban on 21 June 2016, the
Government of Jordan sealed the border and declared the entire north -eastern border
region as a closed military zone with no civilian access. Supplies of water continued
largely uninterrupted, with the provision of an average of 1 3.2 l per person per day
at Rukban. In August 2016, a one-off delivery of humanitarian assistance was
agreed upon, delivered by crane. Following further discussions, the resumption of
the delivery of humanitarian assistance was permitted in November 2016, thro ugh a
newly set-up distribution area. That distribution was completed on 12 January 2017.
(3) Planning for the next cycle of aid distributions was met with a series of
logistical, administrative and security challenges and did not resume until 7 May,
when the delivery of life-saving humanitarian assistance restarted at the berm.
Throughout the month of May, food and essential items have been delivered to
approximately 27,600 individuals in Rukban in preparation for the summer months.
The construction of a new water station and pipe network has been completed and is
scheduled to become operational in the coming weeks.

17-10012

3/19

S/2017/541

(4) In addition, a United Nations health clinic set up in December 2016 continues
to receive and treat the most vulnerable medical cases, as well as assisting with
referrals inside Jordan. Since its opening, and up to the end of May, 4,093
consultations have been conducted at the clinic and 236 cases were referred to
hospitals in Jordan for further specialized treatment. Furthermore, betwee n 27 May
and 2 June, an emergency vaccination campaign took place, covering 10,592
children. The number of patients admitted for services at the health clinic was
reduced in recent weeks owing to increased security concerns.
(5) Planning is now under way for the next cycle of aid distributions, after the Eid
celebrations at the end of Ramadan.
8.
Local agreements were also reached between the Government and non -State
armed opposition groups in eastern Damascus, adjacent to eastern Ghutah (which is
one of the four de-escalation areas), in Barzah on 7 May, in Tishrin on 11 May and
in Qabun on 13 May. Between 8 and 29 May, 9,774 people were evacuated from
those districts to Idlib. The Government subsequently assumed full control of those
areas. On 8 May, around 70 persons, including 20 patients, were evacuated from
al-Yarmouk camp in southern Damascus to Idlib. In exchange, on the same day, five
patients and 14 family members were evacuated from the besieged towns of Fu‘ah
and Kafraya in the northern countryside of Idlib.
9.
The Syrian Democratic Forces, supported by the United States of America -led
international counter-ISIL coalition, continued their advance towards Raqqah city
amidst heavy air strikes and increased ground fighting in the we stern and eastern
countryside of Raqqah. By 31 May, the Forces were within five km of Raqqah city.
The Forces’ advances towards Raqqah city displaced an estimated 100,000 people
during the month of May. As the fighting draws closer to Raqqah city, vital ci vilian
infrastructure continues to be affected, with reports of attacks on education
facilities.
10. Many of the displaced are moving north of Raqqah city or towards the Ayn Isa
transit centre and further on to other camps. There have been concerns over th e
action taken by the local authorities at the transit site, where displaced people are
reportedly having their identification documents taken from them while they are
being processed at the camps and not being granted freedom of movement. The
United Nations and its partners are responding to provide humanitarian assistance to
people displaced to those areas north of Raqqah city, where access is allowed.
11. Fighting in early May to the east of Tabaqah has also resulted in displacement,
although many who were displaced have started to return. It is estimated that about
35,000 people are currently residing in Tabaqah town, compared to 80,000 before
the fighting. Local authorities have prevented newly displaced persons arriving from
the north from entering the city, citing security concerns. Many are staying in tents
or open areas outside of the town. Humanitarian partners are responding with food
distributions, but protection concerns, relating to mine contamination in particular,
remain high.
12. On 1 and 2 May, extremist groups attacked the Rajm al-Salibi site in Hasakah
governorate, near the border with Iraq, resulting in 22 deaths and 35 injuries. Rajm
al-Salibi is used as a screening site for Iraqi refugees and Syrian internally displaced
persons before their relocation to Al-Hol camp for internally displaced persons.
13. Following the progress achieved towards de-escalation in early May, my
Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, convened the Syrian parties for a sixth
round of intra-Syrian negotiations, held in Geneva from 16 to 19 May. During that
round, the Special Envoy initiated technical consultations to more deeply explore
4/19

17-10012

S/2017/541

legal and constitutional issues relating to a political transition. Technical
consultations were held between experts from the Office of the Special Envoy and
experts designated by the negotiating delegations to the intra -Syrian talks. In
parallel, the Special Envoy engaged with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board on
modalities for the technical consultations; after the talks, th e Special Envoy held
intensive discussions with civil society organizations, from 22 to 24 May.
Protection
14. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians in
significant numbers. As in the past, the high level of civilian casualties remains a
strong indication that violations of the prohibition on launching indiscriminate
attacks and of the principles of proportionality and precaution in and against the
effects of attack are ongoing. Children have been particularly affected by the
fighting and, in some incidents, constituted the majority of the casualties.
15. Fighting continued to affect civilian infrastructure, including medical
personnel and facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. Based on
information received by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), civilian casualties in possible violati on of international
humanitarian law occurred in various governorates (see annex). OHCHR
documented alleged incidents by many parties to the conflict, including Government
forces and their allies, non-State armed opposition groups and Security Councildesignated terrorist groups.
16. The United States Department of Defense publicly confirmed that in May, the
United States-led coalition carried out 585 strikes against ISIL targets in the
governorates of Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah, Homs and Raqqah. More than two thirds of
those strikes were reported to have been in Raqqah governorate (with the vicinity of
Raqqah city hit every day of the month), and over a quarter in the governorate of
Dayr al-Zawr. On 25 May, the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) announced that the body would become a full member of the
international coalition, adding that NATO surveillance planes would help improve
airspace management.
17. The Russian Federation publicly confirmed that they conducted strikes in Ma y,
with the Ministry of Defence stating in a 31 May briefing that they had fired cruise
missiles on ISIL objects in the vicinity of Tadmur (Palmyra). The Ministry
reportedly briefed the media that they had also carried out air strikes on ISIL targets
travelling from Raqqah city to Tadmur (Palmyra).
18. The United Nations and health partners received credible reports of eight
attacks that affected medical facilities and personnel throughout the month of May.
Of those, five have been verified to date. Of the five verified attacks, four occurred
on health-care facilities providing trauma treatment in rural Damascus, Homs, Hama
and Dar‘a. Collectively, the attacks resulted in the killing of at least two medical
staff and wounding of at least 18 people, including three medical staff. One attack
was registered against the Ibn Sina psychiatric hospital in Rural Damascus. Some
departments of the hospital were partially damaged and four female patients were
killed, while 17 patients and one nurse were injured.
19. Educational facilities continued to be affected as well. On 18 May 2017, ISIL
fighters entered and used the Aqarib elementary school, 15 km north -east of
Salamiyah city, Hama governorate, during a clash with Government forces.

17-10012

5/19

S/2017/541

Humanitarian access
Box 3
Key points for humanitarian access
(1) With a convoy to Duma on 2 May, one besieged area was reached through
United Nations inter-agency cross-line operations in May, beyond Dayr al-Zawr
(reached through airdrops). A total of two inter-agency convoys deployed in May
reached two hard-to-reach areas, namely, Wadi Barada on 6 May and Jayrud on
22 May. Removal of medical supplies from the convoys remains a major challenge,
with supplies sufficient for 90,827 people removed in May.
(2) As of the end of May, the United Nations had reached some 266,750 people
under the April/May convoy plan, which constitutes 25 per cent of the 1,066,650
beneficiaries originally requested to be reached. Other inter -agency convoys could
not proceed owing to a lack of approvals, including the lack of facilitation lett ers by
the Syrian authorities; fighting and insecurity; and other restrictions after initial
approvals.
(3) During the reporting period, some 1,243,572 beneficiaries were assisted by the
United Nations and partners via cross-border operations from Turkey and Jordan.
(4) The United Nations and partners continue to respond to the humanitarian
impact of fighting and insecurity in north-eastern Syria. While they are reaching
hundreds of thousands in these governorates, restrictions by local authorities on the
ground continued to hinder response efforts in May, including by causing difficulties
in getting supplies to the area.
20. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting
conflict lines, administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions on the
movement of people and goods by the parties to the conflict.
21. Access for the United Nations to those living in besieged and hard -to-reach
locations remains a critical concern. Three United Nations inter -agency convoys
were dispatched to besieged and hard-to-reach locations in May (see table 4 for the
list of inter-agency convoys in May). Convoys to other besieged and hard -to-reach
areas, including those approved under the April-May inter-agency convoy plan,
were unable to proceed as a result of fighting and insecurity, administrative delays
by the Syrian authorities and restrictions applied by non -State armed opposition
groups.
22. During the reporting period, United Nations agencies also undertook single agency cross-line deliveries to hard-to-reach locations or reached those locations
through their regular programmes. Meanwhile, both international and Syrian
non-governmental organizations continued to undertake needs assessments and
provide support (including medical, education, psychosocial and protection
services) in besieged and hard-to-reach locations, under extremely challenging
circumstances and in accordance with humanitarian principles.

6/19

17-10012

S/2017/541

Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations: percentage of
people reached each month in besieged areas, including via airdrops to Dayr
al-Zawr city

7

100%

Number of besieged
areas reached this year

80%

Convoys
60%

Airdrops
40%

20%

0%

January

February

March

April

May

23. A combination of insecurity, deliberate interference and restrictions by the
parties to the conflict continued to prevent aid delivery. The majority of United
Nations agencies and the majority of United Nations partners continue to be unable
to access populations in need in areas of the country controlled by ISIL, as all plans
to deliver assistance to these areas have been suspended as a result of their inability
to work independently and monitor activities. This has prevented the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners from reaching Raqqah city and most of Dayr al -Zawr
governorate, as well as pockets of northern rural Aleppo, southern rural Hasakah
and north-western rural Hama.
24. Meanwhile, restrictions continue to be imposed by non -State armed opposition
groups and other local actors. For example, humanitarian organizations have
reported challenges in obtaining approvals from local authorities in Kurdish controlled areas in the north-east of the country, causing delays to programming.
This included the local authorities denying requests by the World Food Programme
(WFP) and International Organization for Migration (IOM) to deliver assistance to
people in Hasakah governorate, as the authorities requested that all aid be redirected
to support the response in Raqqah governorate. As a result, WFP was only able to
deliver food for 18,750 people out of the 192,500 people they had planned to reach.
25. At the same time, humanitarian access for Turkey-based cross-border partners
into Idlib governorate is also reportedly continuing to face more challenges, as
non-State armed opposition groups, as well as groups designated as terrorist groups
by the Security Council, are placing demands on non-governmental organizations
operating in the governorate. Those organizations face registration requirements
and/or are being requested to provide information on staffing, logistics and finances.
The demands are not being applied consistently and have led some organizations to
scale down or even temporarily suspend their operations, pending a resolution of
such issues.

17-10012

7/19

S/2017/541

Figure III
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations (May 2017)

195,725 people reached

XL
People reached in

People reached in

People reached in

hard-to-reach areas

besieged areas

priority cross-line

74,250

121,475

areas

0

1.9 %

19.5 %

1 13

People reached in
hard-to-reach areas

People reached in
besieged areas

Besieged locations
reached

Cross-line convoys

Airlifts

Airdrops

3

53

20

of

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas:
3.9 million
Number
624,500

of

people

in

besieged

areas:

26. Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for over 90,000
treatments were removed from convoys in May. The details of the treatments and
supplies removed are given in table 2. Additional medical supplies were scheduled
to be delivered as part of the monthly inter-agency convoy plan, but only three
convoys were able to proceed. Furthermore, since the beginning of 2017, the World
Health Organization has submitted nine single-agency requests to the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic to access 14 locations in five governorates. The
Government approved two requests, six requests remain unanswered and one
request has been rejected.
Table 2
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys in May 2017

8/19

Location

Number of treatments

Type of supplies

Jayrud

18 151

Pneumonia type A and B kits, intravenous
therapy used for fluid replacement, latex
examination gloves, anticholinergic and
antispasmodic drugs, bronchodilators,
different types of antibiotics,
anti-inflammatory treatments and synthetic
corticosteroids

Wadi Barada

53 948

Pneumonia type A and B kits, bronchodilators,
antibiotic and analgesic treatments, and
antipyretic drugs

17-10012

S/2017/541
Location

Number of treatments

Type of supplies

Duma

18 628

Pneumonia type A and B kits, defibrillator,
clear water kit with filter, anti-epileptic drugs,
sterilizers, basic X-ray, ventilator for adults,
intravenous therapy used for fluid
replacement, anti-inflammatory treatments,
synthetic corticosteroids, anticholinergic and
antispasmodic drugs, and latex examination
gloves

27. The United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for April and May requested
access to 28 locations, including besieged areas, aiming to reach 1,066,650 people.
Access to 764,950 beneficiaries was approved, representing 71.7 per cent out of a
total of 1,066,650 beneficiaries to whom access had been requested. Nine locations
were approved in full, while 13 locations were approved with either a lower number
of beneficiaries in need than those identified by the United Nations, or without the
number of beneficiaries who might be reached having been specified. Access was
denied to six locations, comprising over 132,000 people. As of the end of May, the
team had reached some 266,750 people with six convoys, representing 28 per cent
of the people requested in the plan. Convoys to other approved locations in the plan
could not be dispatched in April or May owing to non -approval by the Syrian
authorities at the outset, as well as insecurity and fighting and delays with the
issuance of facilitation letters in some instances.
28. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency convoys
during the reporting period. For example, during the month of May, WFP submitted
1,795 official requests to obtain facilitation letters to transport food assistance to
targeted locations across the country, the vast majority of which are for regularly
accessible areas. Of those, three requests did not receive approval or response from
the relevant authorities, preventing the delivery of food assistance for 10,000
people. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) submitted requests for 42 facilitation letters for the movement of
non-food items and livelihood kits within the Syrian Arab Republic, mostly to areas
accessible under regular programming. 40 of those were approved, while two were
rejected for security reasons. The United Nations Population Fund in Syria reached
12,874 people in hard-to-reach and besieged areas, with protection support.
29. The Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing in Hasakah governorate has been temporarily
closed by the Turkish authorities since 27 December 2015 because of security
concerns. This has interrupted land deliveries of United Nations humanitarian
assistance to Hasakah governorate through borders surrounding the governorate.
Hasakah governorate also remains largely inaccessible by road for United Nations
agencies from within the Syrian Arab Republic owing to insecurity and the presence
of ISIL along the routes. However, the road from Aleppo through Manbij to
Hasakah has reopened for commercial traffic. While discussions continue to identify
a land route for life-saving United Nations aid, the United Nations continues airlifts
from Damascus to Qamishli airport to deliver multisectoral assistance.
Humanitarian response
30. In May, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach
millions of people in need through all modalities from within the Syria n Arab
Republic and across its borders (see table 3). In addition to the United Nations and
partners, non-governmental organizations also continued to deliver life -saving
assistance to people in need. The Government continued to provide basic services to
17-10012

9/19

S/2017/541

areas under its control as well as in many areas beyond its control. Local authorities
in many areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continued to
provide services when possible.
Table 3
Number of people reached by the United Nations and other organizations in
May 2017
Organization

Number of people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Organization for Migration

47 688
1 807 515

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

297 046

United Nations Children’s Fund

>4 500 000

United Nations Development Programme

1 811 402

United Nations Population Fund

267 787

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East

198 838

World Food Programme

3 650 000

World Health Organization

1 018 973

31. During the reporting period, cross-border deliveries continued from Turkey
and Jordan into the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (see figure IV for details). In line
with those Security Council resolutions, the United Nations notifi ed the Syrian
authorities in advance of each shipment, including content, destination and number
of beneficiaries. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab
Republic continued its operations, monitoring 501 trucks used in 20 convoys by
seven United Nations entities in May, confirming the humanitarian nature of each
and notifying the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Mechanism continued
to benefit from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
Figure IV
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners per
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, May 2017
(Thousands)

1,001

16
Nutrition

37

121

68

Water, sanitation Non-food items
and hygiene

Food

Health

32. Inter-agency convoys completed in May 2017 are listed in table 4 below. In
total, the United Nations undertook three inter-agency convoys during the reporting
month, all part of the April and May inter-agency convoy plan. In May, WFP carried
10/19

17-10012

S/2017/541

out 20 high-altitude airdrop rotations, airdropping food rations sufficient for 51,475
people as well as supplies from other humanitarian actors. In May, the logistics
cluster conducted 53 airlift rotations to Qamishli, airlifting a total of 1,516 tons of
WFP food and other supplies on behalf of other humanitarian actors. This enabled
WFP to provide food assistance for 34,980 people in parts of Hasakah and Raqqah
governorates.
Table 4
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys: May 2017
Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries
reached

Date

Location

Type of assistance

2 May

Duma

75 000

70 000

Multisectoral

6 May

Wadi Barada

30 000

30 000

Multisectoral

22 May

Jayrud, Nasriyeh and Atanah

44 250

44 250

Multisectoral

33. The second cross-border polio campaign was conducted from 29 April to
11 May 2017, targeting children under the age of 5 in accessible areas in Idlib,
Ladhiqiyah, Aleppo and Homs. The total number of children vaccinated by bivalent
oral polio vaccine was 659,253. The accelerated implementation of routine
immunization campaign, in collaboration with Médecins sans frontières Spain,
began on 13 May in Aleppo, for 10 days. A total of 81,736 children were vaccinated.
A national vaccination campaign against measles was also conducted from inside
the Syrian Arab Republic during the period from 21 to 25 May, reaching over
1.5 million children in 12 governorates. The United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) vaccinated 8,560
Palestine refugee children against measles through its clinics as part of this
campaign.
34. During May, UNICEF provided nutrition services for over 260,000 children
and pregnant and lactating mothers through regular programming and cross -border
and inter-agency cross-line operations. Nutrition services included preventive,
therapeutic and supplementary interventions, including screening and treatment for
cases of moderate and severe acute malnutrition.
35. For the fourth consecutive year, UNRWA supported 297 grade 9, and 82 grade
12 Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic and Syrian students from
Lebanon and Yarmouk to take their national examinations, on 14 May and 30 May,
respectively. During the two-week examination period, UNRWA provided the young
refugees with lodging and food, medical consultations, cash assistance, study
sessions, psychosocial support and counselling, and recreational activities. The
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) is also providing support to children
from hard-to-reach and besieged areas in order for them to sit their national
examinations. A total of 4,657 children coming from hard -to-reach areas in Hama,
Hasakah and Ladhiqiyah were supported by UNICEF with education bursaries to sit
for the grade 9 national examinations.
36. Throughout the month, the Russian Federation sent information bulletins to
the United Nations from the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in
the Syrian Arab Republic, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance.
Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms of
humanitarian assistance.

17-10012

11/19

S/2017/541

Visas and registrations
37. A total of 34 new visa requests were submitted to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic in May. Of those, 13 applications were approved, 1 was
rejected and 20 remain pending. A total of 18 new visa requests submitted in earlier
months were approved in May, while 2 were rejected. A total of 57 visa renewal
requests were submitted in May, of which 36 requests were approved and 21 remain
pending. A further 19 visa renewals submitted in earlier months were also approved,
while 2 remain pending.
38. A total of 21 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to operate in the country. Four
international non-governmental organizations are in the process of completing
registration. Those organizations continued to face a series of administrative hurdles
and restrictions that affect their ability to operate, including in gaining permission to
undertake independent needs assessments. Some 217 national non-governmental
organizations are authorized by the Syrian Arab Republic to partner with the United
Nations.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
39. On 7 May, five improvised explosive devices were remotely detonated on the
highway between Suwayda’ and Damascus in the Lahithah area and damaged a
civilian bus, causing a number of injuries. As a result, a mission by the Suwayda’
field office of UNHCR, to Damascus, was postponed and all staff were advised to
avoid using public transportation between Suwayda’ and Damascus until further
notice.
40. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 21 staff members of the United Nations, 17 of wh om were UNRWA
staff members, 65 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and eight staff members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. In
addition, many staff members of international and national non -governmental
organizations are reported to have been killed. A total of 29 United Nations staff
members, including 1 UNDP staff member and 28 UNRWA staff members, are
detained or currently missing.

III. Observations
41. The signature of the memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas on
4 May created an opportunity to improve the situation of many civilians in the
Syrian Arab Republic. While the exact boundaries have not been identified, the
de-escalation areas include all besieged areas, except Dayr al-Zawr (besieged by
ISIL). It is critical that de-escalation succeeds and that we see a sustained calm in
these areas. I am mindful that the guarantors’ efforts have resulted in a reduction of
violence in the areas identified. This must be further expanded and should not lead
to escalation of violence in other parts of the country. The creation of de -escalation
areas must also result in a sustained increase in humanitarian access. Such an
increase was not seen in May.
42. If implemented, the memorandum agreed on 4 Ma y has the potential to
solidify the 30 December 2016 ceasefire, facilitate unhindered humanitarian access
to millions of civilians in the de-escalation areas and create an enabling
environment for negotiations to achieve a political settlement of the Syria n conflict
based on resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of June 2012. The

12/19

17-10012

S/2017/541

de-escalation areas could serve to build trust among the conflicting sides and
prepare the ground for progress in the political negotiations.
43. The United Nations stands ready to support the guarantors in the
implementation of the memorandum, with a view to alleviating the suffering of the
Syrian people and ensuring the implementation of the memorandum in line with
relevant Security Council resolutions and international humanitarian and human
rights law. The establishment of the de-escalation areas should also be accompanied
by other confidence-building measures, including, as a matter of priority, measures
regarding the issue of detainees.
44. Despite the reduction in fighting in many areas following the agreement, I
remain deeply troubled by the situation on the ground for many civilians who suffer
from the ongoing conflict. Explosive weapons continue to be fired into populated
areas, not only indiscriminately killing and injuring people, but also destroying and
damaging vital infrastructure. I continue to reiterate my call for the situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International Criminal Court. I also call
on all Member States to support the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011.
45. I am particularly concerned for those civilians who are affected by anti -ISIL
operations, who face significant security and protection challenges from every
direction, at home, and often face similar challenges again in displacem ent camps.
All those conducting military operations in the Syrian Arab Republic must do so in
compliance with international humanitarian law, in particular as it relates to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, and must facilitate humani tarian
access to allow aid to reach those in urgent need of life -saving assistance. All efforts
must be made to include a humanitarian concept of operations in military planning.
46. Those living in besieged areas also continue to face dire circumstances,
although the number of people in those areas has been further reduced through the
implementation of local agreements. In many instances, the agreements, to which
the United Nations is not a party, followed prolonged periods of heavy fighting and
restricted humanitarian assistance, for years on end. Thousands of people left
besieged areas in May after local agreements in Wa‘r, Barzah and Qabun. Such local
agreements do not appear to meet international standards or provide the necessary
humanitarian safeguards. Further, those departing often move to areas in which
civilians and civilian infrastructure continue to be regularly attacked. As I have said
before, any evacuation of civilians must be safe, voluntary and to a place of their
choosing. It is imperative that all those who are displaced through local agreements
have the right of return as soon as the situation allows.
47. Ultimately, an end to the Syrian people’s suffering can only be achieved
through a political process that brings a lasting solution to the Syrian conflict. I
welcome the steps taken in the latest round of intra -Syrian talks in Geneva and the
reconvening of the next round of intra-Syrian talks, to be held in, in Geneva. My
Special Envoy continues to consult with the Syrian parties as well as regional and
international stakeholders on preparations for the talks and the holding of further
technical consultations with the participants.

17-10012

13/19

S/2017/541

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
May 2017a
Rif Dimashq and Damascus governorates
• On 1 May, air strikes hit a surgical hospital in opposition -controlled
Hamuriyah, reportedly resulting in the death of three civilians, including one
woman and two children.
• On 1 May, air strikes hit a residential area in the opposition -controlled city of
Saqba, allegedly killing four male civilians.
• On 1 May, intense air strikes on a residential area in opposition -controlled
Irbin reportedly killed one male civilian and injured an unknown number of
others, including women and children.
• On 2 May, a Syrian Palestinian civilian died after he was allegedly hit by a
sniper, on 29 April, in Government-controlled Hajar al-Aswad.
• On 4 May, a journalist working for opposition-backed outlets was allegedly
shot in the Government-controlled area of Qabun by a sniper.
• On 14 May, ground-based strikes hit opposition-controlled Abbadah, allegedly
killing one male civilian.
• On 14 May, ground-based strikes hit opposition-controlled Ash‘ari, reportedly
killing one male civilian.
• On 16 May, several ground-based strikes hit a residential area in oppositioncontrolled Hamuriyah, allegedly resulting in the death of four civilians,
including two girls and one woman, in addition to the injury of more than
25 others, including women and children.
• On 22 May, a ground-based strike hit a residential area in the vicinity of a
market in the opposition-controlled area of Abbadah, reportedly killing at least
one male civilian and injuring an unknown number of others.
• On 25 May, one male civilian was allegedly shot dead by a sniper as he was
attempting to leave the Hajar al-Aswad area near a Government checkpoint.
Dar‘a governorate
• On 2 May, an improvised explosive device detonated on the road between the
opposition-controlled areas of Busra al-Hariri and Nahtah. The explosion
reportedly resulted in the death of four Civil Defence members.
• On 3 May, ground-based strikes hit opposition-controlled Dar‘a al-Balad,
reportedly killing one civilian.

a

14/19

In line with resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments on the ground, and
the incidents during the month that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has been able to corroborate, relates to compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The information is
provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International
Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a comprehensive listing of all violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human rights law that
took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period.
17-10012

S/2017/541

• On 3 May, an improvised explosive device exploded in an oppositioncontrolled area on the road between Musayfirah and Eastern Karak, allegedly
killing two civilians.
• On 5 May, air strikes hit opposition-controlled Ibta' city, reportedly killing a
child.
• On 5 May, ground-based strikes hit opposition-controlled Dar‘a al-Balad,
resulting in the alleged death of one male civilian.
• On 17 May, ground-based strikes hit the opposition-controlled city of
Muzayrib, reportedly killing one male civilian.
• On 18 May, ground-based strikes hit the Government-controlled residential
areas of Kashif and Matar in Dar‘a city. One strike reportedly hit a school and
allegedly killed seven children, four of them girls, and injured a t least
25 civilians, including 10 women and 5 children.
• On 18 May, an improvised explosive device exploded in the fields south of
Dar‘a city, reportedly killing one child.
• On 22 May, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Government controlled Sahhari neighbourhood in Dar‘a, allegedly killing one woman.
• On 23 May, an improvised explosive device detonated on the outskirts of
Jallayn, reportedly killing a male civilian from Tafas.
Aleppo governorate
• On 3 May, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated near the
interim Government building in I‘zaz town, reportedly killing five civilians,
including two Iraqi refugees.
• On 8 May, an air strike hit a vehicle traveling in the village of Rasm al -Falih,
located near Maskanah. At least 16 civilians were allegedly killed, including
7 women and 3 children.
• On 9 May, air strikes hit residential areas in Rasm al-Falih, reportedly killing
five children from the same family.
• On 10 May, helicopters are reported to have dropped bombs on residential
areas of Samumah village near Maskanah, allegedly killing at least
14 civilians, including 8 children and 1 woman.
Idlib governorate
• On 3 May, air strikes hit a camp for internally displaced persons in opposition controlled rural Jisr al-Shughur, reportedly killing a girl and injuring an
unknown number of other civilians.
• On 13 May, a male civilian was reportedly killed when an improvised
explosive device detonated in Sarmin.
Hama governorate
• On 2 May, air strikes hit residential areas in opposition -controlled Lataminah
city, reportedly killing seven civilians from the same family, including five
children and their mother.
• On 3 May, air strikes hit residential areas in Lataminah city, reportedly killing
a 14-year-old girl.

17-10012

15/19

S/2017/541

• On 8 May, air strikes hit an agricultural area in Lataminah city, resulting in the
alleged killing of one civilian.
• On 14 May, a 14-year-old child was reportedly killed when an unexploded
ordnance exploded in Lataminah city.
• On 15 May, air strikes hit residential areas in ISIL-held Suha village in rural
Uqayribat, allegedly killing two children and injuring an unknown number of
civilians.
• On 16 May, air strikes hit a convoy of vehicles transporting civilians in Suha,
reportedly killing at least 15 civilians, including women and children, and
injuring an unknown number of others.
• On 17 May, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Lataminah city,
reportedly killing a 13-year-old girl and injuring an unknown number of
civilians.
• On 18 May, ISIL fighters reportedly raided the Government -controlled village
of Aqarib north-east of Salamiyah, resulting in the deaths of 36 civilians,
including 19 children and 9 women. While many of the civilians were killed in
the crossfire, a number of them were reportedly shot or had their throats cut by
ISIL fighters. Dozens of other civilians were injured in the incident.
• On 18 May, ground-based strikes repeatedly hit Government-controlled
Salamiyah, striking residential areas, a market and an electricity station. Two
male civilians were reportedly killed and an estimated seven civilians injured
in the incidents.
• On 18 May, air strikes hit residential areas of Lataminah city, allegedly killing
a 13-year-old girl and injuring an unknown number of civilians.
• On 21 May, ground-based strikes hit Salamiyah, reportedly killing one male
civilian and injuring at least three others, including two children and a woman.
• Around 21 May, air strikes hit ISIL-held Uqayribat in eastern rural Hama,
allegedly killing eight civilians from the same family, including four women
and one child.
• On 26 May, air strikes hit residential areas in ISIL-held Hamadah village in
rural Uqayribat, reportedly killing three male civilians and injuring other s.
• On 28 May, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Salamiyah, allegedly
injuring seven civilians, including six children and an elderly man.
Homs governorate
• On 6 May, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in opposition-controlled
Talbisah in northern rural Homs, reportedly killing a child.
• On 10 May, air strikes hit residential areas of ISIL -held Sukhnah east of
Tadmur (Palmyra), allegedly killing five women and injuring an unknown
number of civilians.
• On 13 May, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Talbisah, reportedly
killing two male civilians.
• On 16 May, air strikes hit residential areas in the opposition-controlled town
of Kafr Laha in northern Homs governorate, allegedly killing a female teacher.
• On 23 May, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded near a
checkpoint in Zahra’ neighbourhood in Homs, reportedly killing four civilians,
including two women, and injuring 30 persons.
16/19

17-10012

S/2017/541

• On 29 May, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in Governmentcontrolled upper Mukharram town in eastern Homs, reportedly killing four
civilians from the same family, including a mother and her child.
Dayr al-Zawr governorate
• On 8 May, ground-based strikes hit Qusur and Jurah neighbourhoods in
Government-controlled Dayr al-Zawr city, allegedly killing four civilians,
including three children, and injuring at least another two.
• On 10 May, air strikes hit residential areas of Sur village in northern Dayr
al-Zawr governorate, reportedly killing at least eight civilians, including four
children, and injuring six other civilians.
• On 14 May, ground-based strikes hit houses in Qusur neighbourhood in Dayr
al-Zawr and reportedly killed seven civilians.
• On 15 May, air strikes hit two areas in ISIL-controlled Albu Kamal city in
eastern Dayr al-Zawr, allegedly killing at least 59 civilians (eight of whom
were Iraqi refugees), including 16 children and 12 women, and injuring no less
than 70 others. Three strikes hit close to Ar-Rahman mosque area, and soon
thereafter six strikes hit the houses of civilians in the densely -populated
Hajjanah area of the city. Most of the casualties were reported in Hajjanah
area. The United States-led coalition stated in its public reporting that on the
same day, it had conducted two strikes, which destroyed three ISIL well heads
near Albu Kamal.
• On 16 May, ISIL fighters in Albu Kamal allegedly cut the throats of eight
men — four each at the 2 locations where air strikes had hit in the city the
previous day — stating that the men were killed for providing the coordinates
for the strikes.
• On 18 May, unmanned aerial vehicles reportedly dropped bombs on the
Government-controlled neighbourhood of Harabish in Dayr al-Zawr city,
allegedly killing at least 11 civilians, including 4 children and 3 women, and
injuring more than 20 other civilians. Those killed and wounded were
attending a wedding ceremony that was taking place in the area.
• On 19 May, a small group of ISIL fighters entered the Syrian Democratic
Forces-controlled village of Albu Shams in western rural Dayr al-Zawr
governorate and reportedly killed at least 28 civilians, including a woman and
her daughter; they were reportedly shot at close range. An unknown n umber of
other civilians were reported missing.
• On 22 May, air strikes hit residential buildings in ISIL -controlled
neighbourhood of Kinamat in Dayr al-Zawr city and reportedly killed seven
civilians, including four women, and injured at least 20 other s. The United
States-led coalition stated in its public reporting that on the same day, it had
conducted five strikes, which destroyed four ISIL oil trucks, three ISIL pump
jacks and an ISIL well head near Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 23 May, ground-based strikes hit Jurah neighbourhood in Dayr al-Zawr
city and allegedly killed at least four civilians, including a woman.
• On 24 May, air strikes hit several locations in Mayadin city and reportedly
killed at least 11 civilians, including 4 children and 2 women, and injured at
least nine others.
• On 24 May, air strikes hit residential areas in Muhaymidah village in western
Dayr al-Zawr and allegedly killed two children and injured two other civilians.
17-10012

17/19

S/2017/541

• On 25 May, air strikes hit Mayadin city within the vicinity o f the Saraya
roundabout near the court building, reportedly killing a five -year-old boy in
addition to three other civilians, one of them a woman.
• On 26 May, further air strikes in Mayadin hit two buildings, one of them the
municipality building, where families of ISIL fighters were reportedly based.
At least 100 civilians, 40 or more of them children, were allegedly killed.
• On 30 May, ground-based strikes hit Albu Kamal, reportedly killing three
civilians, including a woman and her granddaughter.
Raqqah governorate
• On 7 May, air strikes hit two residential buildings in Hay al -Thalith
neighbourhood in then ISIL-controlled Tabaqah city in western Raqqah
governorate, reportedly killing at least 21 civilians, including 8 children and
4 women and injuring dozens of others. The United States-led coalition stated
in its public reporting that on the same day, it had conducted two strikes that
engaged ISIL tactical units and destroyed a fighting position near Tabaqah.
• On 8 May, a child and another civilian were allegedly killed when air strikes
hit their home in Dibsi Afnan village in the western part of the governorate.
• On 9 May, air strikes hit residential areas in ISIL -controlled Salihiyah village
in eastern Raqqah governorate, reportedly killing 11 civilians, including
6 women and 2 children, and injuring at least nine other civilians.
• On 14 May, air strikes hit two vehicles transporting farm workers, many of
them women, working in cotton fields in Akarshah village in the eastern part
of the governorate, reportedly resulting in the killing of 23 civilians, including
17 women, and injuring five other civilians, including two women.
• On 21 May, air strikes hit residential buildings in Kudayran village in western
Raqqah governorate and allegedly killed at least 14 civilians, 3 of them
children, as well as injuring another 20 civilians.
• On 23 May, two children and their father were reportedly killed when an
improvised explosive device detonated in the rural Syrian Democratic Forces controlled Mazra‘at Hittin village in northern Raqqah governorate.
• On 23 May, air strikes hit residential areas in Barudah village in the western
part of the governorate, reportedly killing 16 civilians, including 4 women and
6 children from the same family, and injuring at least seven other civilians.
• On 23 May, two civilians, a woman and her husband, were allegedly killed
when an improvised explosive device detonated in Hay al -Thani
neighbourhood in Tabaqah city, western rural Raqqah.
• On 24 May, two civilians, a man and his child, were reportedly killed in Hay
al-Thani area of Tabaqah when an improvised explosive device detonated in
the vicinity.
• On 24 May, air strikes hit residential areas in Dibsi Faraj and Dibsi Afnan in
the western parts of the governorate, allegedly killing two women and injuring
another two.
• On 27 May, air strikes hit a home in Raqqah city, reportedly killing at least six
civilians from one family, including a girl, and injuring three other civilians.

18/19

17-10012

S/2017/541

Hasakah governorate
• On 2 May, an improvised explosive device detonated in the proximity of a
checkpoint controlled by the Syrian Democratic Forces at the Rajm al -Salibi
screening site for internally displaced persons in southern Hasakah. The
operation was followed by heavy armed clashes between the Forces and ISIL
fighters. At least 19 civilians, including women and children, were reportedly
killed in the crossfire and 18 others injured, including at least 4 women and
4 children.
• On 21 May, air strikes hit residential areas in Ruwayyih village in southern
Hasakah governorate, reportedly killing at least seven civilians, including two
women, and injuring another five civilians.

17-10012

19/19
