A/78/L.1

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: Limited
19 September 2023
Original: English

Seventy-eighth session
Items 13 and 117
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up
to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution submitted by the President of the General Assembly

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on
sustainable development convened under the auspices of the
General Assembly
The General Assembly
Endorses the political declaration adopted by the high-level political forum on
sustainable development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly,
which is contained in the annex to the present resolution.

23-18015 (E)

220923

*2318015*

A/78/L.1

Annex
Political Declaration adopted at the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF), under the
auspices of the General Assembly in September 2023
I. Our shared commitment
1.
We, the Heads of State and Government and high representatives, have met at
United Nations Headquarters in New York on 18 and 19 September 2023, at the
Sustainable Development Goals Summit, 1 to review progress and accelerate the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
2.
We reaffirm our commitment to effectively implement the 203 0 Agenda and its
SDGs and uphold all principles enshrined in it. The 2030 Agenda remains our
overarching roadmap for achieving sustainable development and overcoming the
multiple crises we face. We will act with urgency to realize its vision as a plan of
action for people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnership, leaving no one behind.
We will endeavour to reach the furthest behind first.
3.
We emphasize that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement
for sustainable development.
4.
We reaffirm that the 2030 Agenda is universal in nature and that its Goals and
targets are comprehensive, far-reaching, people-centered, indivisible and interlinked,
balancing the three dimensions of sustainable development: economic, social and
environmental, in an integrated manner. They seek to realize the human rights of all
and to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls.
5.
We reaffirm that the 2030 Agenda is guided by the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for international law. It is
grounded in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, international human rights
treaties, the Millennium Declaration and the 2005 World Summit Outcome. It is
informed by other instruments such as the Declaration on the Right to Development.
6.
We also reaffirm the Addis Ababa Action Agenda as an integral part of the 2030
Agenda. We are committed to its full implementation which is critical for the
realization of the SDGs and their targets and to this end welcome the organization of
the 2023 High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development back-to-back with the
SDG Summit.
7.
We also reaffirm that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our
time. We express profound alarm that emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise
globally, and remain deeply concerned that all countries, particularly developing
countries, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. We emphasize in
this regard that mitigation of and adaptation to climate change represent an immediate
and urgent priority.
8.
The achievement of the SDGs is in peril. At the midpoint of the 2030 Agenda,
we are alarmed that the progress on most of the SDGs is either moving much too
slowly or has regressed below the 2015 baseline. Our world is currently facing
numerous crises. Years of sustainable development gains are being reversed. Millions
of people have fallen into poverty, hunger and malnutrition are becoming more
prevalent, humanitarian needs are rising, and the impacts of climate change more
__________________
1

2/12

High-level political forum on sustainable development convened under the auspices of the
General Assembly (Sustainable Development Goals Summit).
23-18015

A/78/L.1

pronounced. This has led to increased inequality exacerbated by weakened
international solidarity and a shortfall of trust to jointly overcome these crises.
9.
We commit to bold, ambitious, accelerated, just and transformative actions,
anchored in international solidarity and effective cooperation at all levels. We will
promote a systemic shift towards a more inclusive, just, peaceful, resilient and
sustainable world for people and planet, for present and future generations.
10. We will devote ourselves collectively to the pursuit of sustainable development
including through international cooperation and partnership on the basi s of mutual
trust and the full benefit of all, in a spirit of global solidarity, for the common future
of present and coming generations.
11. We reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development, including, inter alia, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, as set out in principle 7 thereof.
12. We are concerned about the persistent disproportionate and multidimensional
impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. We must strengthen multilateral and
international cooperation for developing countries, particularly the poorest and most
vulnerable countries, to help them recover from the ongoing effects of the COVID -19
pandemic and strengthen resilience including through pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response.
13. We recognize the special challenges facing all developing countries in pursuing
sustainable development, in particular African countries, least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries, small island developing States, as well as the
specific challenges facing middle-income countries and countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
14. We remain resolved, between now and 2030, to end poverty and hunger
everywhere; to combat inequalities within and among countries; to build peaceful,
just and inclusive societies; to respect, protect and fulfil human rights and achieve
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and to ensure the lasting
protection of the planet and its natural resources. We also remain resolved to creat e
conditions for sustainable, inclusive and sustained economic growth, shared
prosperity and decent work for all, and equal pay for work of equal value, taking into
account different levels of national development and capacities. We take note with
appreciation of the Global Accelerator on Jobs and Social Protection for Just
Transitions and encourage all countries to consider supporting its implementation. We
commit to ensuring that persons with disabilities actively participate in and equally
benefit from sustainable development efforts.
15. We reaffirm that gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls
will make a crucial contribution to progress across all the Goals and targets. The
achievement of full human potential and sustainable developm ent is not possible if
one half of humanity continues to be denied full human rights and opportunities. We
will ensure full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
by all women and girls, without discrimination. We also resolve to eliminate all forms
of violence against women and girls.
16. We reaffirm the role of culture as an enabler of sustainable development that
provides people and communities with a strong sense of identity and social cohesion
and contributes to more effective and sustainable development policies and measures
at all levels.
17. We commit to stepping up our efforts to fight against racism, all forms of
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, stigmatization, hate speech,
through cooperation, partnership and inclusion and respect for diversity.
23-18015

3/12

A/78/L.1

18. We reaffirm our resolve to realize our vision of a world with access to inclusive
and equitable quality education, universal health coverage including access to quality
essential health-care services, social protection, food security and improved nutrition,
safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy, sustainable industrialization and quality, resilient, reliable and
sustainable infrastructure for all.
19. We commit to achieving a world in which humanity lives in harmony with
nature, to conserving and sustainably using our planet’s marine and terrestrial
resources, including through sustainable lifestyles, and sustainable consumption and
production, to reversing the trends of environmental degradation, to promoting
resilience, to reducing disaster risk, and to halting ecosystem degradation and
biodiversity loss. We will conserve and sustainably use oceans and seas, freshwater
resources, as well as forests, mountains and drylands and protect biodiversity,
ecosystems and wildlife.
20. Sustainable development cannot be realized without peace and security; and
peace and security will be at risk without sustainable development. We reaffirm the
need to build peaceful, just and inclusive societies that provide equal access to justice
and that are based on respect for human rights (including the right to development),
on effective rule of law and good governance at all levels and on transparent, effective
and accountable institutions. Factors which give rise to violence, insecurity and
injustice, such as inequality, corruption, poor governance and illicit financial and
arms flows, are addressed in the Agenda.
21. The 2030 Agenda remains our commitment to the children and youth of today
so that they may achieve their full human potential, as critical agents of change and
torchbearers of the 2030 Agenda for current and future generations.
22. We acknowledge the essential role of parliaments in ensuring accountability for
the effective implementation of our goals and commitments under the 2030 Agenda.
23. We commit to enhancing global, regional, national and local partnerships for
sustainable development, engaging all relevant stakeholders, including civil society,
private sector, academia and youth, recognizing the important contribution they can
make toward achieving the 2030 Agenda, and the localization of the SDGs. We also
reaffirm the importance of the regional dimension of sustainable development in
addressing regional challenges and scaling up action among countries.

II. Our changed world – Progress and remaining gaps
and challenges
24. Our world has changed drastically since the first SDG Summit in 2019 and since
we adopted the 2030 Agenda in 2015. The world was already off track in achieving
the majority of the SDGs before the COVID-19 pandemic. Without immediate course
correction and acceleration of progress toward achieving the SDGs, our world is
destined to face continued poverty, prolonged periods of crisis and growing
uncertainty.
25. We are concerned about the persistent and long-term impacts from the
COVID-19 pandemic, continued poverty and widening inequalities, and the multiple
interlinked crises that are pushing our world to the brink, particularly in developing
countries and for the poorest and most vulnerable. The crisis of climate change and
its impacts, including persistent drought and extreme weather events, land loss and
degradation, sea level rise, coastal erosion, ocean acidification and the ret reat of
mountain glaciers, as well as biodiversity loss, desertification, sand and dust storms,
and pollution, including plastic, air, and chemical pollution, threaten planet and
4/12

23-18015

A/78/L.1

people. Forced displacement, the cost-of-living, water, food security and nutrition,
financial and energy crises and challenges are derailing progress on the Sustainable
Development Goals.
26. In many parts of the world armed conflicts and instability have persisted or
intensified, causing untold human suffering and undermining the realization of the
Sustainable Development Goals. Our efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts and
foster peaceful, just and inclusive societies have often been fragmented and
insufficient and have been hindered in the current global context.
27. We acknowledge that the cascading global crises have highlighted and
exacerbated existing gender inequality, such as unequal access to healthcare,
education, social protection, decent jobs and economic opportunities.
28. We take note of the Secretary-General’s special edition progress report on the
Sustainable Development Goals, and the Global Sustainable Development Report,
recognizing the value of evidenced-based approaches to evaluate progress to date
towards the SDGs.
29. We recognize the positive role and contribution of migrants for inclusive growth
and sustainable development in countries of origin, transit and destinat ion, including
by enriching societies through human, socioeconomic and cultural capacities. We
recommit to cooperate internationally to ensure safe, orderly and regular migration
involving full respect for human rights and the humane treatment of migrants,
regardless of their migration status, and to support countries of origin, transit and
destination in the spirit of international cooperation, taking into account national
circumstances.
30. We must meet the moment by taking immediate measures to scale up efforts to
achieve the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, including through
development cooperation, SDG investments, reforming the international financial
architecture, supporting sustained, inclusive and sustainable growth, enhancing
macroeconomic policy cooperation, exploring measures of progress on sustainable
development that complement or go beyond gross domestic product, and
implementing actions to accelerate sustainable development, in particular in support
of developing countries.
31. We are deeply concerned by the marked increase of the estimated SDG financing
gap and recognize the urgency of providing predictable, sustainable and sufficient
development finance to developing countries from all sources.
32. We note that there has been positive progress in a limited number of areas. We
recognize the efforts of countries and stakeholders at all levels since 2015 to realize
the vision of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals. We
acknowledge that important lessons were drawn from the COVID-19 pandemic in
health, culture, education, science, technology, and innovation and digital
transformation for sustainable development.
33. We are encouraged by the progress achieved in the implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries 2014–2024, and the
SAMOA Pathway for SIDS 2014–2024, and call upon the international community to
take the opportunity of the Third UN Conference on LLDCs and the 4th International
Conference on Small Island Developing States to identify and address the key priority
issues of LLDCs and SIDS respectively, as well as to forge genuine and durable
partnerships, including financial support, that will accelerate the implementation of
their respective sustainable development blueprints. Additionally, we welcome the
Doha political declaration, and the commitments made towards the timely and full
implementation of the Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2022–2031.
23-18015

5/12

A/78/L.1

34. We welcome the ongoing efforts of the UN development system to implement
the reforms championed by the Secretary-General and endorsed by the General
Assembly, to better support programme countries in their efforts to implement the
2030 Agenda, stressing the importance of predictable and sustainable funding of the
UN development system and its programmatic activities.
35. We recognize that the Voluntary National Reviews have generated valuable
lessons learned and have helped countries monitor progress and integrate the
Sustainable Development Goals into national plans and policies.

III. Call to action – turning our world towards 2030
36. We commit to taking continuous, fundamental, transformative and urgent
actions at all levels and by all stakeholders to overcome the crises and obstacles facing
our world. We recognize the urgent need to take the actions necessary to reverse
declines and accelerate progress to achieve the 2030 Agenda and implement the
SDGs.
37. We commit to achieving sustainable development and shared prosperity fo r all
by focusing our policies and actions on the poorest and most vulnerable. We will
endeavour to identify those who are being left behind and reach those who are the
furthest behind first. People who are vulnerable must be empowered. Those whose
needs are reflected in the 2030 Agenda include all children, youth, persons with
disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, Indigenous Peoples,
refugees, internally displaced persons, and migrants. We intend to see the Goals and
targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments of society. We will take
action to combat inequalities within and among countries and pursue policies that
stem the tide of rising inequality, including through social protection systems and
universal health coverage. We look forward to the proposed world social summit in
2025, subject to discussion and agreement by the General Assembly on its modalities,
and emphasize that the possible summit outcome should have a social development
approach and give momentum towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
38. We are determined to make all efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by the target year of 2030 and to
revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development. To this end:
(a) We commit to taking comprehensive and targeted measures to eradicate
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, everywhere,
recognizing it is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for
sustainable development. We commit to enhancing and supporting policies and
strategies for reducing poverty and inequality, including through international
cooperation.
(b) We will accelerate actions to end hunger, food insecurity and all forms of
malnutrition, and the realization of the right to adequate food, including through
access to sufficient, safe and nutritious foods all year round, the promotion of
sustainable and resilient agriculture and food systems, as well as safe, nutritious and
healthy diets. We commit to keep trade channels and markets open for the movement
of food, fertilizers and other agricultural inputs and outputs, while recognizing the
importance of shorter supply chains at the local levels. In this context, we also commit
to supporting developing countries to address extreme food price volatility.
(c) We commit to targeted and accelerated action to remove all legal, social,
and economic barriers to achieving gender equality, the empowerment of all women
and girls including those with disabilities, their full, equal and effective participation
in all decision-making processes, and the realization and enjoyment of their human
6/12

23-18015

A/78/L.1

rights. In this regard we commit to eliminating, preventing and responding to all
forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls in public and private
spaces both in person and in digital contexts, and call for women’s full access to
justice and effective legal remedies.
(d) We will continue increasing investment in inclusive and equitable quality
education and life-long learning opportunities for all, including early childhood
education, youth and adult literacy programmes and initiatives, digital education,
cultural education, education for sustainable development, digital technologies for
education, skills enhancement, affordable higher education and vocational training,
education in emergencies and teachers’ continuous professional development. We
recognize that early childhood education and care can generate substantial benefits
for children. We will address barriers to girls’ education, gender and disability gaps
and promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in and through
education and safe, healthy and stimulating learning environments that enable all
learners to achieve their full potential and physical, mental and emotional well-being.
We also take note of the 2022 United Nations Transforming Education Summit.
(e) We will continue to take action to bridge the digital divides and spread the
benefits of digitalization. We will expand participation of all countries, in particular
developing countries, in the digital economy, including by enhancing their digital
infrastructure connectivity, building their capacities and access to technological
innovations through stronger partnerships and improving digital literacy. We will
leverage digital technology to expand the foundations on which to strengthen social
protection systems. We commit to building capacities for inclusive participation in
the digital economy and strong partnerships to bring technological innovations to all
countries. We reaffirm that the same rights that people have offline must also be
protected online. We look forward to the elaboration of a Global Digital Compact to
bridge the digital divides and to accelerate the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
(f) We will address water scarcity and stress and drive transformation from a
global water crisis to a world where water is a sustainable resource, ensuring the
availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. We note the
importance of the mid-term comprehensive review of the implementation of the
International Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018 –2028
and the water-related goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda, and we commend the
convening of the UN 2023 Water Conference.
(g) We will ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages,
including by strengthening health systems and achieving universal health coverage
and all other health-related targets and leaving no-one behind. We will address gaps
in preventing, preparing for, and responding to current and future pandemics and
health emergencies, including in the development and distribution of timely and
equitable access to medical countermeasures such as vaccines, therapeutics and
diagnostics.
(h) We commit to making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe,
resilient and sustainable, including through the implementation of the New Urban
Agenda, to contribute to the achievement and localization of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and enhancing financial and technical assistance to plan
and implement sustainable urbanization and human settlements programmes and
projects, and we will promote access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing.
(i) We recommit to making fundamental changes in our consumption and
production patterns, including by transitioning to sustainable economic and business
models, the implementation of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns, and by providing support to developing
23-18015

7/12

A/78/L.1

countries to strengthen their scientific, technological and innovation capacity. We
recognize that local and national zero-waste initiatives can contribute to achieving
sustainable consumption and production.
(j) We will ensure universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all, including through enhanced international cooperation to assist
developing countries and through sustained investments, advancing research and
development, and promote investment in energy infrastructure and clean energy
technology. We will increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global
energy mix by 2030.
(k) We recommit to the full implementation of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, and recall its Mid-term review, as disasters have
become more frequent and intense. We acknowledge that its implementation will
require capacity building and technical and financial assistance in order to be
effectively implemented by developing countries. We will promote a disaster risk informed approach to sustainable development at the local, national, regional and
global levels and accelerate progress on integrating disaster risk reduction into
policies, programmes and investments at all levels. We recognize the need for a
broader and a more people-centred preventive approach to disaster risk reduction, and
that disaster risk reduction policies and practices need to be multi -hazard and
multisectoral, inclusive and accessible in order to be efficient and effective. We will
promote effective local, national and regional multi-hazard early warning
mechanisms.
(l) We stress the urgency of enhancing ambition for climate action in the
implementation of the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement 2 in relation to climate
mitigation, adaptation and the provision of the means of implementation, especially
finance to developing countries. We urge the implementation of the decisions adopted
at COP 27 held in Sharm El-Sheikh. We will take concrete steps toward the
operationalization of the new funding arrangements for responding to loss and
damage by COP 28. We commit to continuing our work to accelerate our action to
address climate change. In this regard, we also look forward to the first global stock
take of the Paris Agreement to take place at COP 28.
(m) We emphasize the need for a balanced and enhanced implementation of all
provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity, including its three objectives.
We will take urgent action to halt and reverse biodiversity loss by 2030 to put nature
on a path to recovery for the benefit of people and planet by conserving and
sustainably using biodiversity and by ensuring the fair and equitable sharing of
benefits from the utilization of genetic resources, while providing the sufficient
means of implementation to support developing countries. We welcome the CBD
COP15 and its outcomes, including the Kunming Montreal Global Biodiversity
Framework and call for the timely implementation of these outcomes and in this
regard we welcome the establishment of the Global Biodiversity Framework Fund.
We call for its timely operationalization and capitalization from all sources, including
international financial resources from developed countries, philanthropic
organizations and private sector, and to progress towa rds implementation as soon as
possible.
(n) We commit to continue urgent efforts to implement the strategic objectives
of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, affirming that
combating desertification, land degradation, drought and floo ds, as well as sand and
dust storms, and achieving land degradation neutrality are essential and have emerged
as a pathway to accelerate progress towards achieving the SDGs.
__________________
2

8/12

Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
23-18015

A/78/L.1

(o) We will decisively and urgently mobilize action for sustainable ocean
management, recognizing the central role of a healthy, productive and resilient ocean.
We commit to an integrated and coordinated approach to conserve, protect and restore
the ocean, its ecosystems and its biodiversity. We emphasize that our actions to
implement Goal 14 should be in accordance with, reinforce and not duplicate or
undermine existing legal instruments, arrangements, processes, mechanisms or
entities. We affirm the need to enhance the conservation and sustainable use of oceans
and their resources by implementing international law as reflected in the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which provides the legal framework for the
conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources, as recalled in
paragraph 158 of The Future We Want. We look forward to the third UN Ocean
Conference, to be held in 2025, to scale-up ocean action and accelerate
implementation.
(p) We will support the global efforts to address plastic pollution, and the work
of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) t o develop an international
legally binding instrument on plastic pollution, including in the marine environment
by 2024.
(q) We commit to bridging the science, technology and innovation divides and
the responsible use of science, technology, and innovation as drivers of sustainable
development and to build the capacities necessary for sustainable transformations.
We reiterate the need to accelerate the transfer of environmentally sound technologies
to developing countries on favourable terms, including on concessional and
preferential terms, as mutually agreed. We will take action to enhance the ability of
developing countries to benefit from science, technology, and innovation and address
the major structural impediments to accessing new and emerging tech nologies
including through scaling up the use of open science, affordable and open -source
technology, research and development, including through strengthened partnerships.
We aim to increase funding for SDG-related research and innovation and build
capacity in all regions to contribute to and benefit from this research. We will seek to
better realize the benefits and address the challenges of artificial intelligence. We
undertake to increase the use of science and scientific evidence in policymaking.
(r) We pledge to take action to strengthen international, national and local
data systems efforts to collect high quality, timely, relevant, disaggregated and
reliable data on SDG progress and to intensify efforts to strengthen data and statistical
capacities in developing countries. We will continue to strengthen our efforts to
collect, analyse and disseminate relevant, reliable and disaggregated data for better
monitoring and policymaking to accelerate the achievement of the 2030 Agenda. We
commit to increasing the availability of SDG data and closing SDG data gaps at all
levels, increasing financing for data and statistics, and enhancing capacity building
support to developing countries.
(s) We will continue to integrate the SDGs into our national policy
frameworks and develop national plans for transformative and accelerated action. We
will make implementing the 2030 Agenda and achieving the SDGs a central focus in
national planning and oversight mechanisms. We will further localize the SDGs and
advance integrated planning and implementation at the local level. We encourage all
relevant actors to better address interlinkages, synergies and trade -offs between the
Sustainable Development Goals, enhancing policy coherence for sustainable
development.
(t) We commit to accelerate the full implementation of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda and to take further actions to scale up financing for sustainable
development, and provide means of implementation for developing countries,
including the following:
23-18015

9/12

A/78/L.1

(i) We will ensure significant mobilization of resources from a variety of
sources, including through enhanced development cooperation, strengthening
the capacity to mobilize domestic resources and private sector investment in
order to provide adequate and predictable means for developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, and to implement programmes and
policies to end poverty in all its forms and dimensions and to create decent jobs.
(ii) We urge developed countries to scale up and fulfill their respective ODA
commitments, including the commitment by many developed countries to
achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official
development assistance (ODA/GNI) to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.20
per cent of ODA/GNI to the least developed countries.
(iii) We call for improved international debt mechanisms to support debt
review, debt payment suspensions, and debt restructuring, as appropriate, with
an expansion of support and eligibility to vulnerable countries in nee d. We
commit to continuing to assist developing countries in avoiding a build -up of
unsustainable debt and in implementing resilience measures so as to reduce the
risk of relapsing into another debt crisis. We recognize the importance of new
and emerging challenges and vulnerabilities in regard to developing country
external and domestic debt sustainability. We call for strengthened multilateral
actions and coordination by all creditors to address the deteriorating debt
situation.
(iv) We welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to address the SDG financing
gap through an SDG stimulus. We will advance the Secretary -General’s
proposal, in a timely manner through discussions at the United Nations as well
as other relevant forums and institutions, to tackle the high cost of debt and
rising risks of debt distress, to enhance support to developing countries and to
massively scale up affordable long-term financing for development and expand
contingency financing to countries in need.
(v) We call for scaling up debt swaps for SDGs, including debt swaps for
climate and nature, and debt swaps for food security, as appropriate, while
recognizing that debt swaps cannot replace broader debt treatments in
unsustainable debt situations, to allow developing countries to us e debt service
payments for investments in sustainable development.
(vi) We recommit to preventing and combating illicit financial flows and
strengthening international cooperation and good practices on assets return and
recovery. We reaffirm our commitment to strive to eliminate safe havens that
create incentives for the transfer abroad of stolen assets and illicit financial
flows. We will implement our obligations to prevent and combat corruption,
bribery and money laundering in all their forms enshrined in the existing
international architecture, in particular in those prescribed in the United Nations
Convention Against Corruption and the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime.
(vii) We call for an urgent voluntary re-channeling of Special Drawing Rights
to countries most in need, including through multilateral development banks,
while respecting relevant legal frameworks and preserving the reserve asset
character of Special Drawing Rights. We will explore ways for future alloca tions
of Special Drawing Rights to benefit those countries most in need.
(viii) We support reform of the international financial architecture. We also
support international financial institution and multilateral development bank
reform as a key for large-scale Sustainable Development Goal-related
investments in order to better address global challenges. The international
10/12

23-18015

A/78/L.1

financial architecture, including its business models and financing capacities,
must be made more fit for purpose, equitable and responsive to the financing
needs of developing countries, to broaden and strengthen the voice and
participation of developing countries in international economic decision making, norm-setting, and global economic governance. We commit to engage
in inclusive inter-governmental discussions on the reform of international
financial institutions in forthcoming processes, including at the United Nations,
taking into account current and ongoing initiatives.
(ix) We urge multilateral development banks to bring forward actions to
mobilize and provide additional financing within their mandates to support
developing countries to achieve the SDGs. We support multilateral development
bank reform efforts and call for tangible progress in this regard, including
through securing increases to grants and concessional finance, better leveraging
their capital bases and considering ways for the respective boards of the MDBs
to increase their capitalization and encourage dialogue between multilateral
development banks and other financial institutions.
(x) We recommit to the promotion of a universal, rules-based,
non-discriminatory, open, fair, inclusive, equitable and transparent multilateral
trading system, with the World Trade Organization (WTO) at its core, as well as
meaningful trade liberalization. We underscore that the multilateral trading
system should contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals, providing policy space for national development objectives, poverty
eradication and sustainable development, consistent with relevant international
rules and countries’ commitments, and promote export-led growth in the
developing countries through, inter alia, preferential trade access for developing
countries, targeted special and differential treatment that respon ds to the
development needs of individual countries, in particular least developed
countries, and the elimination of trade barriers that are inconsistent with World
Trade Organization agreements. We welcome the commitment of WTO
members to work towards the necessary reform of the organization, with the aim
of improving all its functions and effectively addressing the challenges facing
global trade. We look forward to concrete and positive results at the 13th WTO
Ministerial Conference.
(xi) We confirm our political commitment to explore measures of progress on
sustainable development that complement or go beyond gross domestic product
to have a more inclusive approach to international cooperation and reaffirm our
call to engage in United Nations-led intergovernmental discussions in
consultation with relevant stakeholders.
(xii) We encourage the international community to consider multidimensional
vulnerability, including the potential use of a multidimensional vulnerability
index, as criteria to access concessional finance.
(xiii) We look forward to the deliberations on convening a fourth international
conference on financing for development in 2025.
(xiv) We look forward to the beginning of inter-governmental discussions in
New York at United Nations Headquarters on ways to strengthen the
inclusiveness and effectiveness of international tax cooperation.
39. We recognize that the integrated nature of the Sustainable Development Goals
requires a global response. We renew our commitment to multilateralism, to find new
ways of working together and to ensure that multilateral institutions keep pace with
the rapid changes taking place. We further commit to finding peaceful and just
solutions to disputes and to respecting international law and the purposes and
23-18015

11/12

A/78/L.1

principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including the right to self determination of peoples and the need to respect the territorial integrity and political
independence of States.
40. We commit to fully support the UN development system, including the RC
system and the Joint SDG Fund, to deliver better in support of programme countries
and their efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda and its SDGs. We support the United
Nations in playing a central and coordinating role in international development
cooperation.
41. We commit to using the review of the high-level political forum at the 78th
session of the General Assembly to further strengthen the follow-up and review of the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda, harnessing data to track progress in
implementing the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, strengthening analysis
of the interlinkages across the Goals and targets, including policy implications of their
synergies and trade-offs.
42. We look forward to the Summit of the Future in 2024 as an important
opportunity to, inter alia, accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and its
SDGs.
43. We commit with united efforts, political will and firm actions to advance
concrete, integrated and targeted policies and actions to fulfill the vision of the 2030
Agenda and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. We pledge to act now, for
present and future generations, turning our world towards a sustainable and resilient
path by 2030, and leaving no one behind.

12/12

23-18015
