S/PRST/2004/29

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 August 2004
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5018th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 August 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the signature, on 30 July 2004 in Accra,
by the President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, the
Prime Minister of the Government of National Reconciliation, Mr. Seydou
Elimane Diarra, and all the political forces of Côte d’Ivoire, of an agreement
(the “Accra III Agreement”) that consolidates the implementation of the LinasMarcoussis process. It recalls that it endorsed the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. It welcomes the resolute commitment of the African Heads of
State and Government, in particular of the Chairman of the Economic
Community of Western African States, Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor, President
of the Republic of Ghana, and the Chairperson of the African Union,
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, as well
as of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the other participants to
the Accra summit of 29-30 July 2004, thanks to which the conclusion of this
agreement was made possible.
“The Security Council welcomes the spirit of dialogue and responsibility
showed by President Gbagbo and each of the Ivorian parties, who have clearly
demonstrated their willingness to lead the political process in Côte d’Ivoire to
its completion. It welcomes the concrete measures agreed upon by the
signatories of the Accra III Agreement, with a view to facilitating the full and
comprehensive implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and
because of the serious threats, caused by the continuing crisis, which persist
against the territorial integrity of Côte d’Ivoire. It urges the parties to adhere
strictly to the deadlines that have been fixed, in particular to settle the issue of
the eligibility to the Presidency of the Republic and to start the disarmament,
in accordance with the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, for all paramilitary
groups and militias and to disband disruptive youth groups.
“The Security Council urges all parties to implement in good faith,
without delays or preconditions, the obligations they have undertaken in
signing the Accra III Agreement. It calls upon them in particular to remain
committed so that open, free and transparent elections could be held, as
agreed, before the end of 2005. It reaffirms its complete readiness to take any

04-45140 (E) 050804

*0445140*

S/PRST/2004/29

appropriate measure against individuals who impede the full implementation
of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
“The Security Council takes note with profound concern of the
preliminary results of the investigation led by the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire on the massacres that occurred in Korhogo. It reiterates its firm
condemnation of all atrocities and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed in Côte d’Ivoire and in particular those that have
occurred on 25 and 26 March 2004 in Abidjan. It reiterates its full support to
the international commission of inquiry put in place by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, in order to establish the facts and
circumstances of the perpetration of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law which occurred in Côte d’Ivoire since
19 September 2002, and, as far as possible, to identify their authors. It recalls
that all persons responsible for such violations will be brought to justice. It
encourages the Ivorian parties to establish without further delay, as they have
committed themselves to, the National Commission for Human Rights
provided for by the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to continue to follow
closely developments of the situation in Côte d’Ivoire and the implementation
of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. It emphasizes in this regard the
importance of the follow-up mechanism and looks forward to the regular
reports provided for in the Accra III Agreement of 30 July 2004. It requests in
this regard the Secretary-General to keep the Council regularly informed about
the implementation of commitments under the Accra III Agreement.”

2
