TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

17 APRIL 1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 708) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of welcome to Mr. Arkady Shevchenko, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Security Council Affairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . , . . . ., . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913).........................................,...

1

SIPV. 1708

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN
Held in New York

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTH

on Tuesday,

17 April

President: Mr. Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru).

MEETING

1973, at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Besent: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

The agenda was adopted,
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addreqd to the
President of the Security Council (S/ 10913)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l708)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with a previous decision of the Council (1705th
meeting], and with its consent, I shall invite the representatives of Lebanon, Israel and Egypt to take places at
the Council table.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 0913).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. H. El-Zayyat
(Egypt) took places at the Council table.

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Expression of welcome to Mr. Arkady Shevchenko, Undersecretary-General
for Political and Security Council
Affairs

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Again
in accordance with previous decisions of the Council
[I 705th and 1706th meetings], i invite the representatives
of Saudi Arribia, Algeria and the Syrian Arab Republic to
take the places reserved for them in the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they wish to speak.

I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Before
we proceed to the adoption of the agenda, may I avail
myself of this opportunity to extend a very cordial
welcome to Mr. Arkady Shevchenko on behalf of the
Security Council. He has recently been appointed to the
high post of Under-Secretary-General
for Political and
Security Council Affairs. I should like to emphasize that
Mr. Shevchenko has, over a number of years, held important and delicate posts as a member of the delegation of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United
Nations and also been a member of that country’s
delegation to several sessions of the General Assembly. We
&O
know
that Mr. Shevchenko has held important posts in
the Department of International Organizations of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of his country. Recently, he was
Adviser to the Minister for Foreign Affairs with the rank of
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary. During his
bdliant diplomatic career, Mr. Shevchenko has acquired a
wealth of experience and knowledge in the work of this
Organization, and particularly in the work of the Security
Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria) and Mr. H. Kelani (SJ)rian
Arab Republic) took the places reserved for them in the
Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In a
letter dated 16 April 1973, the representative of Tunisia has
asked to be allowed to participate, without the right to
vote, in the Council’s consideration of the item on its
agenda. In accordance with the established practice, and
with the consent of the Council, I shall invite the
representative of Tunisia to take the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber, on the understanding
that he will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when he wishes to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. H. Driss (Tunisia)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. T am sure that 1 am expressing the unanimous feeling of
the Security Council in welcoming Mr. Shevchenko to his
new and important post. On behalf of the Council I should
like to say that we are completely confident that we shall
have his valuable and fruitful co-operation in carrying out
the delicate tasks of this Council.

6. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
since this is the first occasion I have had to speak in the
Council under your presidency, may I congratulate YOU
upon your accession to this high office, inform you of the
1

many respects the jungle has its own natural laws, it would
be rather to revert to a state of international anarchy. The
representative of Israel has stated here that, because the
action in Beirut was directed against terrorists, it needed no
justification. In the view of my delegation, every act of
violence needs justification. Where the violence is international, the United Nations is legitimately concerned with it,
The object of the United Nations is to try to establish order
and peace in international relation.,. Recent events have cut
at everything for which the United Nations stands.

pleasure it gives us and assure you that we shall do our best
to co-operate with you in your very difficult task.
7. Also, may I perhaps take the opportunity to congratulate our new Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Shevchenko, and
join in the warm welcome that you have already accorded
him.
8. Apart, however, from the pleasure of congratulating
you, Mr. President, I must confess that it is in a spirit of
profound depression that I take part in this debate. It is
depressing that, as the years go by, far from moving
forward we only go backwards.
Far from peace and
counsels of moderation prevailing, we witness everincreasing violence-a vicious circle of reprisal and counterreprisal with the scene dominated increasingly by extremists and extreme counsels. The arguments that we hear are
too often dominated by the past, when we should be
looking to the present and the future. I must also confess
that I am further depressed by the prolonged exchanges to
which we have been subjected on matters totally unconnected with the agenda, and I hope that the appeal that
you, Mr. President, made yesterday will not go unheeded.

11. But I said earlier that what we must do is to look
towards the future. We must try to break out of this
horrifying spiral of violence, counter-violence and further
violence. As I said to the Assembly last December,* while
my Government cannot accept that terrorism is in any
circumstances justified, we are not blind to the need to
eradicate its root causes and to deal with the problems
underlying it. We must show the hundreds of thousands of
refugees in Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Lebanon,
Gaza and elsewhere that the world has not forgotten thetn.
We must take note of, and we must take action on, their
legitimate aspirations which must not be overlooked in any
final settlement. In short we must once more give them a
reason for living and hope for the future.

9. My Government has consistently deplored all acts of
violence and terrorism in the Middle East, wherever and by
whomsoever they have been committed. To take only the
incidents of recent weeks. we deplore, and we must all
deplore, the tragedy of Khartoum and the senseless terrorist
activities in Nicosia. We deeply symfiathize with the cause
and the fate of the Palestine refugees who have been the
subject of endless debates and resolutions in the United
Nations which seem to have no influence on their lot. As
they sit in their camps, often almost in sight of their former
homes, it is not surprising that bitterness and hatred should
grow in their hearts and that, in despair, some of them
should turn to violence and extremism. But this is not the
way to win sympathy for their cause. The international
community cannot tolerate the killing of innocent people,
the murder of diplomats and the disruption of communications that has been caused. Not only must the Palestinian
leaders exercise restraint but also all the Governments
concerned in the area must exert themselves to control this
violence. They must not permit the wild men to disrupt
international order. We have all given our endorsement to
the Declaration on Friendly Relations [General Assembly
resolutio?? 2625 (XXV), annex/ and we are all committed
to the Charter principles which it embodies. It is surely
time for all of us to respond whole-heartedly to the appeal
with which the Declaration ends-that is, its appeal to all
States to be guided by these principles in their international
conduct and to develop their mutual relations on the basis
of their strict observance.

12. The debate here these last days has ranged widely
from the subject which is on our agenda, the Israeli attacks
on Lebanon on 9 and 10 April. But while we must focus on
that event, we cannot close our minds to the wider issues of
the Middle East situation as a whole. Until we grapple with
those issues, we can have little hope that incidents like this
will cease. This situation has been at the heart of many of
the statements we have heard, notably that from the
Foreign Minister of Egypt [I 707th meeting], whom we are
delighted to see back here in the Council, though I only
wish that we were seeing him for some other less melancholy
occasion. As he said, all efforts to work towards a solution
have been at a standstill for many months now and it is the
duty of us all to do what we can to get things moving. We
have watched with sympathy the efforts made, for example, by the United States and we are particularly
encouraged when President Nixon said that the Middle East
would have for him “a high priority” in his second term.
13. But it is also the duty of the Council to play its part.
Thus my delegation would be glad to see the Council call
upon the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr, Jarring, to renew their efforts to promote agreement on
the basis of resolution 242 (1967) and we stand ready to
help them in any way we can. In the past, we have
participated in talks on the Middle East between the
permanent members of the Security Council and we remain
ready to do so again.

10. But to deplore the acts of violence of the terrorist
organizations is in no way to condone the action of the
Israeli Government in its attacks on Lebanon, whichire the
occasion for the present meeting. Those too must be
condemned. That was a Government-organized operation
into the territory of another sovereign State, an act of
official violence which can, under no circumstances, be
justified under the Charter. For the internabonal community to accept such action as tolerable would be, not a
return to the jungle as some speakers have said, because in

14. Something must be done and it must be done
urgently. The danger to peace in :he Middle East region is
such that none of us can afford to allow the present
deadlock to persist indefinitely. We must all of us bend

1 See Official
Session, Plenary

2

Records
Meetings,

of the General AssembSv, TWentY-seWWti~
2114th meeting.

every effort to try to find a settlement. It is to this
objective that my Government will remain dedicated.

bread of exile. These conditions have continued to exist for
25 years, and the number of refugees has been swelled-by
the repeated aggression of Israel upon the homeland of the
Palestinians.

15. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, allow
me first of all, on behalf of my delegation, to join previous
speakers in congratulating you on assuming the presidency
of the Council, Having had the privilege of working closely
together with you on the Council’s mission to Zambia, I am
personally very much gratified to see you in the chair when
the Council is discussing the difficult and delicate question
now on our agenda. I am convinced that the conduct of our
deliberations is safe in your most competent hands.

20. The second root cause is the continued occupation by
force of arms by Israel of territories belonging to three
neighbouring Arab countries. Efforts to implement Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) have not succeeded in
eliminating this second root cause.
21. Taking these facts into consideration, it is difficult for
my delegation to understand how the representative of
Israel can appear before the Council and tell this august
body that he did not come to the Council to justify the
murderous actions of his Government but that he had in
fact come “to accuse”. To accuse whom and of what? To
accuse the people whom Israel had driven away from their
homeland for taking their rights in their own hands after 25
years of frustration and desperation? It should be clear
that the Palestinians cannot be expected just to sit idly by
and watch with folded hands how the Israeli usurpers
secure the occupation of the land that rightfully belongs to
the Palestinians.

16. My delegation also wishes to thank the outgoing
President and to express our high appreciation to our
colleague and good friend, Mr. Aquiline Boyd of Panama,
who acquitted himself most admirably of his duties as
Council President for the month of March. He managed to
finalize successfully in record time the discussion on the
report of the mission to Zambia. Mr, Boyd did an excellent
job with regard to his duties when the Council enjoyed the
lavish hospitality of his country during its meetings at
Panama City while, at the same time, being the perfect host
to
his colleagues and friends. My delegation would like to
express once more its profound gratitude to the Government and people of Panama.

22. So long as the Palestinians are deprived of their land
and their homes and so long as Israel insists on clinging to
the fallacy of having the right to occupy the land that
rightfully belongs to others, it would be illusory to imagine
that acts of violence born of political despair and frustration will cease, however much we may deplore those acts
when innocents become their victims. If Israel were to
discontinue its policy of aggression and its intransigency in
opposing a just settlement in the Middle East and if that
country were more responsive to the resolutions that have
been adopted by the United Nations and the Security
Council, such as, for instance, resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967, there would be no reason to hold these
meetings of the Council.

17. With your permission, Mr. President, my delegation
would like to join you in congratulating Mr. Shevchenko
upon his assumption
of the office of UnderSecretary-General for Political and Security Council Affairs.
I am sure that he will be a worthy successor to his
predecessor, Mr. Kutakov, from whom my delegation has
always received the fullest assistance and co-operation. My
delegation looks forward to continuing this relationship
with Mr. Shevchenko.
18. The Council is once again convened to discuss the
Middle East question. My delegation has listened most
attentively to the statements made by the speakers, and
especially by the representatives of the parties directly
concerned. In the opinion’of my delegation, the issue that
has been brought this time to the attention of the Council
is quite clear: the military incursion by Israel, a Member of
the United Nations, on the territory of Lebanon, another
Member of the United Nations, to execute the premeditated murder of leaders of the Palestinian liberation
movement as part of the official policy of the Government
of Israel. In this murder other innocent persons have fallen
victim.

23. In the circumstances, we can only express our Strong
condemnation of the open Israeli aggression upon its
neighbour, Lebanon, and our abhorrence for the murder
committed by the Israeli Government. In the light of the
fact that Lebanon has always pursued a policy of peace, the
Israeli aggression becomes even more reprehensible and,
indeed, deserving of the strongest censure. So long as SUCh
acts of aggression and terrorism continue to be a characteristic of the official Israeli policy, there can be no realistic
prospect of a lasting peace in the area.

19. I do not want to dwell at length on the issue of
terrorism; others have done it already with more eloquence
than I could. My delegation would like to express its
considered view that the problem of terrorism and counterterrorism, as the result of the Middle East question, cannot
be considered apart from its root causes. These root causes
are mainly twofold. The first is the injustice which has for
so long been inflicted upon the Palestinians, who are the
indigenous inhabitants of what is today called Israel.
Thousands of these people have been driven from their
homes and forced to live in foreign countries, dependent
upon the meagre charity of strangers, and eating the bitter

24. The Council is now confronted with a very grave
problem because the latest acts of terrorism wantonly
perpetrated by Israel have clearly demonstrated to the
world that terrorism has become the official policy of one
of the Members of the United Nations. This cannot and
must not be tolerated because it constitutes a very serious
violation of the principles of the Charter and leads to
lawlessness in international relations. The representative of
Israel had referred to Beirut as the capital of international
terrorism and tried to substantiate this claim by contending
that the various acts of terrorism that have taken place in
the world in the last few years originated in Lebanon. My
3

delegation regrets that he did not mention the fact that
there are 300,000 refugees in Lebanon who were driven
from their homeland by Israel, These Palestinian refugees
have found temporary shelter in Lebanon and entertain
only one desire and that is to return to their own land. The
Israeli representative cannot profess ignorance of the fact
that it is this desire, this determination, coupled with the
misery, the frustration, the desperation and the humiliation
that Israel has imposed upon these Palestinian refugees that
lead them to commit acts of terrorism and violence.

Lebanon before this Council when he said on Thursday last
week:
“With the attack by Israeli commandos on the Intema.
tional Airport of Beirut on 28 December 1968, Israel set
in motion a cycle of violence which has persistently
intensified since then . , . hundreds of innocent people,
including women and children, have been murdered or
wounded; several hundred homes and buildings have been
destroyed; the peace of the country has been disturbed.”
[17OSth meeting, para. 18. /

2.5. Indonesia, like many other countries, cannot condone
senseless acts of violence and wanton terrorism. But we do
not view the acts of violence committed by desperate and
frustrated people, deprived of their rights and chased away
by violence from their homeland, in the same light as the
acts of terrorism committed by a Government as its official
policy to enable that Government to continue its unlawful
occupation of other people’s land and territory, The
violence committed by the Palestinians, which the world
has witnessed and which will no doubt occur again if the
root causes are not soon redressed, is an expression of the
legitimate aspir&ions of a people who have been unlawfully
deprived of their rights, their homes and their land. We
cannot just view these acts of violence as mere terrorism,
separate from their root causes. On the contrary, they have
to be considered witbin the whole framework of the grave
problems that have beset the Middle East for a long time
and for which a solution still remains elusive. If we do not
address ourselves to the very origin of these problems, and
redress the wrongs that have been committed, a recurrence
of similar violence will continue and may demand ever
greater sacrifices in human lives and material loss. From the
Palestinian side, these acts are carried out by a desperate
and frustrated people; it is the despair, the frustration and
the yearning to return to their homeland which drive these
people to commit acts of violence that demand such a
heavy toll. The world has seen similar acts committed by
peoples with the same purpose in mind, namely to reclaim
their land, illegally occupied by others through aggression
or colonialism. It becomes a completely different matter,
however, when a Government raises terrorism, killings and
violence to the level,of an official policy, to be executed by
its armed forces, as is now the case with Israel, As I said
earlier, such a policy cannot and must not be tolerated by
the international community. And I repeat again that we
must go down to the root causes of the Middle East
problem and try to solve them, if we want to break the
vicious circle of terrorism and counter-terrorism,
of violence and counter-violence.

27. The attacks of Israel upon Lebanon have included
assaults on the refugee camps in northern Lebanon last
February, in which dozens of Palestinians were indiscriminately murdered. The Security Council has already con;
demned Israel on numerous occasions and has warned that
country that such flagrant violations of the peace must not
be repeated. This was clearly expressed in Security Council
resolution 280 (1970), in which the Council warned Israel
that such armed attacks could “no longer be tolerated” and
that if Israel were to persist in launching such incursions
into the territory of its neighbours the Council would find
it necessary to consider “taking adequate and effective
steps or measures in accordance with the relevant Articles
of the Charter to implement its resolutions”.
28. The Indonesian delegation is of the opinion that the
time has come to take those “adequate and effective steps”
referred to in resolution 280 (1970) and to implement fully
the decisions the Council has taken in the past. The urgency
of the situation demands that this Council take, in the
words of the Foreign Minister of Egypt yesterday, “more
meaningful and effective” steps. As far as Indonesia is
concerned, we shall continue to support the struggle of the
Arab peoples for the just cause of the Palestinian people
who have been chased away by force from their homeland
and for the liberation of Arab territories which have been
forcefully occupied by Israel.
29. We are, of course, aware that any action by the
Security Council, to be effective, can only be taken with
the concurrence and co-operation of the permanent members of the Council. Without such co-operation, without the
necessary common political will, any proposed action wili
be no more effective than the numerous resolutions which
have so far, regrettably, remained unimplemented. The time
has come to take the necessary steps with the full
co-operation of all the members of the Security Council, in
particular of its permanent members because of their
special responsibility, to end the dangerous situation in the
Middle East which has disturbed world peace for a quarter
of a century.

26. The question to which we must turn now is the course
of action the Security Council will take in the present crisis.
Shall we once again pass a resolution, when we have passed
so many before and have seen them wither impotently
away? Shall we again condemn Israel, knowing for sure
that the Council’s condemnations are going to be shrugged
away by Israel, as has happened so many times before?
Shall we ignore the mounting violence that Israel has
inflicted upon Lebanon, so that Israel can continue
engaging itself in similar acts with impunity? The level of
violence has now reached a pitch which we cannot afford to
ignore. I quote from the statement of the representative of

30. My delegation does not want to go into recriminations. We only’want to appeal to the permanent members
to co-operate with one another, to take the necessary
action, not only with regard to the issue of the moment,
very serious though it may be, but also and in the first place
with regard to the root causes of the Middle East problent.
We do not want to spell out who is more right or leSS right,
who is more wrong or less wrong among the permanent
members. We consider it a matter or urgency, however, that
4

they jointly as well as separately make use of their power of
persuasion and exercise their vast influence to help solve
the question of the Middle East, before the wind that has
been sown by violating the fundamental rights of the
Palestinians will force us to reap the whirlwind of renewed
fighting, death and destruction.
31. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
fiutn Frerrch): Representing an African country tied to
Latin America by a similar past dominated by foreign
occupation,‘injustice and arbitrary rule and also by a fierce
resistance struggle against that domination and for national
liberation, I am happy, Mr. President, at a time when the
Council is examining once again the tragic events which
have once again plunged Lebanon into mourning, to see in
tile Chair a distinguished and worthy diplomat from Latin
America, Your distinguished professional and personal
qualities, which everyone who knows you is pleased to
note, are a certain guarantee of the success of our
deliberations. On behalf of my delegation, I should like to
congratulate you and to assure you of our complete
co-operation during the month of your presidency. I should
like to fake this opportunity also to congratulate your
predecessor, Mr. Boyd, on the effective manner in which he
presided over our deliberations in Panama, and to thank
him for the warm welcome accorded to us by his people
and Government, Permit me to associate myself with YOU in
bidding welcome to Mr. Shevchenko and to take the
opportunity to pay tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Kutakov,
whose effective co-operation we highly appreciated when
my country presidedover this Council.
32. The Security Council once again has before it a
complaint from Lebanon againstIsrael,following a new act
of aggression.
Lebanon, once again,hasbecomethe theatre
of bloody incidents which have cost the lives of dozensof
People.AS the Council has learnt, on 11 April, in the early
FOURS of the morning, terrorists disembarkedon the coast
of El-Ouzai and, taking advantageof the surpriseelement,
like bandits, broke into homes and, in cold blood,
murderedYoussef El-Najjar and the poet and intellectual,
Kamal Nasser, spokesman of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. While the Council still had in mind the
cynical bombardment carried out by Israel againstthe
Palestinianrefugee camps,valiant fighters for freedomand
justicewere falling under a treacheroushail of bulletswhile
fighting to reconquer their native soil.

35. The item on our agendais very familiar to Membersof
the United Nations and hasbecomeso to the international
community; it is a matter of grave concern. Many resolutions adopted both by the General Assembly and by this
Council have unfortunately remained dead letters. This
distressingitem on the agendaof the United Nations, asit
has been for almost a quarter century, assumesdifferent
forms and hasmany different implications, the most recent
repercussionsof which go from the Munich incident to the
tragedy which affected the Libyan civilian aircraft, which
cost the lives of more than a hundred innocent victims,
including women and children, as well as the cynical
elimination of the Palestinenational leaders.
36. This, in its essence,is a fundamental problem-the
problem of the right of peopleto their lives, the inalienable
right of the Palestinepeople to a home so that they can
put an end to their wanderings,which have lastedalmosta
quarter of a century. The people of Palestinetoday claim
justice from an international community which arbitrarily
has expropriated its motherland in the name of a principle
whoselogic escapesus.
37. For four years we have witnesseda dangerousescalation of tension on the part of the Israeli Government.
Methodically Israel has been intensifying its expansionist
policy, which constitutes a permanent threat to the peace
and security, both of the region and of the world. By its
persistent refusal to comply with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and other relevant resolutionsadopted by
the General Assembly and other organs of the United
Nations, Israel is continuing to defy the international
community. Assured of the unreservedsupport of certain
great Powers,dnd hence sure of its impunity, Israel is now
stepping up its escalationsagainstLebanon and other Arab
countries.
38. The Council will rememberthe concern expressedby
my delegation in September 1972, in the course of the
considerationof a similarcomplaint on the part of Lebanon
and Syria, when, by its negativevote, one of the permanent
members of the Security Council causedthe rejection of
the draft resolution in document S/10784, although that
draft resolution wassupportedby the majority of members,
who called for the condemnationof Israelfor the barbarous
act committed againstvictims, most of them women and
children.
39. My delegation at that time expressedits profound
regret at that vote which we hoped would not be
interpreted by Israel asa victory permitting it to undertake
new attacks and intensify its acts of aggressionagainstits
Arab neighbours.Wehopedat the time:

33. History has taught us that it is not by assassinating
the
leadersof a movement that one puts an end to a struggle
for liberation. On the contrary, such acts of violencegive
new impetus to the strugglewhich revives.The examplesof
the cowardly assassinations
of Mondlane and Cabralprove
that. The liberation movements of Guinea (Bissau),Cape
Verde and Mozambique, beingstrengthened,shouldbring a
speedyconclusion to Portuguese colonialism.Every day,
heavylossesare inflicted on the enemy.

L‘. . . that the rejection of our draft resolution calling for
the re-establishmentof peacein the Middle East will not
be exploited by Israel asa victory that allowsit freedom
to embark on new escalationsand the commissionof new
acts of aggressionagainst the peaceful territory of
Lebanonand Syria.” (1662nd meeting,para. 169.f

34. Thesefacts from the recent past makeit certain that
the brave Palestinian people will succeedin exercisingits
in&enable right to self-determinationand reconqueringof
its nationalterritory.

40. In order to maintain a state of confusion and to give a
pretext for its policy of aggression,Israel now talks of
terrorism. It pleads guilty; it presentsitself as a small,
5

47. The efforts of the international community since1967
to bring about a just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East crisisleave no room for doubt. The Organizationof
African Unity, in its peacemission,encounteredan attitude
on the part of Israel which can be explained only by the
support it receives from the United States. But recent
events have shown that Africa has learned all the lessons
that it should havelearnedfrom the arroganceand scornof
a State that had had so many African friends which arenow
beginning.toleaveit more and more in isolation.

defenceless nation, persecuted by the Arab countries and
struggling in self-defence to preserve the rights of its
citizens threatened by Palestine and the Arabs.
41. Unfortunately, we know the facts, and the sad reality
is there to show us every day the power of Israel, which is
multiplying its acts of reprisal-acts that remind us of the
methods employed in the dark age of Hitler.
42. Apart from military reprisals, Israel wants to constrain
the Arab States and Lebanon to put an end to the activities
of the Palestine nationalists. It therefore becomes imperative to seek an equitable solution to the crisis raging in
the Middle East. The time has now come when the
international community must undo its error. As we were
told in Panama by the Head of the Government there,
General Torrijos, it is more useful to remedy an error than
to perpetuate an injustice. We feel that responsibility rests
with the great Powers.

48. In the United Nations what remainsto be doneis ta
evaluate the other peace mission, that entrusted to
Mr. Gunnar Jarring. In this regard, we agreeentirely with
the Foreign Minister of Egypt that there should be an
evaluation of the attempts made so far to make the
aggressor
seereason.
49. It is high time for the United Nationsto act effectively
to put a stop to the slaughterin the Middle East. Like most
previous speakers,my delegation once again turns with
hope to the great Powers, because,asI said, they created
the Palestineproblem and they have the moral duty to find
a solution for it-and it is now a matter of urgency.

43. Are we to continue deliberately to tolerate from a
Member State of our Organization acts of aggression against
other, weaker States-aggression which constitutes a threat
to international peace and security? Are we to allow a
Government to go on acting with impunity-a Government
which no longer complies with ,the provisions of the
Charter, Article 4, paragraph 1, of which provides that:

50. My delegation listened with great attention to the
statement of the Foreign Minister of Egypt, and we
reaffirm that the international. community must redouble
its efforts to bring about a just and lastingsettlement of the
Middle East crisis.

“Membership in the United Nations is open to all other
peace-loving states which accept the obligations contained
in the present Charter and, in the judgment of the
Organization, are able and willing to carry out these
obligations.“?

51. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Mr. President,allow
me first of all to expressthe delight and satisfactionof the
Austrian delegation at seeing you occupy the chair of
Presidentof the Security Council for the month of April. It
may perhapsbe slightly inappropriatefor a colleaguewho is
both junior in years and experienceto you to join other
representativesin the praiseof your high diplomatic talents
and skill and list the many stations of a most distinguished
career,of which Vienna hasnarrowly failed to be one.But
it is certainly not inappropriate to expressour feelingsOf
respect and esteem to the representative of a friendly
country with whom Austria sharesmuch more than the red
and white colours of our flags. In expressingconfidencein
the successof your missionasour President,I do SO out of
the highly gratifying personalexperience of someonewho
had the privilege of working with you in another mission
entrusted to you by the Security Council, which gaveme
ampleopportunity, Mr. President,to appreciate your great
senseof political responsibility and dedication.

44. That, in our view, constitutes the complicity of the
great Powers, which, yielding to the pressure of intemational Zionism, artificially created Israel and put it in the
place of the age-old Palestine, the people of which have ever
since led the life of wanderers, hunted even in their most
remote refuges. They no longer have any choice. They react
according to whether their pain and distress are more or less
intense-according to whether they cherish any hope or are
desperate. That is the lot of the Palestine people which has
been persecuted and is struggling to survive-a people with
its organizations which have no other alternative but
recourse to legitimate violence engendered by frustration.
45. We turn with hope once again towards the Powers
which more than any other Members of the Organization
hold the key to solution of the Pales&ian tragedy, because
it was they who created this problem, and we think that
they are morally bound to provide a solution which is by
now more than urgent.

52. Allow me alsoto addressa few words of gratitude to
our Presidentfor the month of March, Mr. Aquiline Bopd,
who wasthe host of the Security Council during its first
meeting,now a part of history, in Latin America, andwho
was at the sametime an extremely skilled and untiring
President of the Council during a number of difficult
moments.May I ask Mr. Boyd, in acceptingthese expressionsof thanks, to transmit the renewedtoken of gratitude
of my delegationto the Governmentand people of Panama
for the warm and generouswelcomewhich will remainin
our memoriesfor a very long time.

46. We would address ourselves particularly to the Govemment of the United States, which provides Israel with
considerablefinancial and military assistance,to settle this
questionby making Israelcomply unconditionally with the
provisions of the resolutions adopted on this subject,
particularly the provisions of Security Council resolution
242 (1967)
and
General
Assembly
resolution
2949 (XXVII).
6

53. Let me also add a word of welcome of my own to the
newly appointed Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Security Council Affairs, Mr. Shevchenko, who occupies,
for the first time, the chair to the President’s left. He is not
new, however, to this chamber as he has served a number of
years with his country’s delegation on the Security Council
and, as the President stated at the beginning of this
meeting, we all look forward to close and fruitful cooperation with Mr. Shevchenko, whose contributions to the
work of the Security Council, thanks to his previous
experience and thanks to his personal qualifications and
capabilities, will surely be most valuable ones.

57. Confronted with these events, we share with all
delegations in this Council an extreme sense of urgency in
seeking appropriate action. Council action, in our mind,
should be directed against the continuation of violence,
against the new escalation of hatred and bitterness with all
its unforeseeable consequences. It is clear from our position
stated earlier that, in our opinion rejection and condemnation of violence by the Council can only achieve its
objective if it is directed against all forms and all sources of
violence and if it appeals, in the strongest terms possible, to
all sides to act with a sense of responsibility and restraint.
No purpose can be served by trying to stamp out violence
in one place when it is so obvious that the nature of the
conflict is liable to produce violence in so many quarters,

54. Once again this Council is faced with a chain of events
which have caused a widespread wave of death and
bloodshed, events which have resulted in a dangerous new
upsurge of hatred and tension. Once again this Council-as
so often when it deals with matters concerning the crisis in
the Middle East-is faced with a debate characterized by
much bitterness and recrimination and a growing sense of
frustration. This is hardly the climate in which the Council
can fulfil its primary task defined by the Charter. This is
hardly the climate in which the Council can make a
contribution to an easing of tension, to create the necessary
prerequisites for peace and security in a conflict which has
not ceased to preoccupy the United Nations since its very
founding years.

58. We are fully aware that acts of violence and terror are
only the symptoms of deep-rooted evils; and nowhere
should this be more obvious than in the crisis in the Middle
East. Eradicating violence from the political scene in the
Middle East, and thus from other regions into which
violence has spread in a dramatic way over the last years,
can only be one step in an effort to which this Organization
has already dedicated so much of its time and energy. It is
the absence of a solution in the Middle East and it is the
passage of time which explain, to a high degree, the growing
sense of frustration and impatience which has bred so much
unrest and tension, This applies particularly to the large
group of Palestinians whose plight and frustration has never
failed to win the sympathy and understanding of my
Government and people, never insensible to the problem of
refugees. Nobody disputes the existence of this political
crisis in the Middle East; nobody disputes the extreme
urgency of a peaceful solution. There is much less agreement, however, on the ways and means to attain this goal
or even on the preliminary steps which could promote a
new climate of de’tente and thus bridge the gap of
misunderstanding and distrust between the parties.

55. Much of the debate so far has been taken up by the
description of a wave of violence whose origins are as much
in controversy as the responsibility of its authors. The
debate has centered on a wide array of facts, many of them
of the very recent past, which lead to one principal
conclusion: that we have reached a dangerous phase of
escalation of violence in an area which, more than any
other, has always shown extreme sensibility to events of
this kind. The events before us are so dangerous in nature,
the evil dynamism they unleash so obvious, that we find it
impossible to react in any manner other than by stressing
once again what has always been the clear position of the
Austrian Government in the face of international violence,
wherever found, in whatever circumstances and by whomever committed. We can only repeat what the Austrian
Federal Government, expressing the deep feelings of the
Austrian people, has invariably affirmed: the clear and
unequivocal condemnation of all acts of violence as
justifiable neither by exceptional circumstances nor for any
other reason. We say this not only out of a firm dedication
to the principle of peaceful solution of conflicts but also
out of a deep respect for human life.

59. ln view of this growing sense of confusion and
controversy, we should not lose sight of the fact that a
widely recognized basis for a solution exists. It is Security
Council resolution 242 (1947), adopted unanimously on
22 November 1967, which contains ali the elements to
bring about peace with justice and security for all nations in
the Middle East, including a just settlement of the refugee
problem, This resolution demonstrates that the United
Nations, with the assistance of all concerned and especially
with the active co-operation of the permanent members of
the Council, is not incapable of devising the platform for a
solution.
60. But it is perhaps no less useful to remember that
resolution 242 (1967) also provides machinery and procedures to facilitate progress towards that goal. It is undoubtedly for those engaged in the conflict to choose,
amongst the peaceful means available for the solution of
their differences, those they consider most appropriate.
Despite this indisputable right, my delegation feels that, in
the present situation, no possibility should be left unexplored and none of the existing platforms-and,
as I said
earlier, there are very few indeed-should remain unused.

56. This attitude of principle is the only one a peaceful
nation which pursues a policy of permanent neutrality-a
policy of permanent rejection of war as a means of
international politics-as its guideline in international affairs
can adopt. As a consequence, we find it impossible to
differentiate between acts of violence, to justify one and
condemn the other. It is for this reason that our approach
to the events which have led to the present series of
meetings of the Council, the Israeli raids against Palestinian
leaders in Beirut, .can be no other than our absolute
rejection of the killing by terrorists of diplomats in
Khartoum, bomb attacks in Cyprus, or other outbreaks of
violence of the recent past.

61. It was precisely in this spirit, incidentally, that the
Austrian Federal Government, at the preparatory talks for a
7

unresolved war? Are these acts, which demonstrate a grisly
contempt for life, to become normal-deeds to be emulated
more and more throughout the world? Is this the heritage
that we, the members of a civilized society, wish to leave
behind?

European security conference in Helsinki, proposed the
study of the question in which way Europe might contribute to a de’tente in the Middle East.
62. What is required, then, is a renewed and concerted
search by all concerned for ways and means to reopen the
road towards a peaceful settlement, and it is the firm belief
of my delegation that, in such an effort, the United Nations
can and should play a prominent part.

69. In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
United Nations affirmed the right of every human being to
life, liberty and the security of person. Is this Declaration
now to be forgotten?

63. Mr, SCALI (United States of America): Mr. President,
I wish to join other representatives on the Council in
welcoming your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. Although I am a newcomer, I have already
had the opportunity to benefit from your wise counsel and
to note the calm, dignified and objective manner in which
you are presiding at these meetings.

70. So that there will be no misunderstanding, let me
make it emphatically clear that the United States opposes
violence and terror from whatever source and of whatever
kind. We do not and will not condone violations of the
sovereignty of one State by another State. Neither, however, do we condone murders in violation of basic human
rights by individuals or groups, Such individuals and groups
depend on the support or on the acquiescence of Governments on whose territory they exist and from which they
plan and direct their operations. That support and acquiescence is clearly contrary to the General Assembly’s
Declaration on friendly relations as well as to general
principles of international law.

64. As we are meeting here today, I think it is important
that we recognize that we are confronting a new and more
dangerous turn in the long and frustrating search for peace
in the Middle East. The cycle of violence in this part of the
world not only is continuing but has also taken on newer
and uglier dimensions. To the shame of all mankind, acts of
violence and terror, often striking down innocent people,
are on the verge of becoming a routine foot-note to the
tragic and unresolved Arab-Israeli conflict.

71. While we are aware of the political realities which are
usually cited to excuse action or inaction on the part of
certain Governments, it is the duty of each State not to
condone or abet or close its eyes to these acts of terrorism.
Indeed, it is the duty of every State actively to prevent the
organization or instigation of such acts on its territov,
whether they are directed against its own citizens or againsl
the citizens of other countries.

65. In focusing attention on violence, I do not ask that we
lose sight of the human and political problems which have
already defied solution for a generation. Rather, 1 wish to
place in perspective a phenomenon that is both inherently
important and important as a barrier to further efforts to
bring real peace and security to the Middle East.

72. The question now in the Middle East is not who
started what but how this vicious cycle is to be broken.
This is our real problem. Statesmust not export violence.
Private groups must not export violence. At this moment,
assessing
blame is secondary to the purposeof endingthe
misery and suffering on both sides.The overriding task of
the Council is-to seizethe presentopportunity and move to
put an end to violence sothat the political processwill have
a chanceto operate.

66. In the past few months hundreds have been killedinnocent men, women and children, diplomats, tourists and
bystanders alike. If we are to do anything about this, it is
important that we understand that this new turn may be
more than a temporary phenomenon in the history of
mankind. It can become an accepted way of life.
67. We are living today at a time when a knock on the
door may signal the visit of an assassin armed with a
machine-gun or a fire bomb. It is intolerable that our fears
have now reached the stage that at thousands of airports
around the world innocent civilians must submit to
complex security searches before boarding their planes and
then pray that their flights will be safe. It is intolerable that
innocent civilians cannot enter their automobiles without
fear that they have been converted into instruments of
death. It is intolerable that opening the morning mail may
trigger an explosion. It is intolerable that the innocent
cannot regard even the family apartment, the social
gathering, the Olympic sporting field or the quiet streets as
an abode of peace. And it is intolerable that diplomats must
conduct their tasks with concern for what may happen to
them or their families in the future and with grief over what
has already transpired. Everywhere life, the life of the
innocent bystander, has been made tragically cheap.

73. The meaningof the Declarationon friendly relations
[General Assemblyresolution2625 (XXV), annexJ isclear.
It says:
“Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing,
instigating, assistingor participating in acts of civil strife
or terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in
organized activities within its territory directed towards
the commissionof such acts, when the actsreferred to in
the presentparagraphinvolve a threat or use of force.“’
74. The cycle of violence will not be broken by drawing
distinctions between violence by conventional forces and
violence by individuals and groups. Violence by CO~YCIItional forcesand violenceby terroristsare to be condemned
equally, One is asugly as the other, The time has come to
recognizethat we must be equally stern in dealing with all
forms of international violence.

68. Are these acts of terror and counter-terror to become
accepted as the new rules of engagement to a tragic
8

75. The United Nations must leave n0 doubt as t0 the
disapproval of the international community of unwarranted
and unnecessary loss of innocent lives from acts of
international terrorism and military responses t0 it. Action
and co-operation by all States is required. No Member State
should attack another. Any such action only breeds further
violence. Neither should any State allow its territory to he
used for the launching of terrorist attacks outside its terri.
tory. No St& should harbour elementswhich attack other
States, or nationals of that State, wherever they may be.

81, Mr. DRlSS (Tunisia) (interpretation from fien&);
Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you and, at: the
same time, to express my warmest wishes for your success
as President of the Security Council, an office which you
are exercising with dignity and competence. 1 should also
like to thank You, and the members of the Council, for
allOWi% me to Participate in your deliberations. Thanks to
the established tradition, it is permissible for a country such
as mine, which, because of the strict application of the rules
of rotation and of quotas, is not a member of the Council,
to be able to come before you nevertheless to express jts
views on an event of extreme seriousness, which is once
again a case of intentional Israeli aggression against
Lebanon. We can now reaffirm our position with respect t0
two basjc problems which we cannot ignore: the problem
of the Palestinian people and that of the Middle East in
general.

76. We have heard many statements here condemning one
side or the other, trying to assess blame. We believe this is
an essentially sterile approach to the problem, These
arguments will not lead to an end to the present agony, for
it is in the nature of a vicious circle that cause and effect
become impossible to distinguish.
77, The time has come, indeed it is already overdue, when
there must be a halt to alI acts of terror by all sides. Even as
there is a truce on the ground which has stopped the major
hostilities for 32 months, so, too, there must be an end to
this grisly exchange of violence and counterviolence which
extends the battlefield to areas where innocent people
inevitably become its victims. All of us, regardless of our
sympathies, have a duty to act now, and not by one-sided
condemnations or by demands for unequal punishment
which ignore the real world,

82. I hope that I shall not abuse the time of the Council.
If we could solve these problems by using arguments only, I
would then insist on occupying this seal: for long hours,
But, alas, this is the twenty-sixth year of speeches,
arguments and counterarguments. The archives of the
Unjted Nations overflow and it is tjme to say to the
Security Council and to the world that we have had
enough. The positions are clear, Israel established itself,
strengthens itself, extends itself and appears in the midst of
the Middle East as a real Power, Perhaps tomorrow it will
even be a nuclear Power. Who can prevent it? The
Palestinian people, the victims of injustice, chased from
their homeland, have nevertheless not lost their faith. Like
other peoples before them, they have taken the road of
battle and of sacrifice to recover their right to their
homeland. Who can turn them away from this? Surely not
Israel, which has jumped 5,000 years back into history to
seek justification for its right to the land of Palestine. The
Arabs all around, who have lost a part of their territory,
suffer humiliation and domination and remain exposed to
repeated aggressions, have no other choice than to fight for
their survival and dignity.

78. Instead, let us move carefully, avoiding the temptation
for the short-term propaganda advantage which inflames
rather than heals. Let us not vie with one another in
cataloguing our grievances and sufferings. It is not enough
to look backward.
It is time to look forward. My
Government is prepared to do so, as v!e continue our search
for a better understanding among these temporary foes,
who one day must: be friends. Let us facilitate the change
from violence to peace, An instrument for this lies at hand.
Let us use it; let us use the already existing framework for
an over-all settlement. I refer to resolution 242 (1967),
which points the way to the goal of a lasting peace through
which all the peoples of the Middle East can achieve
security and justice, Resolution ‘242 (1967) calls for a just
settlement of the refugee problem. The United States
recognizes that peace in the Middle East can only be
achieved by taking into full account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians.

83. Peace is ardently desired, but it is so far removed and,
like a mirage, it will continue to reflect illusions as long as
men of goodwill have not won the cause and as long as the
profound aspirations of the peoples of the Middle East,
particularly those of Palestine, have not been satisfied. All
this jndjcates that we run the risk of having to remain
powerless for a long time to come before a situation which
is fluid, but explosive, and which threatens to become
permanent and, at the same tjme, intolerable, because of
the victims which multiply, the rancour which develops and
the anger which underlies it all. An assessment of the losses
and benefits of both sides during the 2.5 years would be
interesting, What are the losses of the Arabs? Much of their
territory, And the benefits’? Practically none. Even the
hopes born at the end of the colonial era and at the time of
the independence of 18 Arab States are now somewhat
dissipated. Today, a well orchestrated propaganda tends to
present the image of the Arab as an assassin who js to be
avoided at all costs. On the other hand, the Israelis have
gained much territory-1 should say many territories. But
the image of small Israel threatened on all sides by Arab
States has disappeared, to give way to the image of an
invincible Israel, But, paradoxically and at the same time,

79. Unless the ‘Council can move from recrimination to
even-handed condemnation of all forms of violence, there
will be no progress towards peace. Therefore, we ask for an
end to both cross-border attacks and individual acts Of
violence. If the Council will call for this, it will create an
atmosphere in which we can move on from the assessment
of blame to the making of peace. Let us move ahead
urgently to encourage negotiations for a peaceful settlement. 1 appeal to the members of this Council to act in
such a way that this meeting can contribute to the goal Of a
lasting peace in the Middle East.
80. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Tunisia, 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to address the Council.

9

territories has not taken place. On the contrary, we are
witnessing their de facto annexation. The Government of
Israel designs and implements a policy intended to intro.
duce profound changes in the occupied territories, thus
betraying its intention to make its presence there eternal,
We are told that, at best, one must expect permanent
occupation of Jerusalem, of Sharm el-Sheikh md of the
Golan Heights. By frequent acts of aggression Israel affirms
its will to annihilate the Palestinian people and to play the
role of implementing justice in the region.

another event has occurred: the awakening of the Palestinian national conscience which, in turn,, has placed the
Israelis on an alert and has plunged them back into a
permanent fear which is, in a way, of their own creation,
84. Lie all that Israel does, this Beirut affair will sooner
or later have a boomerang effect. It is thought the Palestine
Liberation Front is decapitated by the killing of a few
leaders, but in fact that gives birth to new leaders who are
younger and therefore more intractable. Terrorism is a
reality of our days. We condemn it; we endeavour to do
away with it. But it is there. It is used by individuals and by
one State as a means of action, the effectiveness of which is
questionable but which gives the authors a certain satisfaction, However, Israel will not succeed in silencing the
Palestinians by attacks and incursions in Lebanon and
elsewhere. The Palestinians will surely not recover their
rights because of the sole fact of terrorism, we may be told.
But their struggle is just and cannot fade into oblivion.

88. We might be carried away by despair and conclude
that we shall never see reason prevail in the Middle East,
were other factors not to intervene in our analysis, Those
factors are the following. First, while ignoring the Pales.
tinian people the Israelis actually
live in fear-and it is the
Palestinian people they fear, because that people really
exists and profoundly believes in its inalienable rights.
Secondly, there has been an evolution of thought in Israel,
above all among the young, who are beginning to become
aware of the injustice committed against the Palestinians
and can no longer bear belonging to a country
which in fact
follows a colonial policy, despoiling Arab lands and
occupying territories that belong to other States. Thirdly,
international public opinion shows increasingly widespread
reprobation for acts of aggression of Israel such as its
extraordinary attack on the Libyan aircraft in Sinai and its
numerous punitive expeditions against Lebanon,

8.5. Furthermore, we must realize that the problem no
longer concerns only the Arabs and Jews of Palestine. The
problem is of concern to the entire international community. Is the problem ripe for the international community to guide States towards an equitable solution’? On
what does the ripeness of the problem depend other than
the exact assessment of all and the attitude of equity of the
Powers concerned iu the conflict between antagonists?
86. In 1947, when the United Nations decided on the
partition of Palestine, the only concern of the international
community was to satisfy the Zionists, and hence to take
advantage of Hitler’s holocaust and of the feelings of
justified compassion he aroused for the Jews of the world.
With rare exceptions, the Arabs were then still under
foreign domination. In many regions of the Arab world, the
struggle against colonialism had not yet reached its apogee.
Instead of accepting the part of Palestine that had been
given them by the resolution on partition, the Arabs of
Palestine preferred to reject partition, They were then
suddenly chased from their homes through the back doors
of neighbouring Arab countries and, finally, they are now
refused the right to exist in their own country and even
elsewhere, since they are chased everywhere, while, on the
contrary, the great Powers recognize Israel’s existence and
its right to expansion to boot! The rights of the Palestinians are ignored. What is more, it would seem that the
policy of certain countries, on the pretext of the struggle
against terrorism, is intended to chase the Palestinians
wherever they exist in the vain and illusory hope of
safeguarding peace and tranquility in the region and making
sure that Israel will be perennial.

89. But all those factors have not yet attained sufficient
force to influence the course of events. The list of acts of
violence that has been presented by the delegation of Israel
since the first day of this debate, to which we must not
forget to add the acts of aggression perpetrated by the
Government of Israel, is certainly edifying. It is no longer
classical terrorism. It is a continuation of the conflict in a
new form, with acts of spying and counter-spying, frequent
assassinations, bombings and armed incursions. This is
grave; this is serious, And here developments are far from
reassuring. The cease-fire is precarious. Israel has made no
effort to change its Zionist and expansionist character. Yet
it is evident that, had Israel accepted implementation of
United Nations resolutions concerning the refugees
[General Assembly resolution 194 (M)J and withdrawai
from the occupied territories [Security Council resolution
242 (1967)J, a better situation would have been created in
the Middle East. All efforts at mediation have, unfortunately, failed-the getting together of the great Powers,
the Jarring Mission, the good offices of wise Africans, the
many efforts of numerousGovernments.
90. The prospectsof ajust and lastingpeacein the Middle
East seemremote to us. Are we to wait until the situation
deteriorates further before we act to promote just and
equitablesolutionsasnecessary?Is it not time for all of 1%
small and large nations alike, to become aware of our
responsibility and require respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and the resolutionsof our Organization?
Has not the time come to take up this problem with new
methods and a more realistic and positive spirit, and to
grant the Middle East absolute priority in our concerns?
What is neededis a generalmobilization of our efforts for
an over-all solution that will provide universalrecognition
for the inalienable rights of the Palestinianpeople and

87. Resolution 242 (1947) does not refer to the Palestinians except as refugees, whereas the problem of their
national rights is paramount in any settlement in the Middle
East. Where, then, is the right of all peoples to self-determination? Where is the principle of the integrity of all
States, of a just and equitable policy, of an over-all
settlement that will ensure lasting peace based on justice?
Many arguments were advanced in the course of the debates
of the Security Council leading to the adoption of
resolution 242 (1967). Since then-and this is 1973, six
years after the six-day war-withdrawal
from the occupied
10

withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories, enabling
Jerusalem once more to become the symbol of peace and
brotherhood.

security? Then why does everyone talk about disarmament
in New York, Geneva and elsewhere? Then why do we
have the Security Council, which lives with the obsession of
the veto and which has often been paralysed by the veto?
Why do we have the Unitad Nations, the Charter, resolution
242 (1967) and the Jarring mission? Why indeed are we
here?

91. With our sensitivity, which we never wish to shed
because it shows us the road of justice, and with our usual
concern to appeal to reason, which shows us the path of
truth, we submit to the Security Council a series of
thoughts. We have tried to project, unchanged, on the
international screen which this Security Council is, our vision
of the situation in the Middle East. In fact, this is not the
first time this august Council has heard statements recalling
the monumental injustice committed more than a quarter
of a century ago against a small people in the Middle East
and retracing the 26 tragic years which that small people
has suffered, How many times have voices been raised here
to pose the crucial question whether one can deny the
Palestinian people its right to its homeland? Of all the
representatives of States seated around this table-superPowers, Powers small or large, weak or strong-is there a
single one that in all conscience believes that the people of
Palestine does not have the right to its homeland?

96. We are far from being pessimistic. Nor would we
affirm that the United Nations no longer represents
anything and that one must therefore resign oneself to the
idea that sooner or later it will meet the fate of the League
of Nations, On the contrary, we are one of the small
countries which are devoted to the Organization and
attached to its ideais, and our devotion to it is only
equalled by our discontent and protest because of the now
increasingly numerous acts and excessively persistent policy
of certain States. We must not forget that South Africa and
Portugal are among the States which paralyse the Organization, discredit it and, finally, act as though they would
wish to condemn it to a slow death.
97. We are among those who believe that the responsibility of the great Powers is decisive in the Middle East;
that of the super-Powers is even more decisive. But we also
believe that the small and medium-sized countries, including the Arab countries, not only have something to say
but could, by concerted effort, design a well-studied
strategy and decide on intelligent and bold action, and thus
lead the great Powers of this world to a more just
assessment of the situation and lead them to take more
vigorous action against the many evils which are, alas, too
numerous in this century, which is reputed to be one of
progress and justice but which yet sees so much racism,
colonialism and foreign domination in all forms-and I
cannot forget the underdevelopment and the poverty
suffered in the third world and against which we must unite
our efforts.

92. And yet the leaders of the Palestinian people, the
leaders of a liberation movement, have been assassinated in
Beirut by a group acting on the orders of a Government,
and that group later, after its crime, was publicly congratulated by the Prime Minister of a State Member of the
United Natjons. That is the first fact; it is grave and
exceptional.
93. Yet what is now obvious-and the present debate of
the Security Council bears witness to this-is that the
problem of Palestine is before the Security Council. From
this I shall draw two conclusions. Before demanding of the
Palestinians that they respect international law, the international community should, first of all, take action so that
international law respecti the Palestinian people. It is not
logical to place them beyond the pale of the law and then
designate them as outlaws. But we must say that, for
ourselves and for the Palestinians, morality must prevail.
The second conclusion, which is rather more of a question
is: Why should not the Security Council hear the representatives of the Palestinian people’?

98. It is this direction which has always guided US in the
United Nations, and particularly in our actions with other
delegations during the twenty-seventh session which led to
the adoption, by 123 votes, of General Assembly resolution
2991 (XXVII), in which the Assembly:
“2. Culls upon Member States to ensure the strict
application of the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with Article 25 of the Charter of the United
Nations;

94. The second fact is no less grave: The Government of
Israel sent a group of armed men to the capital of an
independent and sovereign State to carry out an operation
including acts of sabotage and political assassination, and
this in defiance of all laws except one-that of the jungle.
Israel has permitted itself such audacity, first because it
knows that it is armed to the teeth and because Lebanon, a
peaceful country, has practically no army, and secondly
because in Tel-Aviv there was a conviction that the
international community would not react positively.

“3. Appeals to Member States which have not yet
expressed their views on ways and means of enhancing
the effectiveness of the Security Council in accordance
with the principles and provisions of the Charter to do SO
by 30 June 1973 at the latest,”

9.5. We now see the Security Council hearing speeches.
Will it take the necessary decision or wili it once again
hesitate because of the fear of a veto? What are we to think
of that? Must the small countries draw the conclusion that,
to protect themselves from aggression, it is their duty to
arm themselves as much as or more than their neighbours?
Then why is there such a flood of declarations of the
United Nations on the strengthening of international

99. I should also like to recall that the delegation of
Tunisia-which
comes from a country that has a wellknown experience, since for eight years there was a war of
national liberation raging in a neighbouring country-has,
for a long time, foreseen the development of events in the
Middle East. That is why we had reservations when the
Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security
f General Assehbly resdurion 2734 (XXV)f was adopted
11

on the occasion of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the
United Nations. We then spoke about the right of “hot
pursuit” and we foresaw that that which occurred on the
Algerian-Tunisian frontier between 1954 and 1962 might
recur on other frontiers. The latest aggression of Israel
against Lebanon, with which the Security Council is seized,
is in that category and even surpasses the kind of military
events which occurred on the Tunisian frontier-doubtless
unbeknownst to the French Government in most cases. But
here there is an act organized by a responsible Government
of a State Member of the United Nations against a State
Member of the United Nations.
100. On behalf of the people and the Government of
Tunisia, on behalf of President Bourguiba, I should like to
place on record before the Council the total solidarity of
Tunisia with Lebanon, to which justice must be given by
the application of the provisions of the Charter.

terror that is threatening to endangerinnocent humanlives
in every corner of the world.
107. My delegationis not alone in finding the continuing
spectacle of violence followed by violent reprisal and
further violence on a mounting and increasinglyworld-wide
scalenot only saddeningbut gravely disturbing. Noneof it
can be condoned; it must all be deplored, whatever the
degreeof provocation offered from either side.And it must
be brought to an end, or the sympathy, patience and
understanding which exists throughout the world and
which extends particularly to the Palestinerefugeesmay
cometo be tried beyond enduranceto the point wherethe
Security Council will find itself being pressedto take
decisionsthat will be unwelcometo all the disputingparties
in the Middle East.
108. We have listenedin thesepastfew days to a constant
ebb and flow of intense recrimination, In this emotional
atmosphereof chargeand counterchargeof aggression,
or
complicity or acquiescencein aggression,it is perhapstoo
much to hope that either sidecan bring itself, at any rate in
this Council, to show any understandingof, and to make
the slightestconcessionto, the problems,the fearsandthe
motivations of the other side. But it is this complete
polarization of attitudes that have becomefrozen over the
years that helps to aggravatethe already difficult task of
the United Nationsand particularly of this Council.

101, This latest aggression of Israel against Lebanon is
after all, however grave, an incident among many others
more or less serious and more or less deadly. And all these
incidents are a source of concern and profound anxiety. We
believe that we now face a particularly dangerous situation in
the Middle East. It is the duty of the Council to confront
the situation and to take the required measures. What has
just occurred in Beirut and the events of the last months are
really alarming. It is the duty of all of us to put an end to
the escalation.

109. In the context of the agendafor this meeting the
Council is called on by the representativeof Lebanon to
take into seriousconsideration, against a background of
earlieraggressive
actschargedagainstIsrael, “the new Israeli
blatant act of aggression
againstLebanon” [S/lO9lI/.

102. We have said so before the General Assembly and we
repeat it today before the Security Council: the problem of
the Middle East should have high priority in cur concerns
and in the concerns of our Governments.

110. This would suggestthat we are not expected to take
account of all other retaliatory acts of violence and terror
or of their underlying causes.Investigation of the undcrlying causesis to be the task of the Ad Hoc Committeeon
International Terrorism establishedby the General ASsembly under its resolution 3034(XXVII). But for the
fundamentalunderlying causewe do not of courseneedto
look beyond the persistent failure of the search for a
settlement of the dispute between Israel and its Arab
neighbourStates.

103. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first of all express my great pleasure in joining other
members of the Council in welcoming you to the presidential Chair in which you can be sure of the fullest
co-operation and goodwill of the Australian delegation.
104. 1 should also like once again to convey our appreciation and our congratulations to our other colleague from
Latin America, Mr. Boyd of I’anama, on his felicitous
handling of the presidency in the month of March, during
which we held our momentous meetings in his own
country,

1I I, I am happy to say that the Government and people
of Australia enjoy good relations with the principal
countries concernedand no country is more anxious than
mine to see a just, secureand lastingpeaceestablishedas
soon aspossiblein the Middle East. And in the view of my
delegation the first, and we believe the most positive and
helpful step in that direction, might be to break the cycle
of aggression
and reprisalandthus to turn back the wave of
murderous violence and terror that has spread outwards
from the Middle Eastacrossthe world.

105. I am glad also to join in welcoming our new
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Shevchenko, and to extend to
him our good wishes and encouragement in the tasks and
responsibilities that lie ahead of him,
106. My delegation has listened with close attention to the
statements made in the past few days on the matter that is
now
before the Council. If I say that we have listened
without enjoyment, I mean to cast no reflection on the
sincerity underlying the strong feelings which have been
expressed in the course of this debate and which we can
fully understand. These strong feelings are of course not
unfamiliar to this Council. But they seem, on this occasion,
to reveal, perhaps more clearly than ever before, the
symptoms of the pattern of escalation of violence and

112. If we are right in this belief, there seemsto be little
point in our consideringthe latest Israeli act in isolation
from the rest of the horrifying matrix of recent internationalviolenceandterror. This debateseemstohavethrown
up a new expression,“state terrorism”, and there WI be
no doubt that what happenedin Beirut on the night of Qto
10 April was murder planned, directed and acknowledged
12

by the Government of Israel, and a deplorable intrusion
upon the sovereignty of another State Member of the
United Nations. As such it must demand censure.
113. But whether it is to be regarded as an act of
aggression or retaliation or precaution or self-defence, it is
only one of a succession of acts of violence in respect of
some of which some of Israel’s neighbouring Governments
can scarcely escape charges of complicity or at least
acquiescence, In other words “the new Israeli blatant act of
aggression against Lebanon”, to quote again from the letter
of the representative of Lebanon in document S/10911, is
part of a vicious circle and cannot be separated from its
surrounding pattern of violence if this Council is to
generate a new momentum in its efforts to bring about a
just, secure and lasting peace in the Middle East. If the
United Nations fails to put an end to the further escalation
and proliferation of international terrorism, ,it is liable to
have matters taken out of its hands.
114. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Spanish): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Lebanon.
I1 5. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I should like to express
the thanks of my delegation to the representatives around
this table who have spoken rightly and openly, have shown
the solidarity of their countries with Lebanon in these
trying times and have joined in exposing and condemning
the acts of aggression conducted by Israel against Lebanon.

Council is dealing with the complaint of Lebanon, we are
not to be made the scapegoat and we categorically reject
any attempts by anyone to make Lebanon responsible for
acts which are conducted outside its territory or acts
conducted by individual Palestinians.
119. I have listened with great attention and consideration
to the statements made today by the representatives of the
United Kingdom and the United States. I agree with
Mr. Scali that we are not here to apportion or assess
responsibility, but I must call the attention of the Council
to the fact that a certain emphasis has been placed on one
aspect of the problem, terrorist acts, a subject which is not
before the Council, more than on the specific question we
are dealing. with. There has been a reference to the
Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
adopted by the General Assembly during its twenty-fifth
session [resolution 2625 [XXV), Annex]. A quotation was
given from that Declaration. I hope that the inference will
not be drawn that Lebanon is the particular State that is
organizing, instigating, assisting and participating in acts of
violence and so on. I should like to remind members of the
Council of other portions of the same Declaration and I
shouId like them to be clearly put in the record. The
Declaration solemnly proclaims the following principles.
“Every State has the duty to refrain in its international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations. Such a threat or use of
force constitutes a violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations and shall never be
employed as a means of settling international issues.

I 16. I should like to call the attention of the Council to a
very important fact. Here in document S/Agenda/l708
dated 16 April 1973, which was adopted at the beginning
of this meeting, there is one item entitled: “The situation in
the Middle East: letter dated 12 April 1973 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913)“. We are facing one particular aspect of the
situation in the Middle East dealt with in that particular
letter, which is a definite complaint by Lebanon about a
definite, precise and specific act of aggression conducted by
Israel on the morning of 10 April 1973 against my country.
I do not see in that document any item called “terrorism”,
nor do I see another item called: “Review of the Middle
East situation in general in connexion with resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967”.

‘L. . .
“A war of aggression constitutes a crime against the
peace, for which there is responsibility under international law.
L‘
...
“Every State has the duty to refrain from the threat or
use of force to violate the existing international boundaries of another State or as a means of solving international disputes, including territorial disputes . . .“.

117. As far as the second point is concerned, yesterday
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt apprised the
Council (1707th meeting] of his desire, after the conclusion of the debate on the Lebanese complaint, to seize
the Council with a new request, That is his privilege and we
shall await his action and be here to support him and to
show the same spirit of solidarity towards Egypt and the
other Arab countries victims of Israeli aggression that Egypt
has shown today in participating in the debate on this
particular and specific item.

There are other provisions in this Declaration-which
I am
not going to quote, since the question is not before
us-relating to the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force, We shall come to that at a later stage.
120. There is always a certain attempt to speak of balance
and of fairness: an attempt to equate acts with other acts. I
have made it clear before in my statements to the Council,
and I should like to make it clear again, that in dealing with
a specific complaint by Lebanon we are not here to equate
acts of violence carried out by individuals--by anybody
anywhere in the world against anyone-with a precise act of
aggression carried out by Israel against Lebanon. This is not
the first such act, This Council has condemned Israel several

I lg. As far as concerns the question of terrorism, acts of
violence and attacks on diplomats and civil aircraft, the
Council is free to discuss it at any time under any item.
Members of the Council have the full privilege of seizing the
Council of a specific item on terrorism or acts of terrorism,
and naturally we have no objection to that, but, when the
13

times before because of its aggressiovs against my country.
It is already an established pattern. Lebanon has always
been considered a moderate, peaceful couatry. We have
been pushed constantly into a most difficult situation,
while the international community and some Members of
the United Nations, who have the responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security, are not acting effectively in order to bring about a solution of the problem of
the Middle East. Those acts of violence committed by
individualsdo not in any way justify the open, nakedand
premeditatedacts of aggressioncommitted by Israelagainst
Lebanon.When we speak about terrorism we shouldalso
speakabout terrorism organized by a State. Why do weput
emphasisonly on terrorism conducted by individuals?
What about the terrorism conceived, plannedandexecuted
by a State? Why do we not speak about thosereactions
and over-reactions of Israel against Lebanon every time
there is an act of violence somewherein the world?
121, I should like here to remind the Council of an
opinion that a former Foreign Minister of Israel, Mr. Moshe
Sharett, once expressed.In a lecture he gave in 1957 he
opinedthat:
“A people shouldnot consider,when military reactions
outstrip in their severity the events that causedthem,that
theseactions do not produce grave’processesand set in
motion these grave processeswhich widen the gulf and
thrust our neighboursinto extremism.”

that it hasshownno signsof doing anything to solveit? It
may be argued that the United Nations provides relief
assistance
to the refugees.That is true and praiseworthy;
but it is not enoughto maintain them in misery, in a state
of vegetation, while the usurpersof their homelandenjoy
growingmilitary and economicpower,thanks to substantial
and generousaid, grants, loans and armamentspumped
steadilythrough the pipeline of assistance
to Israel.
125. My delegationis raisingtheseargumentsat thisstage
to bring back into correct focus the dramaticeventswhich
arc still flowing out of the original and capital sin-that of
the spoliation of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people. To freeze the Palestinianproblem at its present
level, to neglect to find a solution to it, to avoid dealing
with it courageously,fairly and squarely,to yield, wittingly
or unwittingly, to Israel’ssystematicand obstinaterefusal
to settle it, is tantamount to a deliberateinvitation by the
United Nations for additional tragic events to rock the
world. It also meansthat the United Nations is allowing
itself, by its inaction or refusalto act, to wander away from
facing the realitiesof the situation andto evadeshouldering
its fullest responsibility,

126. Those who are concernedabout the growing acts of
violence-and we sharetheir concern-must step out of the
stalemateof this quiet and lethargy which is prevailing in
international affairs and hit at the roots of the problem. It
hasbeensufficiently repeatedthat violence begetsviolence.
There is the stark reality of the existenceof one anda half
122. Well, that is the preciseaction that Israelis conduct- million Palestinianrefugeeswho are still living in deploring againstpeaceful, moderateLebanonin order constantly able, miserableandfrustrating conditionsafter 25 years. As
to pushit and its peopleinto a most difficult situation;and, long asthe international community doesnot addressitself
unfortunately, we are at the presenttime facing a situation to finding a just solution to their problem, the cycle of
wherewe have to carry a certain portion of the assessment violence in which the Middle East is grippedtoday will not
of the blame. To try to apportion responsibility for
be broken and cannot but go on spiralling.
incidents and outrages perpetrated every now and then,
here and there,, is to divert attention from the real 127. Israel seemsto enjoy, in the opinion of experts, not a
responsibility. Israel was and remainsthe party principally balanceof military power with the Arab Statesbut a net
responsible
for the tragedy of the Palestinianpeopleandfor
superiority over them. Israel is usingthat superiority right
its resultingconsequences.
The Zionist and Israeliterrorism and left, and we are its victims. Israel usesit not for
before, during and after 1947 and 1948, and asa resultof
defence,as its leaderspretend, but to maintain an offensive
the 1967 war, has driven over a million and a half people campaignof terror and intimidation againstthe neighbaurout of their ancestralhomelandinto exile; their lands,their
ing Arab States. But that superiority cannot Iast for ever.
homes and property have been taken by foreignersinGreat Powersand empireshave risenand crumbled in the
gatheredin Arab Palestine,
course of history; no amount of military superiority and
power has saved them. But nations which built their
123. This historic, factual responsibility should not be existenceon solid moral and humanfoundations were able
clouded in the minds of people and the argumentsof
to withstand the calamitiesof time andsurvived.
present-dayrealismshould take into seriousconsideration
this basicelementwhen there are attempts at apportioning 128. Regardingthe Arab world, we must remember the
responsibility. Singular acts, no matter what their magni- historical truth that Israel and its supportersmust reckon
tude may be and whatever the impact they may haveon
with; it is an historical as well as a present-dayand future
public opinion, shouldnot blind people to the fundatiental
reality, A Jewish man with great vision, ProfessorJudas
truth about the tragedy of the Palestinianpeople brought Magnus, a founder and first President of the Hebrew
about by Israel. Nor can the United Nations absolveitself University in Jerusalem,saw it a long time ago when he
of its cardinalresponsibility.
spoke of “. . . the permanenttruth of the presenceof the
Arab world, with which all nationshave had to reckon, and
124. It is not my intention to recall all the facts aboutthe
so must Israel. The Israelis are no exceptions; they only
role played by the United Nations in the creation of the
enjoy a temporary superiority”. Mr. Magnusalsosaid,with
Palestinianproblem; but are we not justified in reminding chilling prescience:“The day we lick the Arabs, that is the
the Counciland the international community at largethat
day, I think, when we shall be sowing the seeds of an
the United Nations has permitted the problem of the
eternal hatred of suchdimensionsthat Jewswill not be able
Palestinianrehlgeesto last for a quarter of a century, and to live in Palestinefor centuriesto come.”
14

129. Is that the peace Israel wants? Is the kind of peace
Israel wants a peace achieved by building walls of hatred
around itself, by building hedges of violence around jts
borders?
130. On this day of Passover I invite the Jews of the world
to think about peace-and to think about it sincerely. I
agree with Mr. Scali and Sir Colin Crowe regarding the
peace and prospects of peace that we should look forward
to. We should act for peace; that is our aim. It has been the
aim of the Arab Governments and peoples for a long time.
They have, as I mentioned before, a great stake in peace,
for in peace alone can they achieve their national goals of
educational, economic and social progress and political
stability.

midst. Chase them out of your house before they bring that
house down upon you. I was amazed to listen to the
representative of Lebanon refer to the principles contained
in the Declaration on friendly relations and co-operation
between States. The principles cited by him are precisely
those that the Arab States have torn to pieces in their
relations with Israel. Who is responsible for 25 years of
continuous war? Who is responsible for the aggression that
started with the Arab invasion of Israel in 1948 and still
continues through periods of truce, armistice and ceasefire-but
still continues, by various methods, including,
today, the bestial method of bloodshed through outrages
and atrocities?
137. The representative of Lebanon, however, did not
refer to and did not read out to us the principle that I and
other representatives have cited in the course of this debate,
contained in the same Declaration, and I should like to
repeat it:

131. President Sadat of Egypt, in an article published by
the quarterly Foreign Affairs in its issue of October 1972,
emphasized the importance of peace to his country. He said
that Egypt had no interest in the wars of the Middle East.
He added:

“Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing or
encouraging the organization of irregular forces or armed
bands, including mercenaries, for incursion into the
territory of another State.

“They are tremendous obstacles on her road to progress. The cause of peace will not be furthered if the
victor is allowed to dictate his terms and to exact the
fruits of his victory. The future we and the other Arab
nations dream of is one of justice and of peace in
co-operation with all those who wish to assist our
progress towards those goals.”

“Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing,
instigating, assisting or participating in acts of civil strife
or terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in
organized activities within its territory directed towards
the commission of such acts, when the acts referred to in
the present paragraph involve a threat or use of force.”

132. Egypt made positive moves towards achieving peace
in February 1970. It was commended by the United
Nations in various resolutions and by international public
opinion. Perhaps I should remind the Council here that
Mr. Richard Nixon, the President of the United States,
described the Egyptian attitude best when he said that
“Egypt was forthcoming more than expected”.

138. The representative of Lebanon asked whether the
references to this particular obligation implied that
Lebanon and its Government were considered to be
responsible for violating this obligation. The answer is
clearly yes. The Government of Lebanon acquiesces in the
presence of armed bands on its territory. It encourages
them by its attitude; it fosters and gives added strength, by
the kind of statements to which the Security Council has
been treated in the course of this debate, to the terrorist
groups active on its territory.

133. Why should we all feel powerless in the face of Israel
in our search to achieve a just and durable peace? Why is
Israel allowed to perpetuate a stalemate and, consequently,
to further the deterioration of t.he situation we are all
complaining about? Mr. President, I would like to assure
YOU and members of the Council that there are countries
which are attached to peace and to the prevalence of peace
in the world. But allow me to say that there is no country
in the world which is attached to peace more than
Lebanon.

139. It is time for the Government of Lebanon not to be
selective in its references to international obligations, to
Charter principles, to declarations, especially those adopted
unanimously by all Member States of the United Nations.
Either there is one law for all or there is really no sense at
a11 in our discussing the application of international
principles of law and morality. Indeed, any one of US,or of
the onlookers and listeners that have been following our
deliberations thus far, must have been troubled by a
number of questions.

134. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fiorn Spanish): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.
135. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): We have heard in the course
of the present debate a great deal about peaceful, innocent
Lebanon, By now the world is fully acquainted with how
peaceful and how innocent Lebanon and its capital, Beirut,
are. Lebanon is like the house owner who consorts with
murderers, who permits drimjnals the use of his home and
then, when the neighbours strike back, complains that the
house is being damaged or affected.

140. Is not the Charter of the United Nations based on the
sovereign equality of all its Member States? Why then is
one Arab representative after another permitted, as they
have been again today, to come before the highest organ of
the United Nations and openly reject Israel’s right to
independence? Why are they permitted to claim here that
a11peoples in the world have a right to national identity, to
freedom and self-determination,
but not the Jewish
people? Why are Arab representatives allowed to turn the
Security Council Chamber into a forum where slander and

136. TO the Government of Lebanon I would give a piece
of very simple advice. Get rid of the murderers in your
15

falsehood are constantly trotted out, where truth and
history are turned into mockery and where law and equity
are cynically distorted? Is it not a travesty of elementary
justice when the Jewish people’s age-long struggle to restore
its independence in its ancient homeland is calumniated and
dismissed, while the descendants of Arab conquerors of this
land and people, the great majority of whom had emigrated
into Palestine from abroad in the same years the Jews
returned to it, are referred to as indigenous, as they were by
some representatives again at the present meeting?
141. How long will the United Nations have to hear what
the world knows to be a total untruth: that the problem of
a million Palestinian refugees, out of more than 40 million
refugees in all parts of the globe who were resettled a long
time ago, is the source of Arab terrorism, which began long
before there was a single Palestinian refugee in the world?
142. Those who have been listening to the statements
made in the Council today and yesterday must have been
‘pondeiiiig and wondering over a number bf questions. Does
not international law, do not United Nations resolutions,
prohibit the organization and the support of terrorist acts
from the territory of one State against another, as provided
for, for instance, in the Declaration I cited? Why then does
not the Security Council do something about the maintenance of terrorist bases and the initiation of terrorist acts
on the territory of Lebanon and other Arab States? Why
does the Council listen passively to Arab Governments
justifying their identification with terror atrocities and
demanding a licence for continuing in this criminal
attitude?
143. Is there or is there not a fundamental Charter
principle recognizing the right of every State Member of the
United Nations to self-defence, a right transcending all
other principles and obligations? Why then is there
criticism of Israel’s action against the terrorist bases from
which savage attacks have been launched against its
territory and its citizens? Is it merely because this action
was carried out by Israel? Does not the principle of
self-defence apply to Israel as it does to other countries? Is
not the entire enlightened world engaged today in combatting international terrorism? Why does not the Security
Council do something about it’?

it necessary to do so in order to prove that the Council,
because of its structure, its composition, its voting prac.
dures, is unable to take an equitable stand on Middle
Eastern questions? How many more meetings of the
Security Council are necessary to remind the world that in
its entire history this organ has not adopted a sin@e
resolution-not a single resolution-condemning
the murder
of Israeli citizens, and that time and again such resolutions
have been voted down or vetoed?
146. Have we already forgotten how, when in 1967 Egypt
chased otit the United Nations Emergency Force from
Sinai and Gaza, imposed a war blockade in the Straits of
Tiran, massed its forces for attack along Israel’s borders and
began shelling Israeli villages, the Council found itself in a
mire of polemics, incapable of taking any action?
147. What is then the course of action against the barbaric
campaign of Arab terrorism that is being proposed to us
here? Nothing, nothing at all. Since the beginning of the El
Fatah-Black September atrocities in 1970, 80 Arab terrorists have been caught in Western countries-some of them in
States represented in this Council, including States whose
representatives have spoken today. All of these terroristsall of them-have been released. Now, is this the wa)- trl
combat terrorism? Is this the example set for Israel? In
another country, Yugoslavia, only a few days ago, an Israel
table-tennis team participating in an international tournament was compelled by the Yugoslav authorities to leave
because those authorities gave in to the threats of )\rab
terrorist organizations to attack the Israeli sportsmen. NIW
is this a policy to be emulated? Do nothing? Surrender tr:
the menace of savage bloodshed? Release criminals cngasecl
in it?
148. A Jewish citizen of the USSR recently wrote a ktlrl
to the Secretary-General, explaining his suffering, his
despair and his longing to live as a free man in IsrxI.
RecallingJewishhistory-the inquisition, the pogroms, &C
Nazi holocaust-he wrote: “In the heart of every Jew there
is a cemetery.” Yes, we have not forgotten and we ~ha11
JM
forget. We have not forgotten the 6million barbarimh
butchered, the 2 million Jewish children led to gas clra!t%e
bers and crematoria, while the world stood by in silence.
We have not forgotten how, in those dark years of
persecutionand murder,we were beingtold that there W~Q
principles of sovereignty, of domesticjurisdiction, of vital
State interests which prevented intervention, which LWvented effective action to save6 million Jews. The a&ice
given us today-.sit still, do nothing about the murder *lf
Jewsin our timesbecausethere are questionssuch asthrl<C
of sovereignty-cannot but bring back the echoes of {IX
past.

144. What is the advice that we hear at the Council table?
From Arab representatives it is simple: disappear from the
world and then there will be peace, Well, the Jewish people
has rejected such advice for several millenia; it does not
intend to heed it now, especially when it comes from such
paragons of international law as Arab representatives or the
representative of Indonesia, which State thought nothing of
massacring half a million Chinese citizens only a few years
ago. Where was the Security Council then?

149. The problem before the Security Council is ~1~‘ap.
Egypt and Lebanon and their supportersare asking ftir .i
licence to continue international terrorism. Israel subtnils
to the Council that, in the absenceof any readinessby &at*
Governmentsto abide by their obligations and put an cg$J
to the use of their territory for murder operations, in Ill<*
absenceof any effective measures
by the United Nations a**
curb international terrorism, Israel has no choice but (19
protect its peoplewith its own means.The cycle of viokIm
is not of Israel’smaking. When Arab violence ceases:lrld

145. What alternatives do those who have expressed
dissatisfaction with Israel’s action against the terrorist bases
have to offer to us? Address ourselves to the United
Nations? Has not our Organization proved helpless to take
effective action against terrorism? Have we forgotten what
happened only a few months ago at the General Assemb1y
session? Turn to the Security Council? How many times is
16

when Arab terrorism ends, there will be no need for Israeli
counter-measures and an effort towards understanding and
agreement can be made.
150. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
call on the representative of Lebanon.

crossover without any arms,but only with flowers, the
flowersof peace.
154. Mr. ANWAR SANI (Indonesia):I shahbe very brief,
The representativeof Israelreferredto my delegation when
he Was exercisinghis right of reply. He mentionedthe
murderof 500,000Chinese
in Indonesiaa few Yearsago, As
we arenot discussing
the internalaffairsof Indonesiain this
Council, I shouldlike only to requesthim to study hisfacts
better, as neither the numbernor the nationality of the
victims,asstatedby him,is correct,

from ,@anish): I

151. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I promise that I shall be
extremely brief. In the light of the statement we just heard
by the representative of Israel in which he very clearly
expressed a warning to Lebanon by saying, “before they
bring that house down upon you”, I wish to draw the
attention of the Council to the threat that was made
following the attack on Beirut by the Minister of Defense
of Israel, Moishe Dayan, who said that in the future Israel
would not act against individual terrorists alone, but would
strike against the neighbouring Arab countries, and there
was a direct threat against Lebanon, That is the kind of
threat that we are facing every day. It was not sufficient
that Israel committed an abhorrent and abominable act of
aggression on 10 April, Its spokesmen had to follow that
act by making further threats against our lives, our
sovereignty and our territorial integrity.

155. The PRESIDENT(interpretationfrom @wish): I
call on the representative
of Israel,
156. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel):I haveaskedto speaksimply
to makeone point. It is not the first time andit isnot the
first of his statementsin which the representativeof
Lebanonhas resortedto utter distortion, even of words
pronounceda few minutesbeforehisown statement.I at
no time in my remarkssaidthat IsraelthreatenedLebanon
in any manner. My statementwas that the Lebanese
Governmentshouldeliminatethe terrorist gangsfrom its
territory before they bringthe housedownupon Lebanon,

152. Again we hear the rhetoric of Mr, Tekoah about the
6 million Jews. I think he has used that argument enough in
the Council. We are not responsible for that act, and we
never participated in it. We have been the victim of the
Irolocaust.

151. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Before adjourningthe meeting,I am pleasedto call on
Mr. Arkady Shevchenko,Under-Secretary-General
for Pohtical and Security Council affairs, who wishesto makea
statement.

153. Israel wants to live in peace? Well, it can. The Jews
of Israel can live in peace and harmony with their
neighbours. The Jews of Lebanon live in peace and
harmony with us. We value them, I take this opportunity
here today solemnly to addressto them my congratulations
on this holy day. I have many friends amongthem, and I
value their friendship. We have no hatred againstthe Jewsor
againstthe Israelis. Wehave hatred againstacts of violence
andof aggression.If Mr. Tekoah and his peoplereally wish
to live in peace, in a spirit of conciliation, of peaceand
justice, I invite him and his people to allow the Palestinian
propfe, on this day of Passover,to begin to passover the
horders and to reintegrate in their ancestralhome. This‘is
the invitation that I make to Israel: for the people of
llalestineto reintegrate in their home and to live In peace.I
assure Mr. Tekoah that if the Palestiniansare allowedto go
back to their homesand ifjustice is done to them, they will

158. Mr. SHEVCHENKO (Under-Secretary-General
for
Political and Security Council Affairs) (translationfrom
Russian):I have spentconsiderable
time within thesewalls
and I have alwaysstrivenin the pastand shallcontinueto
strive in the future in my newcapacityto do everythingin
my powerto ensurethat the taskssetout in the Charterof
the United Nationsare accomplished.
I am surethat the
United Nations Secretariat,under the leadershipof the
Secretary-General,
will do everythingnecessary
to carry out
thosetasks.

17

159, I shouldlike sincerelyto thank you, Mr. President,
all the membersof the Security Counciland all my old
friends and colleaguesfor the warm words of welcome
which they addressed
to me.
Themeetingroseat 1.50p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATXONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
dkpositaires
du monde entier. Informea-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Units. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJIYYIITh

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHHfi

PUBLICACIONES

OPrAHN3AUHM

DE

OB’bEAHHENHhIX

LAS

NACIONES

HAUUR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones Unidas estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
Wnidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price: $U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

73-820014une

1978---2,200
