A/RES/76/266

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 June 2022

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda items 15 and 119
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and followup to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 June 2022
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/76/L.58)]

76/266.

Progress Declaration of the International Migration
Review Forum
The General Assembly
Endorses the Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review
Forum, adopted by the Forum, as contained in the annex to the present resolution.
76th plenary meeting
7 June 2022
Annex
Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum
1.
We, the Heads of State and Government and High Representatives, meeting at
United Nations Headquarters in New York from 17 to 20 May 2022 at the first
International Migration Review Forum, convened under the auspices of the General
Assembly, determined to enhance cooperation on international migration in all its
dimensions, to discuss and share progress on the implementation of all aspects of the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, 1 including as it relates to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2 and with the participation of all
relevant stakeholders, have adopted the following Progress Declaration.

__________________
1
2

22-08884 (E)

Resolution 73/195, annex.
Resolution 70/1.

160622

*2208884*

A/RES/76/266

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

Introduction
2.
We reaffirm the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, also
known as the Marrakech Compact on Migration, and recall General Assembly
resolution 73/195 of 19 December 2018, by which it endorsed the Global Compact,
as well as General Assembly resolution 73/326 of 19 July 2019 on the format and
organizational aspects of the international migration review forums.
3.
We also reaffirm that the Global Compact is based on a set of cross-cutting and
interdependent guiding principles: people-centred, international cooperation, national
sovereignty, rule of law and due process, sustainable development, human rights,
gender-responsive, child-sensitive, whole-of-government approach and whole-ofsociety approach.
4.
We are determined to fulfil the objectives and commitments outlined in the
Global Compact, in line with its 360-degree vision, guiding principles and
comprehensive approach, by facilitating safe, orderly and regular migration,
promoting the contributions of migrants at all skills levels to sustaina ble development
at the local, national, regional and global levels, within the framework of the 2030
Agenda, and reducing the incidence and negative impact of irregular migration.
5.
We acknowledge our shared responsibilities to one another as Member State s of
the United Nations to respect each other’s needs and concerns over migration, and we
recognize that all migrants, regardless of their migration status, are human rights
holders, and reaffirm the need to protect their safety and dignity, and the overar ching
obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all migrants, regardless of their migration status, without any kind of
discrimination, while promoting the security, well-being and prosperity of all our
communities.
6.
We reaffirm the importance of international cooperation to facilitate safe,
orderly and regular migration, including through the implementation of planned and
well-governed migration policies in line with international law.
7.
We recognize the positive role and contributions of migrants for inclusive growth
and sustainable development in countries of origin, transit and destination, including
by enriching societies through human, socioeconomic and cultural capacities.
8.
We commend the positive role and contributions of millions of migrants in
responding to and recovering from the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic,
including as essential workers, and remain deeply concerned that the pandemic has
had a severe and disproportionate impact on migrants, including through increased
COVID-19 exposure, discrimination, violence, job losses, wage theft, protracted
family separation, and restricted or lack of access to health -care services and other
basic services, including vaccines, social protection, education and child services, and
being subjected to unsafe and undignified returns.
9.
We recognize that as many as 281 million people were international migrants in
2020 globally, of whom 48 per cent were women and girls and 15 per cent were under
the age of 20, and that remittances are a critical source of support for families and
communities, with migrants having transferred over 751 billion United States dollars
in remittances in 2021 to their countries of origin.
10. We recognize the value and dignity of the labour of all migrant workers in all
sectors, emphasizing the importance of promoting fair labour conditions and decent
work and upholding international labour standards, and, in this regard, we also
recognize the work of women migrant workers, including in paid and unpaid care
work, domestic work and the informal economy, and emphasize the need to ensure
that they are legally protected against violence, harassment and exploitation.
2/13

22-08884

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

A/RES/76/266

11. We are concerned that a growing number of migrant children, inclu ding those
who are unaccompanied or separated from their parents or primary caregivers, are
particularly vulnerable along their migration journey, and reaffirm our commitment
to protecting the rights of the child and upholding the principle of the best int erests
of the child.
12. We are concerned about the impact of financial and economic crises, poverty,
health emergencies and food insecurity on international migration and migrants, as
well as sudden-onset and slow-onset natural disasters, the adverse effects of climate
change, and environmental degradation, such as desertification, land degradation,
drought, floods, water scarcity and sea level rise, taking into account the potential
implications for migration and migrants.
13. We recognize the importance of creating conducive political, economic, social
and environmental conditions for people to lead peaceful, productive and sustainable
lives in their own country and to fulfil their personal aspirations, and, in this regard,
declare our profound solidarity with and support for migrants caught up in situations
of crisis in countries of transit and destination.
14. We reaffirm our collective responsibility to preserve the lives of all migrants
and take action to prevent loss of migrant lives and, in this cont ext, remain deeply
concerned that thousands of migrants continue to die or go missing each year along
perilous routes on land and at sea, in transit and destination countries, with reports of
more than 8,436 migrants having lost their lives and 5,534 migrants having gone
missing in transit globally from 2019 to 2021.
15. We condemn acts, manifestations and expressions of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants and diasporas and the negative
stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion or belief.
16. We are concerned about the risks, including for migrants, associated with
irregular migration, smuggling of migrants and crimes against migrants, which
continue to pose significant threats to the lives and well-being of migrants, and which
require a concerted international assessment and response and strengthened
multilateral cooperation among countries of origin, transit and destination.
17. We take note with appreciation of the regional reviews of the implementation of
the Global Compact and the reviews of progress at the national level, including, on a
voluntary basis, the elaboration and use of national implementation plans and the
mainstreaming of the Global Compact in plans and legislation, d rawing on
contributions from and the meaningful participation of all relevant stakeholders,
including migrants, as well as parliaments and local governments, in line with a
whole-of-government and whole-of-society approach.
18. We recognize the work of the Global Compact Champion countries and the
Friends of Migration group, including their initiative to share insights, lessons learned
and promising practices in support of the implementation of the Global Compact,
such as the Rabat Declaration adopted during the first ministerial meeting of the
Champion countries on 25 March 2022.
19. We take note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary -General of
27 December 2021 on the implementation of the Global Compact, 3 and its guidance
for the deliberations during the Forum, including policy priorities for consideration
by the Forum.
20. We recognize the work of the United Nations Network on Migration in support
of the implementation of the Global Compact, including the establishment of the
__________________
3

22-08884

A/76/642.
3/13

A/RES/76/266

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

capacity-building mechanism, which comprises the migration multi-partner trust fund
and the Migration Network Hub.
Progress, challenges and gaps in the implementation of the Global Compact
21. We recognize the many efforts and the progress made and the good practices
that have emerged in implementing the Global Compact and in realizing our collective
goal of advancing safe, orderly and regular migration, and in the response to and
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, by national and local governments, the
United Nations system and other international and regional organizations, migrants,
diasporas, civil society, local communities, migrant and diaspora organizations, faith based organizations, academia, the private sector, parliam entarians, trade unions,
national human rights institutions, the media, humanitarian actors, volunteers and
other relevant stakeholders.
22. We are concerned that progress achieved in facilitating and harnessing the
benefits of safe, orderly and regular migration is slow and uneven in many areas and
that the COVID-19 pandemic has reshaped many aspects of international migration
and negatively impacted progress, and created new, and exacerbated existing
situations of vulnerability for migrants. Greater efforts are needed by Member States
to develop ambitious national responses for the implementation of the Global
Compact. We recognize that challenges and gaps in the implementation of the Global
Compact exist and may be due, in part, to limited resources and n ational capacities,
as well as insufficient coordination within and between Governments, and with
relevant stakeholders.
23. We recall that in General Assembly resolution 73/326, Member States decided
to cover all 23 objectives of the Global Compact in four round tables during the
Forum.
Round table 1 (objectives 2, 5, 6, 12 and 18) 4
24. Progress has been made in mainstreaming international migration into
development plans and sectoral policies at the local, national, regional and global
levels, as well as in climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies and policies.
Progress has also been achieved in the conclusion of bilateral and regional labour
migration agreements, efforts to simplify administrative procedures related to
migration and actions to prevent and reduce situations of vulnerability faced by
migrants, in particular those in an irregular situation, including by facilitating their
access to regular status, the formal economy, the lab our market and basic services in
line with national legislation. However, the availability and flexibility of pathways
for regular migration remains limited in many cases.
25. Progress has been made by Member States, the private sector and other
stakeholders in promoting fair and ethical recruitment and decent work for migrant
workers, international labour standards, ensuring respect for and protection and
fulfilment of human rights, and reducing or banning recruitment fees and
strengthening labour inspection capacities. The use of digital technologies during the
pandemic has increased, which contributed to the effectiveness and transparency of
migration procedures, while also raising concerns about the digital divide for many
__________________
4

4/13

Objective 2: Minimize the adverse drivers and structural factors that compel people to leave their
country of origin; objective 5: Enhance availability and flexibility of pathways for regular
migration; objective 6: Facilitate fair and ethical recruitment and safeguard conditions that
ensure decent work; objective 12: Strengthen certainty and predictability in migration procedures
for appropriate screening, assessment and referral; objective 18: Invest in skills development and
facilitate mutual recognition of skills, qualifications and competences.
22-08884

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

A/RES/76/266

migrants as well as challenges related to upholding migrants’ right to privacy and the
protection of personal data.
26. Progress has been achieved in facilitating recognition of academic and
vocational qualifications and skills of migrant workers and returning migrants.
27. The adverse effects of climate change, environmental degradation and natural
disasters are among the drivers of migration, which are influenced by economic,
social, political and demographic contexts. Efforts to mitigate and adapt to the adverse
effects of climate change have been insufficient, including in climate finance, as
acknowledged by the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and as part of the
Glasgow Climate Pact. The responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and the negative
impact of climate change and systemic shocks have laid bare the gaps that remain in
anticipating, preparing for and responding to events that might trigger large
movements of migrants.
28. The lack of mutual recognition of skills and qualifications of migrants limits
their potential, the benefits they can gain from their labour as well as their
contributions to sustainable development, and leaves migrants vulnerable to
exploitation. Many migrant workers, especially women migrant workers, continue to
face precarious working conditions, wage theft, labour exploitation, reduced wages,
discriminatory dismissals, withholding of benefits, forced unpaid leave and protracted
separation from their families, which have been exacerbated during the COVID-19
pandemic. In many cases, migration procedures lack predictability and allow for high
levels of undue discretionary action, undermining the rule of law and due process.
29. The lack of access to quality education and economic opport unities, and
inadequate investment as well as underdevelopment are among the key drivers that
compel young people to leave their countries of origin in search of better
opportunities. Therefore, it remains crucial to promote sustainable development,
generate employment, bridge the digital divides and empower youth to fully
participate in their societies.
Round table 2 (objectives 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 21) 5
30. Stakeholders have developed guidance for the development of transnational
search mechanisms, promoting cross-border operational cooperation and informationsharing, and the establishment of other internationally coordinated efforts on missing
migrants. Observatories have been established to collect migration data, and progress
has been achieved in curbing the incidence of smuggling of migrants and in improving
the capacity of Member States to identify networks of migrant smugglers and their
organizers, and in identifying and responding to the needs of migrants in this regard.
31. There are increasing efforts by Member States to foster cross-border collaboration
for the prevention of trafficking in persons, the investigation and prosecution of
human traffickers, and to provide assistance and safe access to services to victims of
trafficking in persons. Efforts are being made to modernize border-crossing points,
including by simplifying procedures and upgrading infrastructure and equipment, to
reduce immigration detention, including by implementing non-custodial alternatives
__________________
5

22-08884

Objective 4: Ensure that all migrants have proof of legal identity and adequate documentatio n;
objective 8: Save lives and establish coordinated international efforts on missing migrants;
objective 9: Strengthen the transnational response to smuggling of migrants; objective 10:
Prevent, combat and eradicate trafficking in persons in the context o f international migration;
objective 11: Manage borders in an integrated, secure and coordinated manner; objective 13: Use
migration detention only as a measure of last resort and work towards alternatives; objective 21:
Cooperate in facilitating safe and dignified return and readmission, as well as sustainable
reintegration.
5/13

A/RES/76/266

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

to detention in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Some Member States have
taken steps to end child immigration detention, advancing efforts to protect and
respect the best interests of the child. In response to the challenges posed by the
pandemic, some Member States temporarily suspended forced returns and expanded
assistance to returning migrants. Some Member States have supported reintegration
and recognized the opportunity to leverage the skills and knowledge acquired by
returning nationals. Nevertheless, challenges remain in all of these areas.
32. Progress has been made in issuing migrants, including unaccompanied and
separated children, with adequate documentation and civil registry documents.
However, challenges remain regarding international cooperation on identification of
nationals and issuance of travel documents, as many Member States still lack robust
civil registration systems or the capacity to issue identity and travel docu ments.
Migrants continue to face risks throughout the migration journey, owing to a lack of
proof of legal identity, insufficient access to information or lack of predictability in
migration procedures. Some policies, practices and conditions associated wi th
immigration detention, including arbitrary deprivation of liberty, overcrowding and
poor access to basic services have affected the physical and mental health and well being of migrants, as well as child development.
33. Migrants continue to struggle to access and receive humanitarian assistance,
including search and rescue efforts and medical care, which creates and exacerbates
situations of vulnerability. Limited progress has been made in distinguishing the
activities of smuggling networks from the provision of assistance of an exclusively
humanitarian nature for migrants along perilous routes and in other situations where
their life or safety is in danger. In many cases, the provision of such assistance has
been considered unlawful.
34. Travel restrictions imposed by countries of origin, transit and destination as a
response to the COVID-19 pandemic have created and exacerbated situations of
vulnerability faced by migrants, and challenges for return and readmission, in many
cases, including through insufficient efforts to manage national borders in an integrated,
secure and coordinated manner that respects obligations under international law. In
some cases, Member States have forcibly returned migrants with insufficient regard
for health risks or due process and procedural safeguards, including the best interests
of the child. Travel and other restrictions, including border closures and lockdowns,
as well as capacity limitations, constrained the return and readmission of migrants
who wished to return.
35. Safe and dignified return, readmission and sustainable reintegration in full
compliance with international human rights law have proven to be difficult and
complex in many cases. Conditions for more predictable travel have deteriorated
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Limited progress has been made in enhancing
bilateral and international cooperation to determine clear and mutually agreed
procedures that uphold procedural safeguards and guarantee individual assessments
and legal certainty.
36. Poverty, inequalities, economic exclusion and violence, including sexual and
gender-based violence, which have increased during the pandemic, are among the key
risk factors of trafficking in persons, especially for women, children and young
people. The COVID-19 pandemic has complicated access to, and the provision of,
support to victims of trafficking in persons. In some instances, public health
considerations were used to justify detention or unlawful deportation. Member States
also faced practical challenges in ensuring alternatives to detention with full respect
for human rights, particularly with regard to providing adequate living conditions and
access to gender-responsive and people-centred services for migrants.

6/13

22-08884

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

A/RES/76/266

Round table 3 (objectives 14, 15, 16, 19, 20 and 22)6
37. In some cases, consular support has been strengthened through “one -stop-shop”
virtual mechanisms, regional and subregional coordination and consular cooperation.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also given rise to strengthened consular cooperation
between States to protect their nationals and to assist them, including in the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of migrants. Efforts have also been made in building
the capacity of consular services. Several consular services implemented virtual
service delivery to improve accessibility in the context of reduced in -person service.
38. Efforts to provide equal and safe access to affordable basic services, including
access to health-care services and vaccines, to all migrants, regardless of their
migration status, as well as efforts to provide all migrants with access to unemployment
benefits and adequate social protection, without risk of arrest, detention and
deportation in the context of international migration, have been essential in the
effective response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular at the local level.
39. Progress was also made in promoting inclusion and social cohesion, including
through language training and improved access to professional training, employment,
education, and social inclusion and protection measures, as well as through
community awareness campaigns, based on equality, non-discrimination and ways to
promote mutual respect for the cultures, traditions and customs of communities of
destination and of migrants, including acceptance of diversity.
40. Progress was achieved in the provision of health-care services, including mental
health services, and psychosocial support and assistance to those impacted by the
pandemic, including through efforts of diaspora networks and communities that set
up humanitarian initiatives and digital platforms. Progress was also made in the
recognition of the human, cultural, social and economic capital that diasporas bring,
as well as their engagement and remittances in national development strategies, and
in programmes to improve the financial inclusion and literacy of migrant workers and
their families.
41. At the same time, many migrants and their families struggle to gain safe access
to basic services, such as health-care services, despite being disproportionately
exposed to COVID-19 owing to their living conditions and their employment in
essential jobs. Migrants were often not systematically covered by COVID -19 testing,
treatment and vaccination policies and programmes as well as pandemic -related
socioeconomic support and recovery measures, despite their loss of jobs and income.
Safe access to basic services, social protection or recovery assistance often remained
limited to migrants with a regular status, while migrants with irregular status
remained in a situation of vulnerability.
42. Many countries declared remittances to be essential services and eased
regulations during the COVID-19 pandemic, facilitated greater digitalization, offered
incentives and abolished or waived transaction fees. However, the cost of transferring
remittances remained at 6.3 per cent during the third quarter of 2021.
43. In addition to remittances remaining resilient, the pandemic has offered lessons
to improve the remittance market, including by expanding the use of digi tal channels,
promoting innovation, competition and transparency, reducing transaction costs and
__________________
6

22-08884

Objective 14: Enhance consular protection, assistance and cooperation throughout the migration
cycle; objective 15: Provide access to basic services for migrants; objective 16: Emp ower
migrants and societies to realize full inclusion and social cohesion; objective 19: Create
conditions for migrants and diasporas to fully contribute to sustainable development in all
countries; objective 20: Promote faster, safer and cheaper transfer of remittances and foster
financial inclusion of migrants; objective 22: Establish mechanisms for the portability of social
security entitlements and earned benefits.
7/13

A/RES/76/266

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

increasing digital and financial inclusion. However, there is an uneven distribution
across Member States of digital remittance channels, which depend on sound
infrastructure and on digital and financial inclusion. Many migrants, in particular
migrant women, lack access to financial services and mobile-enabled data, even though
they often rely on receiving remittances to support themselves and their families.
44. Despite the fact that some Member States concluded and implemented bilateral
and multilateral agreements to foster the portability of social security entitlements,
coverage and portability of such entitlements remain limited owing to exclusion,
barriers to eligibility, lack of implementation of existing frameworks and limited
cross-border cooperation.
Round table 4 (objectives 1, 3, 7, 17 and 23) 7
45. Progress has been made in improving the collection and use of disaggregated
migration data, including through the establishment of migration data and knowledge
centres and observatories, such as the African Migration Observatory, 8 as well as the
promotion of bilateral and regional exchanges and initiatives on migration data.
46. During the pandemic, many Member States, including local governments, as well
as civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders launched awareness raising initiatives and translated COVID-19-related information into multiple
languages to help to improve migrants’ access to information and health-care services.
47. Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, some Member States have taken action to
reduce situations of vulnerability for migrants, including by providing them,
regardless of their migration status, with access to COVI D-19-related and other
health-care services and vaccinations, by extending visa and residence permits to
avoid migrants falling into an irregular status, by halting forced returns and by
establishing cross-border coordination mechanisms. Many Member States and
relevant stakeholders, including diaspora communities, have taken steps to combat
discrimination, racism, violence, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants
by sharing examples of migrants and communities working together to make the
places where they live and work more inclusive. Many Member States and
stakeholders cooperated in relation to implementing the Global Compact, including
by developing and strengthening bilateral, subregional, regional, interregional and
global dialogues and initiatives, such as bilateral labour migration agreements and
regional migration observatories.
48. Gaps in data collection and analysis persist, in many cases, owing to outdated,
incompatible or inadequate sources and systems for high-quality, accessible, timely,
reliable data collection and disaggregation by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity,
migration status, disability, geographic location and other characteristics relevant in
national contexts, as well as limited digital capacity. The COVID -19 pandemic
exacerbated challenges in data collection, in particular with regard to the 2020 round
of population censuses, which are a key source of migration data.
49. Systematic instances of intolerance, xenophobia, racism and all other multiple
and intersecting forms of discrimination, as well as instances of racial, ethnic and
religious profiling of migrants, misinformation and stigma against migrants,
__________________

Objective 1: Collect and utilize accurate and disaggregated data as a basis for evide nce-based
policies; objective 3: Provide accurate and timely information at all stages of migration;
objective 7: Address and reduce vulnerabilities in migration; objective 17: Eliminate all forms of
discrimination and promote evidence-based public discourse to shape perceptions of migration;
objective 23: Strengthen international cooperation and global partnerships for safe, orderly and
regular migration.
8
The African Migration Observatory is an organ of the African Union established pursuant to
decision Assembly/AU/Dec.695 (XXXI) of the Assembly of the African Union.
7

8/13

22-08884

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

A/RES/76/266

especially Asians and people of Asian descent, as well as Africans and people of
African descent, and persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities remain
widespread, including misleading narratives that generate negative perceptions of
migrants, falsely associate migrants and diasporas with disease or criminal activities,
heighten anti-immigrant sentiments and promote violence against migrants.
50. The funding of the migration multi-partner trust fund has been insufficient to
meet the strong demand from Member States and stakeholders to support the
implementation of the Global Compact.
Recommended actions to accelerate the implementation of the Global Compact
and to strengthen international cooperation on international migration
51. We commit to building on promising practices to harness the benefits of safe,
orderly and regular migration, including those that emerged in the response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, and to providing all migrants with safe access to basic services,
regardless of their migration status, as well as continuity of care, COVID -19
vaccinations, testing and treatment in line with universal health coverage, to ensure
that no one is left behind in achieving the 2030 Agenda. In this context, we commit
to promoting the meaningful participation of migrants in policy discussions on issues
affecting them, including in the COVID-19 response and recovery.
52. Building on the lessons learned during the COVID-19 pandemic and realizing
that there is a need to prepare for future health emergencies, we aim to integrate
promising practices, consistent with the Global Compact and its guiding principles,
into migration policies. In this regard, we commit to accelerating efforts, at all levels,
to integrate public health considerations into migration policies and incorporating the
health needs of migrants in national and local health-care services, policies and plans,
in ways which are transparent, equitable, non-discriminatory, people-centred, genderresponsive, child-sensitive and disability-responsive, and which leave no one behind.
53. Recognizing that migrants are integral to our societies, we commit to pro moting
their meaningful contribution to policy development, delivery and reviews, and
recommit to fostering inclusive and cohesive societies, by strengthening the provision
of information, support and services, which contribute to migrants’ integration.
54. We commit to eliminating all forms of discrimination, including racism, systemic
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, stigmatization, hate
speech, hate crimes targeting migrants and diasporas as well as negative stereotyping
and misleading narratives that generate negative perceptions on migration and
migrants, including by reviewing, developing and implementing relevant legislation,
policies and practices and promoting evidence-based public discourse, inter alia in
partnership with local authorities, migrants, diaspora communities and the media,
bearing in mind the role of migrants as agents of sustainable development and as
rights holders. We also commit to protecting freedom of expression in accordance
with international law, recognizing that an open and free debate contributes to a
comprehensive understanding of all aspects of migration.
55. We commit to respecting, protecting and fulfilling the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants, including those of women and children,
regardless of their migration status, and to addressing international migration through
international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and a comprehensive and
balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of co untries of origin,
transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants
and ensuring that their legislation and migration policies and practices are
non-discriminatory and consistent with their applicable international human rights
obligations, in order to avoid approaches that might create or aggravate situations of
vulnerability for migrants.
22-08884

9/13

A/RES/76/266

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

56. We commit to developing national gender-responsive and child-sensitive
migration policies and legislation in line with relevant obligations under international
law to respect, protect and fulfil the human rights of all migrant women and children,
in particular girls, regardless of their migration status. In this regard, we stress the
importance of ensuring the full, equal and meanin gful participation of women in the
formulation and implementation of migration policies, while recognizing their
independence, agency and leadership.
57. We commit to respecting, protecting and fulfilling the human rights of all
migrant children, regardless of their migration status, including unaccompanied or
separated migrant children, ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary
consideration in all actions concerning children in our legislation, policies and
practices, including those related to integration, return and family reunification. We
will consider, through appropriate mechanisms, progress and challenges in working
to end the practice of child detention in the context of international migration.
58. We will enhance international cooperation, especially by actions that accelerate
the realization of the 2030 Agenda, including the Sustainable Development Goals,
through a revitalized Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, with the aim
of eliminating the adverse drivers and structural factors that hinder people from
building and maintaining sustainable livelihoods and fulfilling their personal
aspirations, and so compel them to leave their country of origin.
59. We will strengthen our efforts to enhance and diversify th e availability of
pathways for safe, orderly and regular migration, including in response to demographic
and labour market realities, and for migrants in vulnerable situations, as well as those
affected by disasters, climate change and environmental degradation, including by
working coherently across all relevant multilateral forums, concluding labour mobility
agreements, optimizing education opportunities, facilitating access to procedures for
family reunification through appropriate measures that promote the realization of the
right to family life and the best interests of the child, and regularizing migrants in an
irregular situation, in line with national laws. In this regard, we commit to providing
migrants with access to information pertaining to their rights and obligations during
all stages of migration, including information on fair and ethical recruitment, skills,
qualifications, entry and exit requirements, living and working conditions, wages and
benefits, and access to justice and services, among others.
60. We commit to strengthening our efforts to take legislative or other measures to
prevent, combat and eradicate trafficking in persons, including forced labour, in the
context of international migration, including by intensifying bilateral, regi onal and
international cooperation to investigate, prosecute and penalize trafficking in persons.
We further commit to ensuring the effective identification, protection of and
assistance to migrants who have become victims of trafficking in persons, not
conditional upon cooperation with the authorities against suspected traffickers,
including by providing access to gender-responsive and child-sensitive measures for
their physical, psychological and social recovery and reintegration, facilitating access
to justice, and avoiding the criminalization of migrants who are victims of trafficking
in persons for trafficking-related offences.
61. We commit to intensifying joint efforts, including through international
cooperation between countries of origin, transit and destination, to prevent and
counter the smuggling of migrants, in full respect for human rights, by protecting the
lives and human rights of migrants, ensuring safe and effective access to justice for
migrant victims of crime and ensuring that migrants do not become liable to criminal
prosecution for the fact of having been the object of smuggling, notwithstanding
potential prosecution for other violations of national law, as well as by combating the

10/13

22-08884

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

A/RES/76/266

criminal activity and ending the impunity of smuggling networks, which put the lives
of migrants at risk, and by enhancing pathways for safe, orderly and regular migration.
62. We commit to strengthening our efforts to cooperate for safe and dignified return
and to guaranteeing due process, individual assessment and effective remedy,
including by upholding the prohibition of collective expulsion in accordance with our
obligations under international human rights law, and to ensuring that our nationals
are duly received and readmitted, in full respect for the h uman right to return to one’s
own country and the obligation of States to readmit their own nationals, and we will
accelerate our efforts so that returning migrants are assisted in their sustainable
reintegration process through effective partnerships.
63. We commit to enhancing cooperation to address violence, including sexual and
gender-based violence, and harassment against women migrant workers in line with
our obligations under international law and relevant labour standards, and to eliminate
situations of vulnerability for women migrant workers by promoting decent work,
such as minimum wage policies, by facilitating safe and effective access to justice,
and by protecting and supporting victims and survivors of all forms of violence,
including harassment.
64. Recognizing the foundational role of proof of legal identity in fulfilling the
objectives of the Global Compact, such as enhancing access to regular pathways,
preventing and reducing statelessness and facilitating safe and dignified return, as
well as sustainable reintegration, we commit to accelerating efforts to ensure that all
migrants have proof of legal identity and adequate documentation and that our nationals
have non-discriminatory access to proof of nationality and other relevant documents,
including by strengthening identification procedures and documentation systems,
including through digitalization efforts, as well as consular capacities and cooperation,
including through technical assistance and bilateral or regional agreements.
65. We aim to develop and implement transparent, safe and predictable arrival
procedures on land and at sea for all migrants, including procedures for rescued
people, promoting responsibility-sharing in providing a place of safety, in accordance
with international law obligations at borders and along migratory routes, and to
develop and implement procedures and agreements on search and rescue of migrants,
with the primary objective of protecting migrants’ right to life, that uphold the
prohibition of collective expulsion, guarantee due process and individual assessments,
enhance reception and assistance capacities, and ensure that the provision of assistance
of an exclusively humanitarian nature for migrants is not considered unlawful.
66. We commit to continuing our efforts to facilitate the mutual recognition of
formally and informally acquired skills and competencies acquired by migrants,
including by issuing documents to this effect as appropriate, supporting the skilling
and reskilling of migrants and returning migrants, promoting decent work
opportunities, enhancing international cooperation to allow for the recovery of earned
wages, benefits and entitlements of returning migrants, and promoting the sustainable
reintegration of returning migrants by providing the m with equal access to social
protection and services.
67. We commit to redoubling our efforts to reduce the average transaction cost of
migrant remittances from 6.3 per cent of the amount transferred during the third
quarter of 2021 to less than 3 per cent by 2030, including by adopting digital solutions
for faster, safer and cheaper remittances, promoting digital and financial inclusion
and accelerating access to transaction accounts for migrants.
68. We invite relevant subregional, regional and cross-regional processes, platforms,
dialogues, forums and organizations, including the United Nations regional economic
commissions and regional consultative processes on migration, in reviewing the
22-08884

11/13

A/RES/76/266

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

progress made in the implementation of the Global Compact at all levels, to consider
ways to enhance cooperation related to its full implementation, in consultation with
all relevant stakeholders and in line with a 360-degree vision.
69. We will integrate migration as a cross-cutting issue in national development
plans, development cooperation and other relevant frameworks, and through the
voluntary elaboration of ambitious and inclusive national implementation plans, in
line with a whole-of-government and whole-of-society approach, and expand
international cooperation and partnerships to implement the vision of the Global
Compact, including through financial and technical assistance to developing
countries, especially to African countries, least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries, small island developing States and middle-income countries.
70. We request the Secretary-General, in his next biennial report, to propose, for the
consideration of Member States, a limited set of indicators, drawing on the global
indicator framework for the Sustainable Developm ent Goals and targets of the 2030
Agenda as contained in General Assembly resolution 71/313 of 6 July 2017 and other
relevant frameworks, to assist Member States, upon their request, in conducting
inclusive reviews of progress related to the implementation of the Global Compact,
as well as to include a comprehensive strategy for improving disaggregated migration
data at the local, national, regional and global levels.
71. We commit to continuing to strengthen national capacities, including for data
collection, and international partnerships to realize the vision laid out in the Global
Compact, including through the capacity-building mechanism, and we encourage
Member States and stakeholders to submit good practices, lessons learned and
challenges to the Migration Network Hub Repository of Practices, and to consider
making financial contributions to the migration multi-partner trust fund.
72. We take note with appreciation of the efforts of the United Nations Network on
Migration in strengthening enhanced system-wide coherence and guidance in support
of the implementation of the Global Compact and the realization of our collective
goal of safe, orderly and regular migration and call upon the Network to cooperat e
with Member States and relevant stakeholders to strengthen collaboration, peer
learning, engagement and linkages at the global, regional, national and local levels.
73. Building on the pledging initiative of the Network, we welcome pledges made
by Member States and relevant stakeholders in the lead-up to the Forum and
encourage further pledges. We also request the Network to provide support to Member
States and relevant stakeholders in their implementation of their pledges, upon their
request. We further encourage States to include these pledges and their implementation
in their submissions of voluntary national reports.
74. We commit to further aligning the implementation of relevant commitments and
objectives from the Global Compact with those under the 2030 Agenda, the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, 9 the Paris Agreement 10 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030 11 and relevant internationally agreed instruments and othe r
existing frameworks, as appropriate.
75. We commit to strengthening the linkages between the Global Compact, the 2030
Agenda and their review forums and to giving due consideration to the progress,
challenges and gaps in implementing the Global Compact i n the elaboration of our
voluntary national reviews of progress in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, as
__________________

Resolution 69/313, annex.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
11
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
9

10

12/13

22-08884

Progress Declaration of the International Migration Review Forum

A/RES/76/266

appropriate. We encourage the President of the Economic and Social Council to invite
the Coordinator of the United Nations Network on Migration to report on the linkages
between the implementation of the Global Compact and the 2030 Agenda during the
high-level political forum on sustainable development, and encourage relevant
subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social Co uncil,
in accordance with their respective mandates, to contribute to the review of the
implementation of the Global Compact.
76. We request the Secretary-General, with the support of the Network and other
relevant actors, to include actionable recommendations on strengthening cooperation
on missing migrants and providing humanitarian assistance to migrants in distress,
including by collaborating with humanitarian actors, in his next biennial report, with
the aim of preventing loss of life in transit.
77. We request the President of the General Assembly to hold a plenary meeting of
the General Assembly in the second half of 2024 in order to consider the next biennial
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Global Compact, as well
as the outcomes of the regional reviews, presented by the Coordinator of the Network,
and for Member States and stakeholders to present, on a voluntary basis, progress in
implementing the pledges they have made in the context of the Forum.

22-08884

13/13
