S/2020/652

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 July 2020
Original: English

Children and armed conflict in Nigeria
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report, which covers the period from January 2017 to December
2019, is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) and subsequent
resolutions on children and armed conflict. It is the second report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Nigeria and contains information on the impact of armed
conflict on children during the period.
The report is focused on the three conflict-affected states in north-east Nigeria,
namely Adamawa, Borno and Yobe. Highlighted herein are grave violations against
children committed by parties to the conflict, including Boko Haram, the Civilian Joint
Task Force and the Nigerian Security Forces. Grave violations in neighbouring
Cameroon, Chad and the Niger are also reflected in the context of the spillover of Boko
Haram’s activities beyond the borders of Nigeria.
It is noted in the report that the highly volatile and rapidly evolving security
situation in north-east Nigeria often resulted in limited access for the United Nations,
hindering the ability to verify violations. However, trends are presented and
information is provided in the report on verified violations, including a large number
of children recruited and used by the Civilian Joint Task Force in previous years, as
well as on sexual violence, abduction and the use of children, especially girls, as
carriers of improvised explosive devices by Boko Haram. The detention of children
for their alleged association with Boko Haram is also highlighted as an issue of
concern.
The report contains recommendations to end and prevent grave violations in
Nigeria and improve the protection of children.

20-09009 (E)

230720

*2009009*

S/2020/652

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is prepared pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict. It is the second
report on Nigeria and covers the period from January 2017 to December 2019. It
contains information related to the six grave violations against children in the context
of the armed conflict in north-east Nigeria. Grave violations in neighbouring
Cameroon, Chad and the Niger are also reflected because of the regional spillover of
Boko Haram’s activities and in order to give a more comprehensive picture of the
situation of children affected by the conflict.
2.
In my most recent annual report on children and armed conflict ( A/74/845S/2020/525), Boko Haram was listed for the recruitment and use of children, the
killing and maiming of children, rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children, attacks on schools and hospitals and the abduction of c hildren. The Civilian
Joint Task Force (CJTF) was listed for the recruitment and use of children and signed
an action plan to address the violation in September 2017.
3.
The information contained in the present report was documented and verified
by the United Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting in Nigeria,
which is co-chaired by the Resident Coordinator and the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF). Access to many locations in north-east Nigeria deteriorated during
the reporting period, making it challenging for the country task force to verify grave
violations. Some areas, especially in northern Borno State, such as Abadam, Marte,
Kukawa and some locations close to the Sambisa forest, including villages around
Chibok, Damboa and Askira Uba, which are active areas of operation of Boko Haram,
remained inaccessible, likely resulting in grave violations being underreported or
unverified.

II. Overview of the political, military and security situation
A.

Political developments
4.
In February 2019, presidential and legislative elections were conducted in
Nigeria following a generally peaceful campaign. The incumbent President,
Muhammadu Buhari, was re-elected and sworn into office on 29 May. He unveiled
his Cabinet in August.
5.
The state of emergency declared in 2013 in the three states mostly affected by
Boko Haram, namely Adamawa, Borno and Yobe, expired in 2015, but no formal
communication was issued to confirm the lifting. Nevertheless, during the reporting
period, the number of security force checkpoints was significantly reduced, allowing
for greater free movement of civilians in the three states.
6.
Following reports that the Nigerian armed forces might have been responsible
for human rights violations in the fight against Boko Haram and in detention facilities,
the army established a national inquiry in March 2017 to investigate the allegations.
In August 2017, the President established a presidential investigative panel to review
the compliance of the armed forces with human rights obligations and rules of
engagement in order to investigate allegations of non-compliance by the armed forces
during their fight against Boko Haram. The panel held public sittings, at which it
heard from victims and witnesses. The findings of both in quiries were presented to
the Chief of Army Staff and the presidency in May and December 2017, respectively,
but reports were not made public.

2/15

20-09009

S/2020/652

7.
In February 2018, the Ministry of Justice announced that 205 Boko Haram
suspects, all adults, had been convicted by a high court in Nigeria for their
involvement with the armed group. They were sentenced to jail terms ranging from 3
to 60 years. In addition, at least 526 suspects, including minors, were freed for lack
of evidence. A girl and her 3-month-old baby were among those released.

B.

Military and security developments
8.
During the reporting period, the security situation was marked by ongoing
conflict resulting from Boko Haram’s activities, which aggravated the existing
humanitarian crisis, including by affecting population displacement and food security.
Sustained military operations by the Nigerian Security Forces, CJTF and the
Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) against the two Boko Haram factions,
Islamic State West Africa Province and Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad,
resulted in a reduction in the territory controlled by those armed groups compared
with the previous reporting period (see S/2017/304). Nevertheless, the groups
continued to pose a serious threat, leading to a protracted humanitarian crisis and
widespread human rights violations, including the killing, maiming and abduction of
children and sexual violence against them. Boko Haram also continued its campaign
of abducting and summarily executing humanitarian workers, as well as suicide
attacks on the population. Regions in countries bordering north -east Nigeria, namely
the Far North Region of Cameroon, the Diffa Region of the Niger and the Lac
Province of Chad, were also affected by persistent armed assaults by the armed group.
9.
In March 2017, the Security Council visited the Lake Chad basin region to take
stock of the situation, which led to the adoption by the Council of resolution 2349
(2017) on 31 March, in which it addressed Boko Haram’s presence and its threat to
peace and stability in the region. In the resolution, the Council expressed concern
about the protection needs of civilians affected by terrorism and condemned human
rights abuses by Boko Haram, including killings, abductions, child marriage, rape,
sexual slavery and the use of girls as carriers of explosive devices. The Council also
called for those responsible to be held accountable. On 30 August 2018, Nigeria
hosted a meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, at
which a regional strategy was adopted to promote the stabilization, recovery and
resilience of Boko Haram-affected areas.
10. In 2017, Boko Haram continued to carry out raids on urban and rural
settlements, as well as heavily armed attacks against Nigerian Security Forces
positions and military convoys. It is a recurring concern that children, pregnant
women and mothers with babies were used as carriers of explosive devices. MNJTF
played a key role in the response to Boko Haram. In collaboration with the national
forces of the countries affected by Boko Haram, over 7,000 captives who were being
held by the group in March and April 2017 were reportedly rescued (see S/2017/563).
The operation also led to the surrender of hundreds of Boko Haram elements. On
6 May 2017, following negotiations facilitated by international actors, Boko Haram
released 82 of the girls who had been abducted from Chibok, Borno State, in April
2014.
11. The use of ground forces and air strikes by the Nigerian Security Forces to fight
Boko Haram intensified from June to December 2017. Under Operation “Deep
Punch” I and II and Operation “Ruwan Wuta”, 1 an offensive was launched into areas
in the Sambisa forest and the Lake Chad basin. Air strikes and ground offensives were

__________________
1

20-09009

“Rain of fire” in Hausa.
3/15

S/2020/652

also carried out by the Nigerian Security Forces in local government areas of Borno
State.
12. In early 2018, the Nigerian Security Forces, supported by MNJTF, pushed Boko
Haram out of several areas in north-east Nigeria. However, Boko Haram continued to
launch deadly attacks and remained a significant threat. On 19 February, Islamic State
West Africa Province elements abducted 110 schoolgirls from Dapchi, Yobe State. A
month later, the Government of Nigeria brokered a temporary ceasefire with the Boko
Haram faction, leading to the release of 105 of the girls. In 2018, there was also an
increase in the number of Boko Haram attacks against civilian targets, including
internally displaced persons and humanitarian workers. For example, in March, Boko
Haram attacked a camp for internally displaced persons in Rann, Borno State, killing
at least three aid workers and abducting three others, all of whom were later executed
by the group. The use of girls and women as carriers of explosive devices remained
an alarming concern.
13. Persistent attacks by Boko Haram in 2019, especially in Gubio and Magumeri
local government areas in Borno State, may be explained by the new Nigerian
Security Forces “super camp” strategy adopted in August 2019, which consisted of
the withdrawal of forward operating bases to consolidate troops into fewer but larger
fortified camps. The strategy left many locations vacant, resulting in the almost
unhindered movement of Boko Haram across Adamawa, Borno and Yobe States. The
group also resorted to hit-and-run tactics, with a deadly impact on civilians, including
children. In July 2019, in a single attack, 65 people were killed when Boko Haram
attacked villagers returning home in Nganzai local government area, Borno State.
14. By the end of the reporting period, parts of northern Borno State were areas of
operation for Islamic State West Africa Province, but still accessible for humanitarian
workers to provide assistance. Other local government areas, also under the influence
of Islamic State West Africa Province, were totally inaccessible. Jama’atu Ahlis
Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad was predominantly active in some local government
areas in southern Borno, where access to humanitarian workers was granted.
15. By December 2019, 7.1 million people, including 4.2 million children, needed
humanitarian assistance in north-east Nigeria, with over 2 million internally displaced
and an estimated 123,350 living as refugees in Cameroon and Chad .

III. Update on parties to conflict
A.

Boko Haram factions: Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad
and Islamic State West Africa Province
16. In March 2015, the leader of Boko Haram, Abubakar Shekau, pledged allegiance
to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and changed the group’s name to Islamic
State West Africa Province. In August 2016, Abu Musab al-Barnawi was recognized
and appointed by ISIL leadership as the de facto leader of Islamic State West Africa
Province. Owing to internal leadership wrangles and a shift in allegiances, two
factions emerged, one led by al-Barnawi (Islamic State West Africa Province) and the
other by Shekau (Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad). The former
distinguishes itself from the latter by primarily attacking security forces using
sophisticated tactics and by engaging in a “hearts and minds approach” towards
civilians, filling a void in State authority. A change in the leadership of Islamic State
West Africa Province in March 2019 seems to have led to a more extreme approach.
During the reporting period, several villages and towns in northern Borno, close to
the Lake Chad basin, were overrun and captured by Islamic State West Africa
Province. On 23 February 2020, Islamic State West Africa Province was included in

4/15

20-09009

S/2020/652

the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati
Wal-Jihad has been predominantly active in southern Borno. A third Boko Haram
faction called Bakura emerged in 2019.

B.

Civilian Joint Task Force
17. CJTF continued to fight alongside the Nigerian Security Forces to protect
communities against Boko Haram. CJTF is based in Maiduguri, Borno State. Of the
27 local government areas in Borno, CJTF is present in all but 3 in southern Borno,
where the presence of Boko Haram is limited. Following the signing of an action plan
with the United Nations in September 2017 to end and prevent the recruitment and
use of children, CJTF stopped recruiting and using children and has since separated
from its ranks 2,203 boys and girls recruited and used between 2013 and 2017. This
significant progress was the result of a progressive effort and a detailed road map for
the implementation of the action plan, with support from the United Nations and
humanitarian partners through the Ministry of Justice of Borno State.

C.

Other parties to conflict
18. The Nigerian Security Forces and MNJTF continued operations against Boko
Haram.

IV. Grave violations against children
19. In the present report, grave violations against children were attributed to Boko
Haram when it was impossible to clearly attribute them specifically to either the
Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad or Islamic State West Africa Province
faction. From January 2017 to December 2019, the country task force verified 5,741
grave violations against children in north-east Nigeria. The main perpetrators were
Boko Haram factions, responsible for 3,179 violations, followed by the Nigerian
Security Forces (329), CJTF (51), the Nigerian Security Force s and CFTF jointly (1)
and unidentified armed elements (19). In addition, 2,162 grave violations attributed
to CJTF that had occurred in previous years were verified during the reporting period
and involved the late verification of cases of recruitment and use of children. The
highest number of verified grave violations (86 per cent) occurred in Borno State,
followed by Adamawa (8 per cent) and Yobe (6 per cent).
20. Despite a slight increase in the number of verified incidents of attacks on
schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access, a significant decrease in
verified numbers of the other four grave violations was observed. This reduction may
be explained by several factors, including access constraints for the country task force
to the most affected areas and the loss of territory initially controlled by Jama’atu
Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad and Islamic State West Africa Province, as well
as the implementation of the CJTF action plan addressing the recruitment and use of
children.
21. Notwithstanding the decrease in verified grave violations attributed to Boko
Haram during the reporting period and compared with the previous period, the two
Boko Haram factions continued to represent a serious threat to children in Nigeria. In
addition, following the expansion of the group’s activities beyond the borders of
Nigeria across the Lake Chad basin region, the United Nations verified 623 grave
violations against children in the Far North Region of Cameroon, 217 in the Niger
and 62 in Chad.

20-09009

5/15

S/2020/652

A.

Recruitment and use of children
22. According to information gathered and verified by the country task force, the
recruitment and use of children accounted for the greatest number of verified
violations in north-east Nigeria. A total of 3,601 children (780 girls, 2,820 boys, 1 sex
unknown) aged between 6 and 17 years were verified to have been recruited and used
by CJTF (2,203), followed by Boko Haram (1,385) and the Nigerian Security Forces
(13). Of the total attributed to CJTF, 41 children were recruit ed and used between
January and September 2017 while the remaining 2,162 were recruited and used
between 2013 and 2016 but verified as such during the reporting period. Within the
framework of its action plan, CJTF granted access to the country task force to carry
out extensive verification of children formerly associated with the group.
23. Of the children newly recruited and used during the three-year reporting period,
the majority, namely 1,092 children (353 girls, 738 boys, 1 sex unknown), were
recruited and used in 2017. The numbers fell to 301 children recruited and used in
2018 and 46 in 2019. During the reporting period, the country task force received
reports of 76 alleged incidents of 1,886 children (1,827 boys, 58 girls, 1 sex unknown)
recruited and used that could not be verified, highlighting the fact that actual numbers
of cases of child recruitment and use may be higher.
Boko Haram
24. Boko Haram continued its campaign of recruiting and using children in
Adamawa, Borno and Yobe States, mainly through abductions. The country task force
verified the recruitment and use of 1,385 children (415 girls, 969 boys, 1 sex
unknown) by the group, the majority of whom were recruited in 2017 (1,051),
followed by 301 in 2018 and 33 in 2019.
25. Children were used by Boko Haram in hostilities as combatants and for
intelligence, as well as in support roles such as cleaners, cooks and messengers. Girls
were subjected to forced religious conversions and forced marriage and used for
sexual purposes. For example, in July 2017 in Borno State, Boko Haram recruited and
used 17 children (7 girls, 10 boys). Of the girls, 6 were used as sex slaves, while 1 girl
and 10 boys were used as cooks, messengers and bodyguards. A total of 203 children
(146 girls, 57 boys) were used as carriers of improvised explosive devices. A
downward trend of such use was observed throughout the period. In 2017, 146
children (101 girls, 45 boys) were used in 77 suicide incidents; the trend decreased to
48 children (38 girls, 10 boys) in 26 incidents in 2018 and to 9 children (7 girls,
2 boys) in 7 incidents in 2019. Girls were specifically used to carry out the attacks.
For example, in April 2018, seven girls aged between 11 and 17 years were used by
Boko Haram as carriers of improvised explosive devices against a military outpost in
Bille Shuwa, Borno State. As a result of the attack, there were over 100 casualties,
including the girls.
26. Separately, with the spillover of Boko Haram’s activities beyond the borders of
Nigeria, the United Nations verified the recruitment and use of children by Boko
Haram in regions of countries bordering Nigeria, namely in the Far North Region of
Cameroon (135 children), the Niger (46) and Chad (32).
Civilian Joint Task Force
27. Until 2017, children and young people were encouraged to join CJTF, including
by families and communities, in order to support and contribute to securing their
neighbourhoods and villages from Boko Haram. Children as young as 9 years of age
were verified as having been associated with CJTF. All the children were recruited
from communities considered to be high-risk areas owing to frequent attacks by Boko

6/15

20-09009

S/2020/652

Haram, and mainly from the Maiduguri Metropolitan Council area and Jere local
government area in Borno State.
28. A total of 2,203 children (363 girls, 1,840 boys) were verified as having been
associated with CJTF between 2013 and 2017. The verification of these cases
occurred in 2017 (41 children), 2018 (1,646) and 2019 (516), during the
implementation of the action plan. Of the total, 342 children (10 girls, 332 boys) were
used by the group as combatants, while the other 1,861 (353 girls, 1,508 boys) were
used in support roles, including for gathering intelligence on Boko Haram, staffing
checkpoints and conducting patrols, searches and arrests of suspected Boko Haram
members. In a verified incident in July 2017, a 14-year-old boy previously associated
with Boko Haram and arrested by CJTF was used by both CJTF and the Nigerian
Security Forces to arrest 62 suspected Boko Haram members in a camp for internally
displaced persons in Bama local government area, Borno State. At another such camp,
in Ngala local government area, Borno State, two girls aged 14 and 16 years were
seen conducting body searches of women and girls at the entrance in September 2017.
In another verified incident, 15 boys aged between 10 and 16 years were seen staffing
CJTF checkpoints along the Maiduguri-Konduga road, and others were seen
participating in joint patrols and road traffic controls in Maiduguri .
29. Following the signing of the action plan in 2017, no new recruitment and use of
children by CJTF was verified by the country task force. Since then, most children
(2,188) disassociated from CJTF went through the symbolic separation ceremony, at
which they were officially given an exit certificate and a reintegration package.
Nigerian Security Forces
30. The cases attributed to the Nigerian Security Forces involved the use of 13 children
(2 girls, 11 boys) for menial jobs at military checkpoints du ring 2019.
Deprivation of liberty for alleged association with armed groups
31. Children aged between 12 and 17 years continued to be deprived of their liberty
for their or their parents’ actual or alleged association with Boko Haram. They were
detained in military detention facilities at the Giwa and Maimalari barracks, both in
Maiduguri, and denied access to their families. Contrary to information given in the
previous report, the United Nations was not allowed access to the facilities and
children, which significantly hindered support and documentation efforts, therefore
making it difficult to assess the number of children in detention. Individuals who
escaped from Boko Haram, including children, have been almost systematically
treated as suspects and therefore subjected to arrest and detention for alleged
association with the group. For example, in July 2017, 204 individuals escaped from
Boko Haram captivity in Banki, Borno State, including 83 children (58 girls, 25 boys)
who were transferred by the Nigerian Security Forces to the Giwa barracks, where
they were detained for periods of up to two years.
32. According to first-hand testimonies, the conditions of detention of children
suspected of association with Boko Haram or who had surrendered to the Nigerian
Security Forces were of serious concern. Over 200 children interviewed by the
country task force narrated their ordeal about the conditions. For example, the small
holding cells, which were mostly overcrowded and extremely hot, made it difficult,
if not impossible, to sleep at night.
33. During the reporting period, the Nigerian army released 1,591 children (1,045
boys, 546 girls) from administrative custody, namely 1,190 in 2017, 241 in 2018 and
160 in 2019. Children were detained for periods ranging from six months to two years.
Most were released from the Giwa barracks after completing the “Operation Safe
Corridor” programme, a deradicalization, rehabilitation and reintegration programme
20-09009

7/15

S/2020/652

run by the Nigerian army in Gombe State for former Boko Har am members who have
voluntarily surrendered.
34. Once released, all the children were systematically handed over to the Ministry
of Women’s Affairs and Social Development of Borno State, which received them at
a transit centre in Maiduguri. Even though the notice given for the release of children
was usually short (a few days), it is considered a good practice as it affords the
Ministry, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations the opportunity to
provide integrated reintegration services.
35. Separately, the United Nations verified the deprivation of liberty of children for
their alleged or actual association with Boko Haram in neighbouring countries. A total
of 364 children were detained in the Niger, 57 in Cameroon and 26 in Chad. In the
framework of the implementation of the agreement related to children associated with
armed forces and groups signed between the United Nations and the Government of
the Niger in February 2017, 42 children allegedly associated with Boko Haram were
released from detention in Niamey. At the time of writing, the 57 children in
Cameroon were still being held by MNJTF in Mora, Far North Region, awaiting
relocation to the Cameroonian Institute for Children.

B.

Killing and maiming
36. The country task force verified 1,433 child casualties (459 girls, 693 boys, 281
sex unknown) in north-east Nigeria: 801 children (275 girls, 319 boys, 207 unknown
sex) were killed and 632 others (184 girls, 374 boys, 74 unknown sex) were maimed.
The main perpetrator was Boko Haram, responsible for 79 per cent of the casualties
(1,133), followed by the Nigerian Security Forces (280) and CJTF (2). A total of 17
children were killed or maimed by unidentified perpetrators by unexploded ordnance,
and 1 child was killed in crossfire between the Nigerian Security Forces and Boko
Haram. Furthermore, the country task force received reports of 505 child casualties
in 89 incidents that could not be verified. Most verified casualties occurred in Borno
State (86 per cent), followed by Adawama (8 per cent) and Yobe (6 per cent). A
downward trend was observed, with 881 casualties verified in 2017, 432 in 2018 and
120 in 2019. The decrease could be attributed to several factors, including the loss of
territory initially under the influence of Boko Haram and the lack of access to some
areas in north-east Nigeria to verify violations.
37. Suicide attacks by Boko Haram were the leading cause of child casualties (578,
or 41 per cent), accounting for 322 child fatalities and the maiming of 256 children .
As noted in section IV.A above, one gruesome particularity of many of the suicide
attacks is the fact that they were conducted by children used as carriers of improvised
explosive devices. The increased use of girls to carry out such attacks represents a
continuous worrying pattern. Of the 203 children used in this way, 78 per cent (146)
were girls. While killing or maiming others, the children were often killed themselves.
38. In December 2017, two female suicide attackers, one a 14-year-old girl, strapped
with explosive devices, attacked a local market in Biu local government area, Borno
State, killing 19 people, including 7 children (6 girls, 1 boy), and injuring 56 others,
including 22 children (5 girls, 17 boys). In January 2018, two girls aged betwee n 13
and 17 years strapped with explosive devices entered the community of Dalori in
Maiduguri. One detonated her device, killing herself and injuring 22 children (9 boys,
13 girls). The other failed to reach her target and detonated her device, killing he rself
only. On 8 November 2018, two girls used by Boko Haram as carriers of explosive
devices were shot and killed by the Nigerian Security Forces as they attempted to
infiltrate a security checkpoint established by the army in Adamawa State. Boys
recruited by Boko Haram were also used by the group to commit suicide attacks. For

8/15

20-09009

S/2020/652

example, in May 2018, two boys used by Boko Haram detonated their explosives
inside a mosque at prayer time in Mubi, Adamawa State. As a result, 3 boys, including
the 2 used as carriers, were killed and 23 other children (9 girls, 14 boys) aged
between 1 and 17 years were injured.
39. Other causes of the killing and maiming of children included aerial
bombardment, crossfire, gunshot wounds during attacks on communities and
unexploded ordnance. For example, on 13 March 2019, four children were playing
with an undetonated hand grenade that exploded outside a school premises in
Gamboru in Ngala local government area, Borno State, which left three boys dead
and four others maimed.
40. Most child casualties attributed to the Nigerian Security Forces (280) related to
a single incident on 17 January 2017, when a Nigerian army air strike accidentally hit
a camp for internally displaced persons in Rann, Borno State, leaving 134 children
(48 girls, 33 boys, 53 sex unknown) dead and 101 others (33 girls, 42 boys, 26 sex
unknown) maimed. Other child casualties attributed to the Nigerian Security Forces
were caused by the targeting of children suspected to be carrying improvised
explosive devices or occurred during the course of the Nigerian Security Forces’
response to Boko Haram offensives.
41. Separately, in the context of Boko Haram’s activities beyond the borders of
Nigeria, the United Nations verified the killing and maiming of 434 children (18 3
girls, 249 boys, 2 sex unknown), in the Far North Region of Cameroon (365), in the
Niger (59) and in Chad (10). Boko Haram was the main perpetrator, responsible for
98 per cent of child casualties (424) across the three countries, including as a result
of the use of children as carriers of explosive devices. Other perpetrators were
government forces (8) and CJTF during cross-border operations (2).

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
42. Girls continued to be extremely vulnerable to rape and o ther forms of sexual
violence, including sexual exploitation, sexual slavery and forced marriage. Forced
and child marriage have been used by families as negative coping mechanisms to
alleviate economic desperation and to deter armed groups from abducting unmarried
girls.
43. Boko Haram remained the main perpetrator of verified incidents of sexual
violence, which often occurred in the context of other grave violations, such as
recruitment and use or abduction. Many of the girls abducted by Boko Haram were
raped, forced into marriage and physically abused. As noted in my previous report,
girls who experienced sexual violence continued to face stigmatization and rejection
upon their return home, leading to further exclusion from protection and assistance.
Some communities often feared these girls and their children, including when born of
rape, and ostracized them because they suspected them to be Boko Haram
sympathizers.
44. The country task force verified 64 incidents of sexual violence affecting 204
children (195 girls, 9 boys) aged between 5 and 15 years, attributed to Boko Haram
(195) and the Nigerian Security Forces (9). Of the total, 131 children (122 girls,
9 boys) were verified as having been subjected to sexual violence in 2017, as well as
43 girls in 2018 and 30 girls in 2019. In addition, five allegations of sexual violence
affecting 20 girls could not be verified. As in my previous report, it was challenging
to document and verify the violation owing to the survivors’ fear of stigma and lack
of access to some conflict-affected areas by the country task force. Therefore, the
numbers do not capture the prevalence of cases of sexual violence against children
that may have occurred in north-east Nigeria, but illustrate the severity of the

20-09009

9/15

S/2020/652

problem. Limitations in access have affected service provision for survivors.
Comprehensive medical and psychosocial services, access to justice and
rehabilitation services are scarce in areas controlled by armed groups. Survivors often
decline legal support owing to the fear of reprisals.
45. Forced marriage by Boko Haram was a common practice that mainly affected
girls, but also boys. In October 2017, the country task force interviewed a group of
51 children (42 girls, 9 boys) formerly associated with Boko Haram who had been
released from military detention. All nine boys, some as young as 12 years of age,
were forced by Boko Haram to marry during their association. All 42 girls were also
raped and/or forced to marry some of the boys or Boko Haram commanders. Upon
their release from detention, 8 of them were pregnant and 21 others had given birth.
In another incident, three girls aged between 12 and 14 years were raped or forcibly
married to Boko Haram fighters while in captivity after their abduction, which
occurred between June 2016 and April 2017. The girls were rescued by the Nigerian
Security Forces and detained at the Giwa military barracks until their release on
15 January 2018. Girls were often held in captivity and sexually abused by Boko
Haram over several years. In 2019, the country task force verified the cases of three
girls abducted from their villages when they were as young as 10 years old. They
were brought to locations in the Sambisa forest, where they were forcibly married to
Boko Haram fighters and used to carry out domestic tasks. Two girls stayed there for
four years and the other for 18 months.
46. Of the nine verified cases of sexual violence attributed to the Nigerian Security
Forces, six occurred in 2017 and three in 2018. For example, in January 201 8 a
14-year-old girl was raped by and later forcibly married to a military intelligence
officer. In another incident, a Nigerian Security Forces soldier raped a 6 -year-old girl,
resulting in a vesicovaginal fistula. He was arrested and put in detention. In 2019,
another Nigerian Security Forces soldier was convicted of raping a 14 -year-old
displaced girl. However, overall, the absence of accountability for conflict -related
sexual violence was prevalent.
47. In addition, in the context of the spillover of Bo ko Haram’s activities beyond
the borders of Nigeria, the United Nations verified incidents of sexual violence
against six girls in Chad (4) and the Niger (2), which were attributed to Boko Haram
(3) and government forces (3).

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
48. In north-east Nigeria, the country task force verified 35 incidents of attacks on
schools (13) and hospitals (22), the overwhelmingly majority attributed to Boko
Haram (32: 10 attacks on schools; 22 on hospitals). The remaining three attacks on
schools were attributed to the Nigerian Security Forces, jointly to the Nigerian
Security Forces and CJTF, and to an unidentified perpetrator (1 each). Despite a low
number of verified incidents in 2017 (5), an upward trend was observed in 2018 and
2019, with 15 verified attacks each year.
49. Attacks on schools included the burning and total destruction of infrastructure,
as well as physical attacks against education personnel that involved, inter alia, the
killing and maiming of teachers and pupils, the abduction of children and the
detonation of person-borne improvised explosive devices within school premises. For
example, in November 2017, an unidentified man allegedly affiliated with Boko
Haram entered a primary school in Kwaya Kusar, Borno State, shouting and waving
a machete. He killed two boys aged 9 and 10 years and wounded a 3 -year-old girl, a
6-year-old boy and the teacher who attempted to stop him. Following the attack, the
school was closed for four weeks, disrupting access to educatio n for more than 4,000

10/15

20-09009

S/2020/652

children. On 19 February 2018, during an attack by Boko Haram on a school in
Dapchi and the abduction of schoolchildren, a teacher was injured and the main gate
of the school destroyed, leading to the closure of the school and affecti ng the
education of more than 900 children. In December 2018, Boko Haram attacked a
UNICEF-supported primary school in the village of Katarko, Yobe State, burning it
to the ground. In February 2018, a joint team of Nigerian Security Forces soldiers and
CJTF members set fire to a market, which destroyed five classrooms in the village of
Alizaram, Borno State.
50. Despite the endorsement by Nigeria of the Safe Schools Declaration in May
2015, 18 incidents of the military use of schools by the Nigerian Securit y Forces were
verified during 2017 (14) and 2018 (4). No new cases were verified in 2019. For
example, in January 2017, the country task force verified the use of the Body primary
school in Gubio local government area as the brigade headquarters of the Nig erian
Security Forces, while the Nigeria Police Force used a secondary school in the same
local government area. The schools were to provide access to education for at least
6,000 children in Gubio. The country task force was not able to verify whether som e
of the schools continued to be used at the end of the reporting period.
51. Attacks on hospitals also increased, from 1 verified incident in 2017 to 10 in
2018 and 11 in 2019. All 22 occurred in Borno State and were attributed to Boko
Haram. They involved the deliberate looting and destruction of hospitals and health
facilities, as well as killing and attacks against medical personnel. For example, in
January 2018, in the context of an attack by Boko Haram on the Pallam community
in Adamawa State, a health centre was burned and a security guard was killed. In
December 2018, Boko Haram attacked the Ajari commercial area in Rann, Borno
State, setting a UNICEF-supported medical facility alight and killing three
non-medical personnel, including a boy. In 2019, Boko Haram vandalized the
maternity and child health unit of Magumeri general hospital, Borno State, and set
ablaze the only ambulance.
52. Separately, in the context of the spillover of Boko Haram’s activities across the
borders of Nigeria, the United Nations verified 5 attacks on schools in the Far North
Region of Cameroon (3) and the Niger (2), and 19 attacks on hospitals in the Niger
(16) and the Far North Region of Cameroon (3). All incidents were attributed to Boko
Haram, except for one attack on a hospital perpetrated by unidentified armed
elements. For example, in January 2019 in Mayo-Sava in the Far North Region of
Cameroon, Boko Haram attacked a school, destroying two classrooms and disrupting
access to education for more than 300 children. In July 2019, Boko Haram destroyed
a mobile clinic set up and managed by a non-governmental organization in the village
of Ngouba in the Diffa Region of the Niger. The United Nations also verified the
military use of eight public primary schools by government fo rces in neighbouring
countries.

E.

Abduction
53. The country task force verified the abduction of 413 children (237 girls, 167
boys, 9 sex unknown) aged between 5 and 15 years in 79 incidents. The main
perpetrator was Boko Haram (405), followed by CJT F (8). While there has been a
decreasing trend compared with the figures indicated in my previous report, when the
abduction of 836 children was verified, the number of children abducted by Boko
Haram is believed to be significantly higher, as monitoring w as hampered by access
constraints. Most abductions were verified in 2017 (189) and 2018 (180), with a
considerable decrease observed in 2019 (44). In addition, information was received
about the alleged abduction of 81 children (36 girls, 27 boys, 18 sex u nknown) in nine
incidents that could not be verified.

20-09009

11/15

S/2020/652

54. Boko Haram continued specifically to target girls, who accounted for the
majority of abducted children. The abduction of girls for the purpose of forced
marriage and other forms of sexual violence, as well as to conduct suicide attacks,
remained of serious concern. During the reporting period, the most emblematic
singular incident of the abduction of children occurred on 19 February 2018 in
Dapchi, Yobe State, where Islamic State West Africa Province elements abducted 110
girls from Bursari Government Girls Science Secondary School. It was reported that
5 of the girls died while being seized, while 104 were released in March 2018,
following a temporary ceasefire between the Government of Nigeria and B oko
Haram. One girl was not released, reportedly because she refused to convert to Islam.
The United Nations provided medical and psychosocial support to the released girls,
together with counselling for their family members. In a separate development in M ay
2017, 82 schoolgirls among the 276 who had been abducted by Boko Haram in April
2014 from a school in Chibok, Borno State, were released through a negotiation
process between Boko Haram and the Government, with the support of international
actors. Following reunification with their families on 20 May 2017, the girls were
re-enrolled in schools in Nigeria and abroad.
55. In addition, the abduction of children in neighbouring regions in Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger, in the context of Boko Haram’s activitie s beyond the borders of
Nigeria, was prevalent during the reporting period. A total of 221 children (151 girls,
70 boys) were verified as having been abducted in 65 incidents, mostly by Boko
Haram (204), while 17 children were abducted by unidentified arme d elements in the
Niger. Boko Haram was responsible for the abduction of 117 children (70 girls, 47
boys) in 32 incidents in Cameroon, 73 children (62 girls, 11 boys) in 24 incidents in
the Niger and 14 children (7 girls, 7 boys) in 6 incidents in Chad. Fo r example, in a
single incident in July 2017, Boko Haram attacked the village of Ngléa in the Diffa
Region of the Niger and abducted 37 children (26 girls, 11 boys).

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
56. The delivery of humanitarian assistance was significantly challenged by access
restrictions, with over 1.2 million people inaccessible as a direct result of mounting
insecurity, especially in northern Borno State. Humanitarian workers were also
targeted by Boko Haram, abducted and, in some cases, executed. The country task
force verified 55 incidents of the denial of humanitarian access to children, which
were attributed to Boko Haram (29) and the Nigerian Security Forces (26). Most
incidents occurred in Borno State, where the humanitarian needs have bee n the most
urgent, followed by Yobe State. A total of 20,000 children, mostly internally
displaced, were estimated to be affected by denials of access.
57. In 2018, the highest number of access denials was registered, with 33 verified
incidents compared with 5 in 2017 and 17 in 2019. In November 2017, Boko Haram
attacked a medical team carrying out a UNICEF-supported routine immunization
exercise in the village of Zaimolo in Gubio local government area, Borno State,
resulting in the temporary suspension of polio vaccination activities in five
subdistricts of that state. In December 2017, Boko Haram ambushed 25 trucks
contracted by the United Nations in a village in Ngala local government area, Borno
State, while a humanitarian relief delivery to internally d isplaced persons was under
way. The attackers killed four civilians and looted two trucks carrying food items. In
March 2018, Boko Haram attacked the Rann camp for internally displaced persons in
Kala/Balge local government area, near the border with Cameroon, killing three aid
workers, injuring one and abducting three more, resulting in the evacuation of
humanitarian personnel from Rann. On 13 December 2019, four aid workers were
killed by Boko Haram after being held captive for almost five months.

12/15

20-09009

S/2020/652

58. Attacks by Boko Haram often resulted in the temporary suspension of
humanitarian activities. For example, in April 2019, Boko Haram attacked a civilian
convoy of a humanitarian organization travelling from Maiduguri to Ngala in Wulgo,
Borno State. The attack left five people dead and six injured (all adults) and led to the
suspension of the humanitarian mission to Ngala. Boko Haram threw two hand
grenades into the humanitarian hub where aid workers live and work in Banki in Bama
local government area, Borno State, in August 2019. Even though there were no
casualties, the incident led to the temporary suspension of humanitarian activities and
the evacuation of humanitarian staff.
59. Denial of humanitarian access by the Nigerian Security Forces involved the
harassment of aid workers and the imposition of delays in the delivery of aid, as well
as ad hoc inspections and unwarranted demands for money in return for passage. In
September 2017, staff members of a non-governmental organization were physically
assaulted by soldiers of the eighth division of the Nigerian Security Forces in
Monguno, Borno State. The country task force reported the incident to senior officials
of the Nigerian Security Forces, who promised to take prompt action. It is unclear
whether action was indeed taken.
60. In the context of the spillover of Boko Haram’s activities across the borders of
Nigeria, the United Nations verified four incidents of the denial of humanitarian
access in the Niger (2) and Chad (2), attributed to government forces and unidentified
armed elements (2 each).

V. Advocacy and dialogue with parties to conflict
61. Following engagement by the country task force, on 15 September 2017, CJTF
signed an action plan to end and prevent its recruitment and use of children. The
Attorney General and Commissioner for Justice of Borno State also signed the action
plan as a witness, signalling the constructive role played by state authorities in the
process. The action plan was translated into Hausa and disseminated within the CJTF
ranks. Soon after the signing, the country task force facilitated a one -day workshop
with 35 CJTF sector commanders and senior officials to develop a time -bound and
detailed road map for implementation.
62. An implementation committee chaired by the Ministry of Justice of Borno State
was established, and a disciplinary committee to oversee compliance with the action
plan and state laws was created. Child protection units were established in CJTF
sectors, including at the group’s headquarters in Maiduguri. The country task force
organized several training sessions on child rights and child p rotection for CJTF
elements, targeting in particular those sectors where most cases of the recruitment
and use of children had been verified. For example, in April and September 2018,
UNICEF organized workshops with CJTF commanders and members of the CJTF
child protection units, as well as staff of the Ministry, on the identification and
registration of children and on age assessment procedures. Awareness-raising
activities were conducted with community leaders in the Maiduguri Metropolitan
Council and other areas in Borno State, with the support of the Ministry, to raise
awareness of the content of the action plan and the commitments of CJTF. One
important aspect of the implementation of the action plan was the conduct of 112
verification missions jointly by CJTF, the Ministry and the country task force to
identify and separate associated children. To that end, CJTF facilitated access to its
locations to enable the documentation and verification of associated children who
were subsequently formally disassociated. By December 2019, 2,203 children had
been formally disengaged from CJTF. Most of them (2,188) attended official
ceremonies marking their separation.

20-09009

13/15

S/2020/652

63. The country task force, along with the Government of Nigeria, continued to
advocate the signature of a handover protocol to facilitate the release and handover
of children allegedly associated with armed groups to civilian child protection actors.
In July 2017, a high-level technical workshop was organized as part of the
consultative process needed for the adoption and operationalization of the protocol.
The event was attended by 25 representatives of key government institutions,
including the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Social
Development, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Office of
the National Security Adviser, the Nigerian army headquarters and the National
Human Rights Commission. At the time of writing, the draft protocol was still
pending signature by the National Security Adviser and the M inistry of Foreign
Affairs.
64. Furthermore, the Government of Nigeria has acknowledged the need to promote
accountability and bring justice to victims through its national legislation. However,
little progress was observed during the reporting period in t erms of accountability for
perpetrators of grave violations against children. In October 2017, mass trials of Boko
Haram suspects were organized and, as of August 2018, more than 1,650 individuals
had been prosecuted. To date, all accused persons have been charged exclusively with
offences under the Terrorism Prevention Act of 2011 and the amended Terrorism
Prevention Act of 2013. It is worth noting that the abduction of 276 schoolgirls in
Chibok in April 2014 was the subject of at least two proceedings lea ding to the
conviction of two individuals. One of them, tried in February 2018 at the Federal
High Court sitting in Kainji, Niger State, in western Nigeria, was sentenced for
abduction, reportedly convicted for participating in and masterminding the abduct ion
of the schoolgirls.

VI. Release of children and programmatic response
65. Through the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Social Development of Borno
State, the United Nations and partners supported the reintegration of 3,794 children
(909 girls, 2,885 boys) formerly associated with armed groups. These comprised
2,203 children separated from CJTF and 1,591 others released from administrative
custody for their actual or alleged association with Boko Haram. All were provided
with reintegration support by UNICEF implementing partners, including to develop
skills in microenterprise and business start-up, in order to assist with the start of
livelihood activities. Younger children were enrolled in school. During the reporting
period, under a government programme to provide back-to-school educational
support, supported by UNICEF, 513 children (67 girls, 446 boys) formerly associated
with armed groups and other vulnerable children were enrolled in school to resume
formal education. Psychosocial support services, including for trauma healing, were
provided to 733 children (130 girls, 603 boys) who benefited from reintegration
assistance.

VII. Observations and recommendations
66. I strongly condemn the continued grave violations against children by Boko
Haram. The large number of children abducted, recruited, used, killed and maimed
and who suffered sexual violence is of serious concern. I urge Boko Haram factions
to immediately cease all violations against children in Nigeria and in the Lake Chad
basin region and abide by their obligations under international law.
67. I am seriously concerned by the increased number of children, mostly girls,
abducted by Boko Haram, notably for the purpose of sexual violence, and used as
14/15

20-09009

S/2020/652

carriers of improvised explosives devices. I urge Boko Haram to immediately release
all abducted children.
68. I strongly condemn attacks on schools, hospitals and related personnel, as well
as the denial of humanitarian access to children, including attacks against
humanitarian workers. I call upon all parties to respect the civilian character of
schools and hospitals and to allow safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian actors
to affected populations.
69. I commend both the Government of Nigeria and CJTF for the constructive role
that they have played in the adoption and implementation of the action plan to end
and prevent the recruitment and use of children by CJTF, including by facilitating the
disengagement of 2,203 boys and girls. I encourage CJTF to fully complete the
implementation of its action plan and facilitate the separation of any remaining
associated children.
70. I call upon the Government of Nigeria to end and prevent the use of children to
carry out menial jobs in some of its armed forces bases.
71. While the release by the Nigerian authorities of 1,591 children from detention
is encouraging, I remain concerned about children still being held in detention for
their alleged association with armed groups, about the long periods of detention and
the fact that the United Nations has been denied access to detention facilities. I call
upon the authorities to treat children associated with armed groups primarily as
victims, and for detention to be used as a measure of last resort and for the shortest
appropriate period, with the best interests of children and international protection
standards as guiding principles. I encourage the Government to continue to coordinate
with relevant stakeholders, including the United Nations, before the release of
detained children, allowing adequate time for preparing the programmatic response.
I also call upon the Government to provide unhindered access to the United Nations
to detention facilities, in particular the Giwa and Maimalari military barracks.
72. I call upon the Government to expedite the review and adoption of the protocol
for the handover of children associated with armed groups to civilian child protection
actors in line with international standards and to swiftly endorse the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups.
73. I welcome the efforts of the Government of Nigeria leading to the release of
abducted children, notably some of the girls abducted from Chibok in April 2014 and
from Dapchi in February 2018. I also welcome the joint efforts of the Government,
with the support of the United Nations and partners, leading to the reintegration of
3,794 children formerly associated with armed groups. I encourage the Nigerian
authorities to continue to ensure the effective and gender-sensitive reintegration of all
children released, as well as the provision of educational, health, mental health and
psychosocial programmes to all children affected by conflict.
74. I appeal to the Government to pursue its efforts to promote accountability by
investigating, prosecuting and sanctioning anyone found to be responsible for grave
violations against children and to ensure that all victims have access to justice.
75. I welcome the contributions of donors to the United Nations, civil society
organizations and the Government of Nigeria to support humanitarian and
development programmes, especially those that help children affected by conflict and
facilitate access to education and health services. I urge donors to enhance th eir
financial support to these programmes, in particular for the reintegration of children
who have been recruited and used and girls who are survivors of sexual violence.

20-09009

15/15
