V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note with satisfaction of the support which
Member States and the organizations and specialized
agencies of the United Nations system have given to the
efforts of the Government of Nicaragua for the reconstruction of the country,
Considering that the economic situation of Nicaragua
has not yet returned to normal and continues to require
the assistance of the international community,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to Nicaragua;
2. Urges all Governments to continue contributing
to the reconstruction and development of Nicaragua:
3. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to continue and increase their assistance in this sphere:
4. Recommends that Nicaragua should receive treatment which is adequate to the needs of the country until
the situation is normalized;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session of the
measures taken to implement the present resolution.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/85.

Assistance for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33 / 146 of 20 December 1978
and 34 / 135 of 14 December 1979 on assistance for the
reconstruction and development of Lebanon,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/15 of 29 April 1980,
Noting with satisfaction the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on assistance for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon, 1""
Noting also the statement made by the United Nations
Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction and
Development of Lebanon before the Second Committee, i rn
I. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report;
2. Commends the United Nations Co-ordinator of
Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of
Lebanon for his unstinted efforts in the discharge of his
duties;
3. Notes with satisfaction the assistance already
provided or pledged by a number of countries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render assistance which can be mobilized within the
United Nations system to help the Government of Lebanon in its reconstruction and development plans and
in their implementation;
5. Calls upon the specialized agencies, organs and
other bodies of the United Nations system to intensify
their efforts in this field;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
''" A/35/99, A/35/381 and Corr. I and 2.
"" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-/ijih Session.
Second Commillee, 36th meeting. paras. 42-5)

35/86.

143

Implementation of the medium-term and longterm recovery and rehabilitation programme in
the Sudano-Sahelian region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVl) of 14 December
1971, 2959 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3054 (XXVIll)
of 17 October 1973, 3253 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974,
3512 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, 31 / 180 of 21 December 1976, 32/159 of 19 December 1977, 33/133 of
19 December 1978 and 34/16 of 9 November 1979,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1918 (LVIII) of 5 May 1975, 2103 (LXIII) of
3 August 1977, 1978/37 of 21 July 1978, 1979/51 of
2 August 1979 and 1980/51 of 23 July 1980,
Taking note of decision 80/35 of 27 June 1980 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme concerning the implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region, 171
Bearing in mind the results of the thirteenth session of
the Council of Ministers of the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!, held at
Niamey from 18 to 22 June 1980, in particular its final
communique,
Taking duly into account the declaration made by the
President of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahe! on 15 October 1980, at the
tenth session of the Committee on Food Aid Policies
and Programmes, 172 relating to the food situation in the
Sahe!,
Noting with satisfaction the decisive role played by the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in helping to
combat the effects of the drought and to implement the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme adopted by the States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in
the Sahe!, and in mobilizing the necessary resources to
finance priority projects,
Considering that the nature and magnitude of the
needs of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region,
which are among the least developed countries, make it
necessary for the international community to continue
to strengthen its action of solidarity in support of the
recovery efforts and the economic development of those
countries,
Considering also the critical food situation in the
countries of the Sahe!,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the medium-term and longterm recovery and rehabilitation programme in the
Sudano-Sahelian region,' 11
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region;
2. Calls upon the international community to provide adequate and urgent food aid to the countries of
the Sahe]:
3. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments, agencies of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
organizations, private organizations and individuals
that have contributed to the implementation of the
'·, See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /980.
Supplement No. 12 (E/ I 980/42/Rev. I}, chap. XL
''' See WFP/CFA: 10/SRA.
,·, ;\/15/176.

144

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region;
4. Strongly urges all Governments to make special
efforts to increase the resources of the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office, including voluntary contributions through the United Nations Pledging Conference
for Development Activities, so as to enable it to respond
more fully to the priority requirements of the Governments of the States members of the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe);
5. Endorses the urgent request addressed by the
Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1980/51
of 23 July I 980 to all United Nations organs, agencies
and programmes to increase their assistance through
joint undertakings with the United Nations SudanoSahelian Office, in response to requests from the
Governments of the Sudano-Sahelian countries, for the
implementation of their recovery, rehabilitation and development programmes;
6. Calls upon all Governments, agencies of the
United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations,
private organizations and individuals to continue to respond favourably, either bilaterally or through the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office or any other intermediary, to requests for assistance from the Governments of the States members of the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe) and
from the Committee itself;
7. Invites the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office to continue to strengthen its close co-operation with
the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel with a view to the implementation of
the recovery and rehabilitation programme and of
priority projects;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
report to the General Assembly, through the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme and the Economic and Social Council, on the
implementation of the medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelian region.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/87.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of the Central African Republic

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the serious damage suffered
by the economic and social infrastructure of the Central
African Republic,
Affirming the urgent need for international action to
assist the Government of the Central African Republic
in its efforts for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development of the country,
Bearing in mind the concern expressed by Member
States about the situation in the Central African Republic and their interest in the expeditious return of the
country to normal conditions of life and in its reconstruction and development,
Noting the statements made by the Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central

African Republic to the General Assembly on 12 October 1979 174 and 9 October 1980, 175
I. Notes with satisfaction the efforts exerted by the
Government and people of the Central African Republic for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
2. Urgently appeals to all Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and international economic and financial
institutions to contribute generously, through bilateral or
multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of the Central African Republic;
3. Requests Member States and the organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system to grant
special treatment to the Central African Republic;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to organize an international programme of financial, technical and
material assistance to the Central African Republic to
enable it to meet its long-term and short-term needs with
respect to reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular
the United Nations Development Programme, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the International Fund for Agricultural Development,
the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization and the United
Nations Children's Fund-to increase their current and
future programmes of assistance to the Central African
Republic, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to assist that country;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to open a special
account for the Central African Republic, within the
framework of the United Nations Trust Fund for Special Economic Assistance Programmes, for the purpose
of facilitating the channelling of contributions to the
Central African Republic and urges Member States and
international financial institutions to contribute generously to that account;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to dispatch a
mission to the Central African Republic with a view to
holding consultations with the Government on the additional assistance which it needs for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country and
to communicate the report of the mission to the international community;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that adequate financial arrangements are made for the
organization of an effective international programme of
assistance to the Central African Republic and for the
mobilization of international assistance;
9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to
the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of the Central African Repub1" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session.
Plenary Meetings, 32nd meeting, paras. 40-129.
111
Ibid.. Thirty-fifth Session. Plenary Meetings. J 1st meeting.
paras. 49-66.
