UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgendal1787)

. . . Li . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council (S/11334);
(h) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative’of Greece
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1348);
(d) Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/ 11389) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1787

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

Held in New York oxi Monday, 29 July 1974, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr:Javier

PfiREZ

de CUI?LLAR

(Peru).‘

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq,
Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon and
United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l787)

of the agenda

The situation in Cypr&:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the’permanent
Representative
of CYPRUS to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11335);
$c) ” Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (Sj 11348);
(d) Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting
Permanent Representative
of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1389)
The meeting

was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral $0 the President of the Security Council
(S/11334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11348);

(d) Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11389)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [1779th-I781st meetings], I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Turkey, Greece, Yugoslavia, Romania,
India and Mauritius to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus), Mr. O/cay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
In view of the limited number of places available at
the Council table, I propose to invite the representatives of Yugoslavia, Romania, India and Mauritius
to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, on the usual understanding
that they will be invited to come to the Council
table when it is their turn to address the Council.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. KikiC
(Yugoslavia),
Mr. Datcu (Romania),
Mr. Jaipal
(India) and Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to a draft resolution sponsored by the
Soviet Union which has been circulated [S/11391].
4.

I call on the Secretary-General.

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have been in
constant touch with my Special Representative and
the Force Commander
in Cyprus, and with my
representative in Geneva, Mr. Guyer. In Cyprus the
situation continues to be tense but is today relatively
quiet. I shall continue to keep the Council informed
through regular reports of any changes in the
situation.
6. The negotiations in Geneva called for in Security
Council resolution
353 (1974) continued
all day
yesterday and all night. Mr. Guyer has been following
these negotiations for the purposes of paragraph 5

.of the resolution and has kept me in touch with them.
As members of the Council know, these negotiations
have been very intensive. It is my understanding
that, in spite of the strenuous efforts that have been
made, fundamental differences persist between the
positions of Greece and Turkey. At last report the
discussions in Geneva were suspended until early
tomorrow morning Geneva time.

in the fighting area in the Kyrenia district. In this
connexion my Special Representative and the Force
Commander have continued their efforts to negotiate
with the competent authorities reciprocal measures
to relieve the hardships of civilians of both communities
afllicted by the war. I am confident that a way can
be found for UNFICYP
to continue to perform its
role with the full agreement of all the parties concerned.

7. I should add that as an observer Mr. Guyer has
12. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
attended the plenary meetings at the Palais des
Republics)
(translation
from
Russian):
As the
Nations in Geneva, but not the closed negotiations
members of the Council already know, the USSR
which have been taking place there. It is therefore
delegation has submitted a draft resolution [S/11.391].
not possible for me to give the members of the Council I This draft fully reflects the position of the Soviet
more details of the negotiations for the time being.
Union on the situation in Cyprus, as set forth in the
statement of the USSR Government
of 28 July
8. Early on the morning of 29 July I was informed _I [S/11390], which I read out at yesterday’s meeting.
by the Force Commander, General Prem Chand, that ;
the Turkish Corps Commander in Cyprus had informed
13. I should like to recall that in its statement at
him that all the personnel of the United Nations + yesterday’s
meeting the Soviet delegation set forth in
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP),
including
detail its views on the measures that the Council
police and civilians, should be evacuated from the
must take immediately
to ensure implementation
of
area controlled by the Turkish forces. I therefore
resolution 353 (1974). It is those views of the Soviet
contacted Mr. Ecevit, the Prime Minister of Turkey,
delegation which constitute the basis of the draft
by telephone this morning and asked him to use best
resolution before the Council.
efforts to ensure that all aspects of this matter be
discussed between the UNFICYP
Force Commander
14. Almost another 24 hours have elapsed since
and the Turkish Corps Commander so that an agreed
yesterday’s
meeting of the Council; however, it must
solution could be reached. I underlined
in this
be said once again that during this period as well,
connexion the humanitarian
task of UNFICYP
in
nothing has been done to implement resolution 353
relation to all the people of Cyprus. The Prime
(1974).
Not a single one of its provisions has been
Minister assured me that he would respond to my
carried out. This means that, just as was the case
request and follow up on this matter.
yesterday, there continues to exist on Cyprus an
explosive and tense situation which constitutes a
9. At about noon today General Prem Chand
direct threat to international
peace and security.
informed me that arrangements had been made for
This confirms once again the urgent need to take
a discussion of this question with the Commander of the
measures to ensure the implementation
of resoluTurkish forces in Cyprus in the course of the next
tion 353 (1974), thereby not only putting an end to
day or so. I hope very much that in the course of
violations of the cease-fire and the foreign military
these discussions a satisfactory arrangement will be
intervention
but also guaranteeing a political settlefound.
ment in Cyprus on the basis of respect for its
sovereignty, independence
and territorial
integrity
10. As I have previously informed the members of
as
a
.non-aligned
State
and
the
restoration
of the
the Council, the present situation was not envisaged
constitutional
Government
of
the
Republic
of
Cyprus,
when the UNFICYP
mandate was established in
headed by President Makarios, and of all the institu1964, and the elements of UNFICYP
which are now
tions
of that Government.
stationed within the area controlled .by the Turkish
forces find themselves in a position which is not
15. I should like to make a few comments on the
covered by that mandate. On the other hand, I
believe that UNFICYP
has been playing, and can
draft resolution submitted by the USSR delegation.
continue to play, a most useful humanitarian role in
First of all, I should like to point out that this
all parts of Cyprus in assisting those elements of the
draft, which-‘reflects, as has already been noted, the
civilian population, Turkish and Greek Cypriot alike,
position of principIe of the Soviet Union on questions
who have been afflicted by the recent hostilities.
relating to the implementation
of resolution 353 (1974),
also reflects and takes into account the views and
11. I wish to say here that since the beginning of
wishes expressed by the ‘parties concerned, by the
the hostilities the units of UNFICYP
all over the
members of the Security Council and by a number of
island have made a continuous effort to bring assistance
non-aligned countries in the course of broad consultaand protection to those sections of the civilian popula-’
tionsheid with them by our delegation on the question
of a possible draft resolution of the Council. We have
tion that were in danger or serious need. This has
taken those wishes into account and reflected them
applied particularly
to isolated Turkish
Cypriot
in the draft resolution submitted to the Council.
communities all over the island and to Greek Cypriots
2

16. The preamble of the draft resolution stresses
sibility for the implementation
of the key provisions
that the situation with regard to the implementation
‘s of resolution 353.(1974), the Council should be aware
of resolution 353 (1974), which defines the basis of a ’ of what is taking - _place in Cyprus and of how its
political
settlement
in Cyprus, continues to be I. resolution is being implemented.
To that end, it is
unsatisfactory.
The Soviet
delegation
therefore
proposed that there be sent immediately
to Cyprus a
proposes that in the circumstances
the Security
special mission composed of a number of niembers of
Council should demand of all the States concerned
the Council to be appointed by the President of the
that they undertake urgent and effective measures for
Council after consultation with its members and with
the practical implementation
of all the provisions of
the Secretary-General,
who has taken an active part
resolution 353 (1974). This idea is expressed in
in the Council’s work on this Iquestion and who can
operative paragraph 1 of the draft.
of course give substantial assistance to the work of
.’
such a mission on the spot.
.
17. The immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces
and military personnel which are present in Cyprus
22. The Soviet delegation would like to take this
opportunity
to express- its appreciation
to the
in violation of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of that State is a key and cardinal
Secretary-General for his actions and for his tireless
condition for the restoration of peace and tranquility
efforts to bring about conditions conducive to the
on the island. It is essential to put an end to the
implementation
of the Council resolutions on the
flagrant interference in the internal affairs of the
Cyprus question. As we have already said, the
Cypriot people and to eliminate any possibility for the
purpose of sending a Council mission to Cyprus would
consolidation of the military occupation of the island
be to ‘verify ou the’ spot the implementation
of
in an attempt to tear that State to pieces. This
resolution 353 .(1974) and to submit a report on the
idea-that
of the immediate withdrawal of all foreign
matter to the Council.
.
forces and military personnel-is
reflected in operative
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution. We agree with
23.’ The question which arises is whom the Security
the views expressed by a number of representatives
Council mission
should contact in Cyprus. For us the
-.
that the draft resolution should once again contain.
matter is clear. In the view of the Soviet delegation,
an appeal for an immediate
cease-fire, since the
there can be only one reply to that question: the
agreement in that respect, reached in accordance with
mission must of course enter into contact with the
resolution 353 (1974) on 22 July, continues to be
legal head of Government of the Republic of Cyprus,
violated. This demand too is included in the same
President Makarios, or any person designated or named
paragraph of the draft resolution.
by him as his representative in Cyprus.
-_”
18. A proposal has been made that measures .should
24. As has already been stated,by the USSR delegabe taken to put an end to all acts of violence against
tion, the Council mission can and must ascertain the
the Republic of Cyprus arising from the presence
reasons why the aforementioned basic resolution has
there of foreign forces and military personnel and
not yet been ,implemented, ‘so that the ‘Council can,
from .non-observance of the cease-fire. A provision
if necessary, .take the appropriate practical steps or
to that effect is also included in operative paragraph ,2.
measures. This is the essence of operative paragraph 3
of the draft resolution.
19. The Council must insist on an immediate
cessation of tiring and of all acts of violence against
25. Individual members of the Council have urged
the Republic of Cyprus, as well as on the speediest
that .the Council should await the outcome of the
withdrawal of all foreign forces and military personnel
tripartite talks on Cyprus being held in Geneva and
from the island.
not take any action which, they claim, mightjeopardize
those talks. However, that approach would not only
20. Cyprus is a non-aligned,State.
In many govemdoom the Council to ‘inactivity in such a complex
ment statements by non-digned countries’ concerning
situation and deprive it of its responsibility for ensuring
the events in Cyprus and in statements by. the
peace and security,in Cyprus; it would also’essentially
representatives of those countries in the Security
sanction the arbitrary determination
of the future of
Council, stress has been. laid on the particular concern
the Cypriot people behind their backs, to the detriment
felt at the fact that what is involved is the fate of
of their fundamental andvital interests. The statement
a non-aligned country-an
active participant in the
by’ the Soviet Government
says clearly that the
non-aligned movement. Therefore, the draft resolution
Cypriot people-both
the Greek Cypriots and the
makes a point of stressing that the Council should
Turkish Cypriots-must
be guaranteed their inalientake measures to eliminate all actions that- are. in
able right to settle their own problems and.to decide
violation
of the sovereigny,
independence
and
the fate .of their common homeland, the sovereign
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus precisely
Republic of Cyprus, in conditions
of peace and
as a non-aligned State.
‘tranquility. This, of course, presupposes participation
by ‘the representatives
of the ~Iawful Government
21. We have stressed that in a situation where the
of Cyprus in all international discussions of the Cyprus
Security Council has a special and growing ‘responproblem, including the geneva negotiations between
3

the United Kingdom,
Greece and Turkey.
The
Soviet Union continues to be firmly in favour of this.-‘;

29. -The Soviet delegation would like to express the
hope that the draft resolution which it has submitted
today will be carefully examined by all members of
the Council and that its provisions and the resolution
as a whole will win broad support.

26. It was this that the Soviet delegation was seeking
when resolution 353 (1974) was being drafted. ,and
agreed upon,. no matter how much that may be 1 30. As I have already said, time does not wait. We
denied by certain members of the Council and no
call ,upon the Security Council to discharge: the
matter how much they may try to cast doubt upon it.
responsibility
entrusted to it and to ensure the
We continue. to proceed from the assumption. that’
restoration of the sovereignty,
independence and
any decisions of international
conferences which ’ territorial
integrity
of a non-aligned
State-the
have been held without the participation of the lawful
Republic of Cyprus-and
of its lawful Government
representatives of the Government of Cyprus, headed ’ headed by President Makarios. The Security Council
by President Makarios, and which are not in conformity , has a duty under the Charter to repulse aggression,
with the interests of the Cypriot people can lead to
to protect the lawful rights of the people of Cyprus
further aggravation of the situation on the island and:
and to ensure peace and security in that area of the
to fresh conflicts. The Soviet delegation therefore I eastern Mediterranean.
considers it necessary to support the views expressed.
on that score by many non-aligned countries, both
31. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
members and non-members of the Council, concerning
I call on the representative of Greece.
the imperative need for participation by the representa-..
tives of the constitutional Government of the Republic’,
32. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): I would have no
of Cyprus in the Geneva negotiations. It is precisely
difftculty in expressing now the views of my Govemfor that reason that the draft resolution includes;
ment on the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet
operative paragraph 4, which reflects the firm opinion
Union, but I shall not do so out of respect for the
of the.Council on this matter in accordance with the
members of the Council. We are not members of the
relevant provisions of resolution 353 (1974). We are
Council, and I think it is only appropriate that we
convinced that this paragraph will meet with the
wait to hear the views of members before we express
understanding and support of the members ‘of the
our own.
Council and that its implementation
will substantially
help to restore Cyprus to the status of a sovereign
33. My reason for speaking is to say a few words
State that it enjoyed before the aggression by the
in relation to the statement made by the SecretaryGreek militarists which precipitated the present crisis.
General at the beginning of this meeting. I found
es. _‘.a :
- that
statement to be of great importance to the Council.
As
a
matter of fact, at’ the three meetings I have
27. ,The Soviet delegation
considers that ‘the
attended some views have been expressed around this
implementation
of, the above-mentioned
provisions
table to the effect that the Security Council should
will be a sure guarantee of the implementation
of
not do anything at all while the Geneva conference
resolution 353 (1974) in its entirety. The decisions
is in progress.
adopted by the Security Council, and particularly
decisions of such importance, cannot be allowed to
34. I myself have said that the best thing we can
remain a dead letter. The Council has. a heavy
do. right now, while the Geneva conference is in
responsibility
and, therefore, all members of the
progress, is to try and help that conference. But
Council must make every effort to ensure that the
that
does not mean that we should not do anything
Council fully discharges the mission. entrusted to it.
at all, and the statement of the Secretary-General
If, however, it so happens that resolution 353 (1974)
reminds us that there is much we can do.
is not implemented through someone’s fault and the
Council is obliged to note the absence of progress in
35. I relate the Secretary-General’s
statement with
its implementation,
then the Council will have to
the
difficulties
we
are
encountering
in
the Geneva
consider this question once again, and take such
conference. The Secretary-General
has just told us
measures as will really ensure the application of all
that the Turkish military authorities in the territory
the provisions of resolution 353 (1974). This question
of
Cyprus at present occupied by Turkey have asked
is the subject of operative paragraph 5. of the draft
UNFICYP
to leave that territory. Some years have
resolution.
passed since we arranged for the UNFICYP
presence
,
in’cyprus-it
was in 1964, if I am not mistaken. That
28. We proceed from the assumption that all States
operation costs a lot of money, and my country’s
which-not
just in words but in fact-are
anxious
share is much greater than its capabilities. I consider
for the preservation of Cyprus as an independent,
that UNFICYP’s
duty in Cyprus is mainly humannon-aligned
State are’ duty bound to take all
itarian. One of the difftculties
in the Geneva
necessary steps to’ achieve the paramount ‘task. of
conference is. that Turkey insists that UNFICYP
ensuring the complete and immediate implementation
should control all the territory not occupied by
of Security Council resolution 353 (1974). *
,Turkey but should not be present at all in the territory
4

.:

occupied by Turkey. Now, I ask all .members of’
the Council if any of them would find that equitable. i
36. I am not fully familiar with the mandate that
enabled the United Nations to send UNFICYP
to
Cyprus, but I have here Security Council resolution 186 (1964), which gave the guidelines for that
mandate; I understand that the then Secretary-General
drew up the mandate himself. I shall now read
paragraph 5 of that resolution:
“Recommends
that the function of the Force
should be, in the interest of preserving international
peace and security, to use its best efforts to prevent
a recurrence of fighting and, as necessary, to
contribute to the maintenance and restoration of
law and order and a return to normal conditions’*.
,

I am wondering whether, on the basis ofthat resolution,
we could not give a broader interpretation
to the
mandate. But, in any case, I think that when we are
talking about a mainly humanitarian problem it should
be possible to arrange practical means to face this
problem, and I am only too grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to do that.
37. But I was struck by the analogy between what
the Secretary-General
told us and what we have to
face at the Geneva conference. Turkey, for instance,
does not want to agree that the free movement of
both Greek and Turkish Cypriots should be controlled
by UNFICYP;
Turkey imposes similar conditions
with regard to repatriation: it says that the repatriation
of Greek Cypriot -refugees who wish. to go back to
their homes or to their work should be controlled,,
but that of Turkish Cypriot refugees should not be. In
both cases that-means that Greeks should be controlled

but Turks should .be. free to move around or to be
repatriated without any control at all by UNFICYP.
And -of course there are other difficulties-for
instance, the difficulty we have in getting the concept
of sovereignty on Cyprus stated in the paper which
will eventually -be issued in Geneva.
38.. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
I call on the representative of Turkey.

39. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I shall be extremely
brief. I do not understand why the problems the
conference in Geneva is facing have to be discussed
here. ‘Either the problems are discussed in Geneva
or they are discussed here. Certainly they should
not be discussed in .both places because that can
only be counter-productive.
40: With regard to what has been said about various
interpretations of the mandate of UNFICYP,
I believe
that the Secretary-General’s
remarks at the beginning
of this meeting, to the effect that this question will
be’.discussed between General Prem Chand and the
local commander of the Turkish force, should be
suflicient for the time being. It is obvious that the
mandate of UNFICYP
is open to several interpretations. I have already dealt with that matter-although’
only briefly-on
a few occasions. In any case, I
think it is clear that the mandate lends itself not
only to a variety of interpretations but also to a variety
of contradictory interpretations.
Therefore, I would
merely wish to state for the record that I should
prefer this ‘whole debate’ to be held where it properly
should’be~held:
‘The -meetitig

#
.

,

/

Spanish):

:

rose ut 4.45 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

U&ED

United

Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLkATIONS

from bookstores
and distributom
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Lea publicationa
des Nations
Unies aont en ventedana
lea libmiries
et lea agences
d&ositairas
du monde entier. Inforxnez-vows
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adreaaez-voua
i : Nations Unies. .Szctiqn des ventes. New York ou Genbve.
EAIC

~naxtrx
axxax

IIOJfYPIiTb

H3AAHHII

OPrAHH3AI(SiH

OB%E~HHEHHbiX

HAUHH

Hamtk.

06nenmmmbnt
HaqaR
YOXHO xynmb
a wimmbxx
MaraH areATcT8ax
ao Bcex paBoRax
xxpa.
HaBoxxTe
cnpaxxsr
06 u3AaHxnx
a
rcxmxno~
xarmune
xnx nmmire
no axpecy : Opraxx3anna
06nenHaeHHbIX
CeKLwi DO npoxcwte AJZranxR, Hbso-tloprc
XnH Xexesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIB

namem

Opraau3aquu

PUBLICACIONBS

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicacionea
de laa Naciones
Unidas
errtin en venta en librerfas
y cams distribuidoraa
en todaa partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a mr librero
o dirljase
a: Naciones
Unldas. Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.
.

Litho,

_..

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

74-82001-Aprill983-2,200
