S/PV.9062

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9062nd meeting

Tuesday, 14 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Ms. Bhat
Mr. Flynn
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. Mills

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-38173 (E)
*2238173*

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

landscape of the Mechanism appears now, particularly
as regards the pending cases.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Maja Popović, Minister of Justice of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius: On behalf of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, I have the
pleasure to brief the Security Council on the progress
of our work, as detailed in the comprehensive reports
before the Council. On a personal note, let me say that
it is a great honour to address the Security Council
one last time before I step down as President of the
Mechanism at the end of this month.
Leading the Mechanism, alongside my fellow
Judges and principals, has been one of the richest and
most rewarding professional experiences of my life,
and I will miss being able to contribute to the work
of this fine institution on a daily basis and interacting
with those who have become like family to me. Allow
me to share, too, my strong sense of satisfaction,
gratitude and confidence when I consider everything
that has happened since I took over as President and my
conviction that we must carry that momentum forward.
I am satisfied with the significant progress
accomplished during the reporting period and
throughout my presidency despite enormous challenges,
including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. Indeed, I am struck by how different the
2/25

14/06/2022

We have only three main cases left, representing
a markedly reduced judicial workload as compared
to early 2019, and very soon there will be two, after
the delivery, on 29 June, of the appeal judgment in the
Fatuma et al. case, over which I preside. In our other
appeal case, Stanišić and Simatović, the proceedings
are well on track for completion by the projected time
frame of June 2023, and another status conference will
be held by me next week in The Hague. In the Kabuga
case, following the recent hearing of independent
medical experts and oral submissions of the parties,
I can report that, just yesterday, the Trial Chamber
issued its decision, finding that the defence had not
established that Mr. Kabuga is presently unfit for trial.
The Chamber also decided, inter alia, that the accused
shall remain detained at the Mechanism’s Hague Branch
and that his trial shall commence there until otherwise
determined. I invite Council members to read the
comprehensive decision of the Trial Chamber, which is
publicly available via the Mechanism’s website.
I am encouraged that such developments represent
the substantial fulfilment of one of the central
priorities of my presidency, which was to conclude the
Mechanism’s existing judicial proceedings in a timely
and efficient manner, while ensuring due process and
fundamental rights. However, the progress has not
stopped there.
Major advances in the tracking of fugitives of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
have also had a decisive impact on the Mechanism’s
operations and outlook. As a result of the arduous
efforts of Prosecutor Brammertz and his team, only
four ICTR fugitives are left, all of whom are expected
to be tried in Rwanda.
We have made headway in other key aspects of
our mandate, as well. Regarding the enforcement of
sentences, for example, the Council will recall that,
in 2020, I issued a revised Practice Direction on
applications for pardon, commutation of sentence and
early release, with the aim of simplifying the process,
while retaining the same legal approach. Since taking
office, I have issued a total of 72 decisions and orders
in relation to such applications, and I will leave only
two recently filed matters to be dealt with by my
successor. Separately, the Mechanism’s responsibilities
in the monitoring of cases that have been referred to
national jurisdictions have been drastically reduced.
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

When I assumed the presidency, the Mechanism was
responsible for monitoring seven cases. Now, only two
cases remain.
All the while, steady progress has been achieved
in areas as diverse as protecting witnesses, responding
to national requests for assistance and managing the
archives of the ICTR, the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 (ICTY) and the Mechanism. Our productivity
in those respects has been enhanced by the Mechanism’s
continual efforts to further harmonize and streamline
its working methods.
Parallel to the results, there have been some setbacks.
To my chagrin, I must now return to the Chamber,
where last December I announced that the situation of
the acquitted and released persons had been resolved
(see S/PV.8927), to report that that is no longer the case;
that the binding agreement signed between the United
Nations and the Niger to relocate those persons to the
Niger’s territory has not been honoured. The Registrar
of the Mechanism is doing his utmost to find a way
through that predicament.
Separately, the contempt case against Petar
Jojić and Vjerica Radeta is an illustration of where
the Mechanism’s ability to secure justice has been
thwarted — in that instance, by Serbia’s ongoing failure
to fulfil the international obligations imposed on all
States by the Council in resolution 1966 (2010).
I now turn to the immense gratitude I feel when
thinking about my presidency and the collaborative
efforts that have given rise to our accomplishments. I can
categorically assert that we have all done the best that
can be done. First and foremost, I wish to acknowledge
the contributions made by our extraordinary staff,
whom I thank sincerely. I also pay tribute to the
friendship and outstanding service of the Mechanism’s
judges, who hail from all corners of the globe and whose
differing perspectives have immeasurably enriched my
own. I also commend my fellow principals, Prosecutor
Brammertz, who is present here today, and Registrar
Tambadou, for their collegiality and assiduousness.
Finally, I would like to publicly praise my own
team members for their steadfast commitment and
for how greatly they have inspired me. Of course, the
Mechanism’s success is not only attributable to those
who work for or at the institution. The Mechanism,

S/PV.9062

like its predecessor tribunals, is part of a broader
system. Reflecting a shared vision of justice and a
determination that the crucial work of those tribunals
would be seen through to the very end, the Mechanism
was brought into being at the international level but
also relies heavily upon stakeholders in the regional
and domestic spheres.
Within the United Nations, the sterling support and
guidance provided by the members of the Council and
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
are essential for the Mechanism’s functioning.
Thanks to Council members and the United Nations
membership, we are able to continue carrying out the
vital mission entrusted to us. In addition, during my
time as President, I have especially valued the superb
assistance provided by the Office of Legal Affairs.
With respect to the role of States in the fulfilment
of our mandate, I recall announcing early in my
Presidency that justice does not end with the delivery of
judgment. The truth of those words has been borne out
time and again, and I highly commend all States that
have volunteered to enforce the sentences of persons
convicted by the ad hoc Tribunals or the Mechanism.
Their exceptional cooperation was apparent at the
height of the pandemic, when pursuant to my orders
enforcement States provided COVID-19 updates every
two weeks.
I also acknowledge the Mechanism’s wonderful
host States, Tanzania and the Netherlands, which
so robustly support us in our mission. Finally, I
express my gratitude to the European Union and the
Swiss Government, whose funding of outreach and
informational activities makes a palpable difference to
those living in affected communities.
That brings me to the future and the sense of
assurance I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks.
Following its fourth review of the progress of work
of the Mechanism, the Council will soon adopt a
draft resolution concerning our mandate, and the
Secretary-General will subsequently appoint the next
President from among the judges on the Mechanism’s
roster. Change is therefore upon us, and with it come
possibilities for revitalization and further improvement.
I am confident that the Mechanism will continue to
thrive under its new leadership, largely because it is in
better shape than ever before.
Moreover, after almost a decade of operations, the
Mechanism is far closer to realizing the Council’s vision

22-381733/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

of a small and temporary institution — an endeavour
that should not be underestimated. It is not easy to head
a downsizing institution and counter the deleterious
effects of reduced productivity, wounded morale and
increased employee turnover. Equally difficult is trying
to solidify the “One Mechanism” approach within the
Mechanism’s unique structure in order to ensure the
optimal, most efficient use of resources at our two
branches. Still, I am sure that my successor will be
more than capable of meeting such challenges.
At the same time, I very much hope that our
progress has instilled trust in the members of the
Council that, when we say we will deliver results, we
mean it, and that the Mechanism will continue carrying
out its residual functions in good faith, to the highest
of standards.
Nonetheless, I must emphasize once more that
many of those activities, including a number of judicial
functions, will extend into the foreseeable future and
for long after the main cases have concluded, unless the
Council decides otherwise. It will be for the Security
Council, not for us, to determine the scope of the
Mechanism’s mandate and to decide if and when certain
of our duties should more appropriately be discharged
by others. In that and many other respects, we are in the
Council’s hands.
It is unsettling to be stepping down at a time when
the global situation is arguably more precarious than it
has been in years. The uncertainties that have plagued
us recently show no signs of abating, and I admit that it
is not always easy to remain optimistic about the state
of international criminal justice.
However, my experiences at the Mechanism and the
ad hoc Tribunals have reinforced in me the unshakeable
belief that the work of those institutions truly matters;
that international justice initiatives can and do succeed,
at times beyond all expectations; and that justice will
ultimately prevail where there is the political will to
seek it. In that light, I urge the international community
to draw upon the same courage, determination and
imagination it displayed in the 1990s when establishing
the ICTY and the ICTR, and in 2010 when establishing
the Mechanism.
Finally, the Mechanism will continue to require
staunch backing in the years ahead, as well as the
meaningful cooperation of those who respect its
purpose and foundational principles. There is much
work yet to be done and comfort in knowing that the
4/25

14/06/2022

task is a joint one. I again wholeheartedly thank all
individuals, States and stakeholders that have shared in
the journey of the Mechanism thus far and stood for
what is right and just. Their support for our institution
and in recent years of my presidency means more than
I can express.
The President: I thank Judge Agius for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Prosecutor Brammertz.
Prosecutor Brammertz: I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council about
the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. My written review and progress reports
provide details about our activities and results during
the reporting period in relation to our strategic priorities.
At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Security Council for its ongoing
review of the Mechanism, as well as to the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) for its recent
report on the Mechanism’s methods and work. The
review process is an important opportunity for detailed
engagement between the Mechanism’s principals and
Council members.
I am very pleased to be able to inform the Council
that, in the past two years, my Office has accounted for
half of the fugitives who remained at large following
the closure of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). That includes all three of the so-called
major fugitives — Félicien Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana
and, as we announced just a few weeks ago, Protais
Mpiranya, former commander of the Presidential Guard.
Following my appointment as Mechanism
Prosecutor in 2016, I made it a priority to bring all
remaining fugitives to justice. Following a thorough
review of past efforts, my Office took key steps to
improve and strengthen our fugitive-tracking efforts.
We restructured our tracking team and, with additional
funding, recruited investigators and analysts with
the needed skills. We also fundamentally reoriented
our work. We combined in-depth investigations with
advanced analytical techniques, including for complex
telecommunication, financial and network data. The
results we have achieved matter.
For the victims of the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi, it is intolerable that those indicted for horrific
crimes remain unaccounted for. While nothing can
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

erase the victims’ pain, we hope they feel satisfied that
the hunt for fugitives continues.
For the Security Council and the international
community, successes like these again demonstrate the
strength of the international community’s commitment
to the victims and its determination to achieve justice,
despite the passage of time. And for the Mechanism
and my Office, we have moved closer to bringing
this important mandate to completion. There are
now only four fugitives remaining, including our top
priority — Fulgence Kayishema.
In that regard, I can report that, after several
challenging years, progress is now being made with
the Republic of South Africa. Thanks to the support
of the President of South Africa and his Cabinet, an
operational task team was recently established to assist
my Office. Our teams held productive discussions
in Pretoria just three weeks ago, and my Office has
submitted its first set of taskings. We are confident
that, with the full and effective cooperation of South
Africa, Kayishema’s flight from justice will soon be
brought to an end. Our ambitious goal is to account for
all four outstanding fugitives by the time the Security
Council next reviews the Mechanism’s work.
We are also continuing our efforts to complete
our remaining trials and appeals. In the Kabuga case,
my Office is ready for the trial to start. We have also
undertaken significant efforts to ensure that the trial
can be completed swiftly. We have submitted the
evidence of most of our witnesses in writing, which
should substantially reduce the in-court time required to
present our case and, ultimately, the length of the trial.
My Office further continues to litigate our ongoing
appeals. In the Fatuma et al. case, we look forward
to the announcement of the judgment at the end of
the month. In the Stanišić and Simatović case, we
completed our written arguments earlier this year and
are now preparing for oral arguments.
My Office remains committed to achieving justice
for the victims in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia,
while taking all measures within our responsibility to
complete those final cases as soon as possible.
Recognizing that national courts are continuing
the work of the ICTR and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, the Security Council mandated
my Office to respond to requests for assistance from
domestic investigators and prosecutors around the
world. Accordingly, assisting national jurisdictions

S/PV.9062

prosecuting international crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda continues to be
a priority.
As my Office moves closer to completing our
last cases and accounting for the final fugitives, it
is important to remind ourselves that thousands of
cases still need to be completed in national courts.
The Prosecutor General of Rwanda is still seeking
to prosecute more than 1,000 fugitives indicted
for genocide.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia,
there are still more than 3,000 suspected perpetrators
of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide to
be investigated and prosecuted. My Office’s assistance
is essential to completing that work. Our evidence
collection contains more than 11 million pages of
testimony, reports and records that national prosecutors
need. Our staff have expert knowledge of the crimes
and the perpetrators.
That is reflected in the number of requests for
assistance we receive each year. Ten years ago, in 2013,
we received approximately 100 requests for assistance.
In each of the past two years, we received nearly 400.
Recent requests are also of greater complexity and
significance. In the light of the large number of cases
still to be completed and national war crimes strategies
in the countries of the former Yugoslavia, we anticipate
that those trends will continue for a number of years
to come.
Yet, despite the support we are providing, national
prosecutors still face other critical challenges. In the
former Yugoslavia, the most significant issue remains
regional judicial cooperation. Recently, my Office
facilitated a number of positive developments between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. The respective
chief prosecutors continue to exchange evidence and
case files to ensure greater accountability, even if there
is certainly still room for improvement.
Unfortunately, both countries are experiencing
severe difficulties obtaining cooperation from Croatia.
As my written report details, the Croatian Government
is taking political decisions to block the justice process.
For example, prosecutors in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are waiting for cooperation in more than 80 cases, some
of which have been pending for up to seven years.
I remember very well that, a decade ago, Croatia was
at the forefront of efforts to improve regional judicial
cooperation in war crimes cases. Today, unfortunately,

22-381735/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

there is a widespread impression that in Croatia there
is still the desire to pursue justice for Croatian victims,
but not for victims of other ethnicities.
There is a simple step Croatia can take to start
changing that view — send all pending requests for
assistance currently blocked by the Ministry of Justice
to the relevant judicial authorities and encourage them
to urgently process those requests.
I also urge the countries of the former Yugoslavia
to put their political differences aside and significantly
increase their cooperation in the search for missing
persons. That is a humanitarian imperative.
With respect to Rwanda, my Office has
regularly noted that greater efforts are needed to
ensure accountability for génocidaires who fled to
other countries, particularly in Europe and Africa.
Prosecutors in those countries are well-aware that
Rwandan nationals suspected of genocide are living in
their countries. The challenge is fundamentally about
priorities and resources and, sometimes, a lack of
political will.
While it is of course understandable that
Governments direct police and prosecutors to focus
on crimes being committed today, that cannot be an
excuse for failing to investigate and punish crimes
of genocide committed in Rwanda two decades ago.
Our commitment to ending impunity and ensuring
accountability for international crimes must be
truly universal.
My Office will continue to work with our national
partners to respond to their requests for assistance and
overcome the challenges they face. The victims of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda and the
crimes committed during the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia continue to look to my Office and the
Security Council for support.
More broadly, in relation to both Rwanda and the
countries of the former Yugoslavia, genocide denial
and the glorification of war criminals persist. There can
be no tolerance for such behaviour, which insults the
victims and sows the seeds for future conflict.
In relation to the ongoing review process and
the report of OIOS, my Office is grateful that our
commitment to realizing the Council’s vision of
the Mechanism as a small, temporary and efficient
structure continues to be recognized.
6/25

14/06/2022

OIOS found that my Office took steps during the
review period that reflected a focus on operationalizing
the Security Council’s mandate. OIOS further noted
that even with skeletal staff numbers, the Office of
the Prosecutor flexibly reconfigured operations as
necessary to deliver results and redeployed resources
to where they were most required. OIOS concluded that
my Office has implemented its recommendation that
we support and strengthen staff morale, a particular
challenge in a downsizing institution. In this regard,
OIOS found that as the office has downsized, the
smaller team benefited from management’s efforts to
promote a more positive work environment.
With respect to our results, my Office is pleased
that during the review period, important steps were
taken to deliver on our mandate. We secured convictions
in three important cases, the trials in Stanišić and
Simatović and Nzabonimpa et al., as well as the Mladić
appeal. As I noted previously, in the last two years,
we accounted for half of the remaining fugitives who
remained at large following the closure of the ICTR.
These are meaningful results that delivered justice for
the victims while also bringing these residual functions
closer to completion. As we look ahead, my Office
will continue to employ the methods and practices that
have established a proven track record of success in
recent years.
In conclusion, we would like to take this
opportunity to recognize the achievements of President
Agius during his time in office and thank him for his
leadership of our Tribunal. During his presidency, the
Mechanism realized important successes. A number
of significant judgments were delivered in accordance
with the judicial timelines. And under his leadership
the principals established a much closer working
relationship to guide the Mechanism through immense
challenges such as the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Finally, for my Office, we remain grateful for the
continued support of the Security Council in all of
our efforts.
The President: I thank Judge Brammertz for
his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you , Mr. President, for holding this debate on the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I would like to thank President Carmel Agius
and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their respective
briefings on the fourth report on the progress of the
work of the Mechanism, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1966 (2010). I welcome the presence among
us of our colleagues from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia. As Chair of the Informal
Working Group on the International Tribunals, I would
like to acknowledge the work done by my predecessor
and thank all the members of the Informal Working
Group for their commitment to the role assigned to us
by paragraph 9 of resolution 2529 (2020).
The Council has been consistent in its attention and
support for the activities of the International Residual
Mechanism. On 31 March this year, in its presidential
statement S/PRST/2022/2, the Security Council
requested the Mechanism to report on the completion
of the tasks entrusted to it, together with a detailed
timetable of ongoing cases and elements that could have
an impact on the expected date of closure of those cases
and other matters within its competence. In the same
vein, the Council instructed the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals to thoroughly review
the Mechanism’s report and the report on the evaluation
of the Mechanism’s methods and work. The status
update given earlier by President Carmel Agius and
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz’s report attempt to show
that the Council was right to trust and invest in the
Mechanism to bring justice to victims of international
crimes in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
It is clear that the considerable progress made by
the Mechanism during the biennium, despite the many
challenges it faced from the health crisis caused by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, is a testament to
its genuine commitment to fulfilling all aspects of its
mandate, while taking into account the imperatives
of the time frame. The vocation of the Mechanism is
to render justice and leave no room for impunity in
the face of the most serious crimes against humanity,
knowing that the volume and complexity of these crimes
requires human, financial and logistical resources
commensurate with the objectives to be achieved and
the responsibilities to be assumed.

S/PV.9062

We must recognize and acknowledge that the
Mechanism has taken on its task in a convincing
manner. The arrest of Félicien Kabuga, the tracking
down of fugitives, the recent confirmation, after
lengthy investigations, of the deaths of Protais
Mpiranya and Phénéas Munyarugarama, in addition to
the convictions of Ratko Mladić, Jovica Stanišić and
the four accused in Nzabonimpa et al., are all facts that
clearly reflect a mobilization of criminal justice against
impunity and the affirmation of the rule of law under
the impetus of the Security Council. This meticulous
work must be completed without prejudice, of course,
to taking into account specific data vis-à-vis personnel,
tasks, costs and forecasts relating to the duration of
residual functions.
The constant support of the Security Council is
essential for the timely completion of the Residual
Mechanism’s mandate. It is fundamental that the Council
fully ensure the smooth functioning of the Tribunals’
work until all the assigned objectives are achieved, both
at the level of the Office of the Prosecutor and at the level
of the Trial and Appeals Chambers. Beyond the support
of the Council, cooperation with national courts is also
crucial in view of the recurrent referrals of cases to
national jurisdictions. The importance of cooperation
between States and the criminal courts is crucial in
order to maximize the collection of evidence that is
indispensable for the opening of judicial investigations,
which are laborious, in order to establish the facts of
alleged crimes, particularly in Rwanda. In this regard,
it is important to strengthen the capacities of national
judicial systems and the training of national judicial
personnel, particularly magistrates.
The Mechanism was established to fight
impunity for those responsible for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and to ensure that
all persons indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia,
including those who are still at large, can be tried. The
International Residual Mechanism must complete its
mandate because many challenges remain, including
the active search for indicted fugitives, finding and
arresting them so that they can be held accountable for
their actions, the closure of pending proceedings and
appeals, the resettlement of those acquitted or convicted
who have served their sentences, and raising awareness
of the fight against glorifying perpetrators of atrocities
and of the denial of serious crimes. Clearly, the work is
far from over.

22-381737/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

I would like to conclude by reiterating to President
Carmel Agius, who is stepping down, our appreciation
for his remarkable commitment and dedication
throughout his tenure as head of the Mechanism, where
he displayed tireless zeal for justice and accountability.
We wish him well in his future endeavours.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the presence of Judge Agius and
Mr. Brammertz.
We are compelled to note that, over the past six
months, the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals — the very name of which includes
the word “residual” — did not make any progress in
the planned completion of its activities. The resolution
establishing the Mechanism (resolution 1966 (2010))
emphasizes that its functions and size will decrease
over time. Yet we have not seen any real cuts in terms
of staff or budget. The progress allegedly made, and
so enthusiastically announced from report to report,
should be considered over a broader period of time
to make it clear that, for example, the Mechanism
currently employs the same number of staff as it did in
2017. In other words, over the past five years there has
been no real downsizing — only time-wasting tactics
and bureaucratic obfuscation.
Let us underscore that the Mechanism has only
three cases before it. By July, it will be down to two
cases, with one at first instance and one at appeal. No
new cases are foreseen — unless the Mechanism cannot
resist the temptation to use contempt of court cases as
a tool to prolong its own existence. Why it continues
to retain so many staff in such circumstances, we do
not know.
The next biennial review of the Residual Mechanism
is now under way, the results of which will determine
the parameters of its further functioning. We trust
that the process will help the Mechanism’s leadership
undertake the necessary efforts to draw down its work
as soon as possible.
Efficiency in the use of available resources was
never the strong suit of the respective International
Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda (ICTR) and the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). It is regrettable that the Mechanism
has inherited that characteristic. From its most recent
report, it is clear that the Mechanism has been chasing
ghosts throughout its entire existence. It turns out
that one of the so-called major fugitives, Mr. Protais
Mpiranya, has been dead for 15 years, while another,
8/25

14/06/2022

Mr. Phénéas Munyarugarama, has been dead for 20
years. Their deaths have only just come to light, which
is hardly evidence of outstanding efficiency.
We regret that the ICTR and the Mechanism failed
to bring those prime suspects to justice. Our delegation
has been closely monitoring compliance with the rights
of the persons under the supervision of the Mechanism.
We are concerned about the information in the report on
the death in Arusha of one of the acquitted persons. We
note the lack of details provided on the circumstances
surrounding that death.
A year has passed since the dismissal of the
appeal by Mr. Ratko Mladić, who remains under the
Mechanism’s supervision. We are concerned by the news
of his deteriorating health. We call on the Mechanism
to redouble its efforts to monitor the medical condition
of supervised persons and ensure that they receive
timely and qualified medical assistance in accordance
with resolution 2529 (2020).
I am speaking at the beginning of this meeting, but
I have no doubt that those members who speak after
me today will discuss at length the so-called legacy of
the Mechanism and the Tribunals. Much has also been
said on that topic by the leadership of those bodies. At
the same time, there is a growing practice of denying
the results of the work of those bodies, including the
glorification of some persons convicted by them. Let us
try to grasp precisely what kind of legacy the Tribunals
and the Mechanism will leave behind and whether it will
make a real contribution to the process of inter-ethnic
and interfaith reconciliation in the Balkans.
Despite the high hopes placed on it, from its very
inception the Mechanism has followed in the footsteps
of the one-sided and politically biased ICTY. The
anti-Serb bias in its investigations and the conviction
that the events of the 1990s were the exclusive
responsibility of the Serbian people has not disappeared.
It is not merely a question of considering how many
persons from each ethnic group have been convicted by
the ICTY and the Mechanism, which would be a gross
oversimplification. The main questions to consider are
who exactly was convicted — or not convicted — of
what particular crime and what happened to the leaders
of each of the parties.
In that connection, the release, on 7 January 2011,
of the report of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe on the atrocities committed by the
leadership of the Kosovo Liberation Army between
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

1998 and 2000, including crimes against humanity,
war crimes, systematic kidnappings and murders, as
well as large-scale trafficking in human organs, was a
real revelation.
Surprisingly, the ICTY and its successor, the
Residual Mechanism, had no questions for those
mentioned in the report. During interviews, witnesses
spoke of organ harvesting and other inhumane acts
committed by the leaders of the Kosovo Albanians,
but the ICTY did not consider it necessary to bring
any of them to justice and did not even launch an
investigation. That is all there is to know when it
comes to the impartiality and objectivity of the ICTY,
the Mechanism and the international criminal justice
system in general.
The protection afforded by the ICTY convinced
the leaders of the illegitimate territorial entity that was
illegally torn away from Serbia, once and for all, of their
own infallibility. Those bandits and criminals, who
have blood on their hands, were suddenly transformed
into respectable politicians who were lauded as national
heroes, gave interviews, shook hands with European
leaders and, until very recently, enjoyed freedom
and impunity.
I would like to ask our Western colleagues, who
are so fond of talking about a victim-centred, rightsfocused approach, what they think it was like for the
families of those people who were sold into slavery or
had their organs harvested to see the likes of Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, Mr. Ramush Haradinaj and their accomplices on
political tours and trips around Europe? Where in all of
that did the fight against impunity feature?
The initiative to establish the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers to investigate the atrocities committed by
the Albanians does not resolve the question of why the
ICTY has turned a blind eye to such egregious crimes in
all the years of its existence. The ICTY was supposed to
be committed to bringing the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes to justice. Its policy of selective hearing is
an indelible stain of shame that will forever remain part
of the legacy of the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism.
As for the Kosovo Specialist Chambers, that initiative
is long overdue, to put it mildly, by some 20 years. Even
now, it is in no hurry to hand down convictions.
Indeed, the mandate of the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers was deliberately constructed with various
loopholes that are now skilfully exploited by lawyers.
For example, they now demand that charges be

S/PV.9062

dropped for criminal acts perpetrated before mid-1998
or after 10 June 1999, or committed in the territory
of Albania. Why is it necessary to drop charges for
crimes committed in the territory of Albania? Who is
interested in the industrial-scale kidnapping of Serbs,
the harvesting of their organs and the sale of those
organs to wealthy individuals in Europe and beyond
that took place during the Balkan war?
Ms. Bhat (India): I take this opportunity to thank
Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT),
for his briefing and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for
presenting the twentieth progress report concerning the
Residual Mechanism.
The Residual Mechanism, in line with the mandate
of the Security Council, has played an important role in
supporting the Member States concerned in addressing
issues related to impunity, justice and reconciliation.
In that context, my delegation appreciates the able
stewardship of Judge Agius as President of the IRMCT
and thanks him for ensuring that the Mechanism
remains on track and continues to deliver.
The coordination among the three principal
organs — the Chambers, the Prosecutor and the
Registry — in ensuring the fulfilment of the Mechanism’s
results-oriented mandate deserves appreciation. The
efforts made to ensure business continuity to the extent
possible under the extraordinary circumstances that the
Mechanism sometimes faced is commendable. We are
hopeful that those efforts will help in adhering to the
timelines laid down for case completion.
We welcome the appointment of Judge Fatimata
Sanou Touré of Burkina Faso and Judge Margaret
deGuzman of the United States of America to the
roster of Mechanism judges. The appointment of
female judges to the Mechanism’s roster is a positive
step towards the establishment of gender parity at the
highest levels within United Nations bodies.
We reiterate the importance of implementing the
mandate of the Mechanism strictly in accordance with
the principles of justice, impartiality and fairness.
We acknowledge the progress made on other judicial
matters during the reporting period, such as the
variation of protective measures, access to confidential
materials for use in cases before domestic jurisdictions
and the relocation of acquitted and released persons.
We also note the work of the Prosecutor’s Office in its
other residual functions.

22-381739/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

We also look forward to an early resolution of the
impasse faced by the Mechanism in the context of the
acquitted and released persons who have relocated to the
Republic of the Niger. That is a humanitarian issue that
needs to be addressed with urgency and sensitivity. We
welcome the efforts made by the Mechanism towards
resolving their predicament. We firmly believe that the
situation can be successfully addressed through the
collective use of the Mechanism’s political, diplomatic
and administrative efforts.
The Mechanism should continue to make headway
in its remaining residual functions, including by
protecting victims and witnesses, tracking the
remaining fugitives of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, extending assistance to national
jurisdictions and managing the archives of the ad hoc
Tribunals and the Mechanism.
In conclusion, let me once again reiterate that
we encourage the Mechanism to take the necessary
measures to keep the trial and appeal schedules on
track and, in keeping with its mandate, to assist in the
capacity-building of national judicial authorities in
relevant countries.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): I
thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
the clear presentation of their report. We also thank the
entire staff of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, based in Arusha, The Hague and
Kigali, for their contribution to the proper functioning
of the Mechanism and more generally to international
criminal justice. The report before us today is a valuable
tool for better understanding the progress made by
the Mechanism and the challenges it must face. It is
an important exercise in transparency, which must be
translated into concrete results.
The Mechanism can claim many achievements in
the area of judicial activities. Indeed, three judgments
have been handed down, two fugitives have been
declared dead and one — Mr. Félicien Kabuga — has
been indicted. Those results speak for themselves,
and we will continue to follow further developments.
The three appeals proceedings and the indictment of
Mr. Kabuga herald a milestone year for international
criminal justice. In that context, it is imperative for the
Mechanism to receive the necessary financial resources
to fulfil its mandate.
We commend the Mechanism once again on adapting
its work to the circumstances related to the health crisis.
10/25

14/06/2022

The Mechanism has successfully demonstrated its
effectiveness and relevance. Concrete measures have
been taken, including through in-depth coordination
among its three organs. The institutionalization of such
dialogue represents significant progress in its working
methods, and we strongly encourage the Mechanism to
continue to make progress in that regard.
International criminal justice cannot be effective
without the full cooperation of States. The arrest of
Mr. Kabuga in France was made possible thanks to the
fugitive-tracking strategy developed by the Office of
the Prosecutor, with the support of the Registry and
the cooperation of France and its specialized judicial
services. That strategy is based on intensive diplomatic
engagement and multiple partnerships with national
authorities. Such a process would not be possible
without States’ cooperation. We once again urge States
to help in the arrest of the four remaining fugitives
in order to ensure that justice is done for the victims.
Combating impunity is in everyone’s interest.
With regard to the cases referred to national
courts, France recalls that the trial of Laurent
Bucyibaruta began in Paris on 9 May. At the national
level, the Mechanism also plays an indispensable
role in monitoring and advising national judicial
authorities. That task represents a significant workload
for the specific organs, but it is also very useful for
strengthening the effectiveness of national jurisdictions
and, consequently, criminal justice as a whole.
The mandate conferred upon the Mechanism by the
Security Council established it as “a small, temporary
and efficient structure, whose functions and size will
diminish over time” (resolution 2529 (2020), para.
6). Accordingly, we note the recent achievements
concerning the fulfilment of its mandate as mentioned
in the most recent report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services. Its observations are particularly
positive: two out of four recommendations have been
implemented and no new ones have been issued by
the Office. The report demonstrates the Mechanism’s
continued efforts to remain within the bounds of its
temporary mandate.
We call on the Mechanism to pursue the
implementation of the most recent recommendations.
France encourages the Mechanism to pursue its
efforts in ensuring diversity within its ranks through
multilingualism and the representation of different
legal systems.
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Lastly, we reiterate our full confidence in the
Mechanism and our support for its work in the fight
against impunity.
In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to
congratulate President Agius for the outstanding
commitment he has shown during his term at the helm
of the Mechanism. We note with regret his decision
not to present his candidacy for another term but look
forward to benefiting from the skills and experience he
will bring to the Mechanism as a judge.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I convey
my delegation’s appreciation to the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Mr. Carmel Agius, and the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for their
presentation of the twentieth progress report of the
Mechanism to the Council, which provides Member
States with an overview of the progress of work and the
challenges facing the Mechanism. Since this is the last
briefing by Mr. Agius as President of the Mechanism,
Ghana wishes to take this opportunity to express
its deep appreciation for his dedication and service
during his presidency and to express its support for his
renomination by the Secretary-General as a judge of
the Residual Mechanism.
My delegation acknowledges the important role
of the Mechanism in ending impunity and holding
accountable to justice the remaining perpetrators of the
atrocity crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. It will support all constructive efforts in
that regard.
With regard to the report, Ghana would like to
make the following four points.
First, concerning the issue of the relocation of
acquitted and released persons by the Mechanism to
third States, Ghana encourages the Mechanism to
continue with its diplomatic efforts to find an amicable
solution with the receiving States. In pursuance of the
diplomatic approach, Ghana further encourages the
Mechanism to engage with all relevant stakeholders,
including the States of origin of released persons.
We also call for the cooperation of States in the
enforcement of sentences and reiterate our thanks to the
Governments of Austria, Belgium, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Poland, Sweden and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland for assuming additional responsibilities by
agreeing to enforce the sentences of one or more

S/PV.9062

convicted persons. We encourage those considering
enforcing sentences in the future to do so.
Secondly, Ghana pledges its support for the efforts
of the Mechanism to arrest fugitives on the run. No
matter how long it takes to arrest those fugitives, we
as a Council cannot forget the survivors and families
of the victims of atrocity crimes, and we must therefore
sustain the demands of justice and accountability
without limitation over time. As much as the wheels of
justice may sometimes grind slowly, we reiterate that it
is also our collective responsibility to seek justice for
the victims by holding accountable the perpetrators of
heinous atrocity crimes. The only way the survivors
and the families of victims can find closure is for the
perpetrators of such heinous crimes to be brought
to justice.
Thirdly, Ghana notes with appreciation the ongoing
collaboration between the Office of the Prosecutor
and national investigations and prosecutions in the
provision of access to evidence and information in
response to the high volume of requests concerning
those crimes. That is a positive development, as it helps
to build the capacities of the officers in the national
prosecutions of the affected countries in line with the
principle of complementarity.
Fourthly, Ghana applauds the cooperation between
the Mechanism and the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS) in completing the Mechanism’s
residual functions in an efficient and effective manner
and welcomes the role that the oversight bodies play
in assisting its management to do so. It is gratifying
to note that not only did OIOS perform its biennial
evaluation of the methods and work of the Mechanism
in preparation for the current mandate review, but that
its Internal Audit Division also performed a number of
audits on specific sections or topics. That is a step in
the right direction towards the early completion of the
work of the Mechanism.
In conclusion, I would be remiss if I ended this
statement without applauding the untiring efforts of the
President and the Prosecutor of the Mechanism and their
staff, despite the strictures of the coronavirus disease,
in carrying out their mandate to bring the perpetrators
of atrocity crimes to justice. While commending the
President, the Prosecutor and staff of the Mechanism,
Ghana urges all States to cooperate with the Mechanism
in order to enable it to complete its mandate in line with
paragraph 13 of resolution 2529 (2020), which notes the
conclusion of the Council’s review of the progress of

22-3817311/25

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

S/PV.9062

the work of the Mechanism, including in completing
its functions.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): As
Judge Agius addresses us for the last time as President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, I congratulate him for his successful tenure
and thank him warmly for his unstinting service and his
presentation today. He has led the Mechanism expertly
and ensured very significant progress on its mandate,
even despite the challenges of the global pandemic.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s proposal
to appoint Judge Gatti Santana as successor to President
Agius. I thank Prosecutor Brammertz for his report
and commend his recent work and that of his Office,
including in confirming the deaths of Protais Mpiranya
and Pheneas Munyarugarama.
I would like
the Mechanism.

to

make

three

points

about

My first point is on the importance of justice and
defending justice. We are currently seeing appalling
barbarism and heinous acts committed by Russia in
Ukraine on a scale not seen in Europe since the dark
days of the 1990s in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Mechanism stands as a reminder that the Security
Council can and should act to ensure accountability for
atrocity crimes. Our commitment to the Mechanism
is unwavering, and we will continue to support it in
implementing its vision of being a small temporary and
effective organization.
Sadly, there are some who smear the Mechanism
and its predecessors and who glorify war criminals
and deny the genocides that happened in Rwanda and
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We condemn those false
narratives and denial, which punish victims and prevent
societies from creating the prosperous future that they
deserve. It is dishonest and dangerous to promote the
idea that peace and reconciliation are undermined by
the careful and rigorous work of the Mechanism and its
independent judges.
My second point is on the future of the Mechanism.
As the Mechanism looks forward to its post-judicial
phase, there remains vital work to be done. Four
fugitives remain at large; we await the outcomes of
two appeals; and we look forward to the timely trial of
Félicien Kabuga, while accepting that the Mechanism
must take into account his medical requirements. But
the work does not stop there. There are sentences to
be enforced, witnesses to be protected and archives
12/25

14/06/2022

to be maintained. We support that important work.
We also expect the Mechanism to be as lean as it
can be, including by developing detailed completion
timelines across its functions and by ending, limiting
or transferring functions at the appropriate time.
My third point is on the importance of cooperation
with the Mechanism. The Mechanism’s successes are
the result of significant and sustained international
cooperation. We must therefore again raise its referral of
Serbia to the Security Council for the ongoing failure to
arrest Jojić and Radeta. That continued non-compliance
is serious and follows years of requests, consideration
and discussion. We therefore urge Serbia to comply
with the Mechanism’s order immediately.
We commend the Mechanism’s work on building
capacity in the Western Balkans but note that judicial
cooperation within the region still remains inadequate.
We call on all countries in the region to remove the
impediments to that.
Finally, we are concerned about the situation of the
acquitted and released persons who were relocated to
the Niger, who are now under effective house arrest. We
call upon the Niger and the Mechanism to urgently find
a lasting solution to that problem.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their briefings on the efforts of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to bring
perpetrators to justice for the atrocities committed in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. We heard from the
President this morning some of the challenges faced
by the Mechanism — operational challenges, morale
challenges and challenges relating to the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We are therefore particularly
grateful for the commitment and the hard work of the
judges, attorneys and staff in Arusha and The Hague,
as well as in the field offices in Sarajevo and Kigali,
despite those challenges over the past year.
In particular, my delegation would like to thank
President Agius for his dedicated years of service as
President of the Mechanism and all the contributions
he has made to the institution, which we have no doubt
will continue as he transitions from President to judge.
Owing to the commendable efforts of the
Mechanism, we continue to see it achieve significant
success, despite the challenges of operating during a
pandemic. Over the next year, like many others, we
look forward to the advancement of the proceedings in
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the trial against Félicien Kabuga, the alleged financier
of the Rwandan genocide. We also look forward to the
conclusion of the appeal in the case against Stanišić
and Simatović, former members of the Serbian State
Security Service. The United States joins others in
continuing to urge Serbia to turn over those indicted by
the Mechanism.
We also note the importance of the ongoing
investigations and proceedings related to contempt
charges against individuals from both Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia. Those proceedings are a critical
part of the Mechanism’s work, as the integrity of court
proceedings is fundamental to the delivery of justice.
We look forward to the pronouncement of the appeal
judgment in the contempt case against Fatuma et al.
later this month.
As the judicial activities of the Mechanism continue
to draw to a close, the United States is mindful of the
importance of finding durable solutions for relocating
individuals who have been acquitted or released, and
we encourage Member State cooperation in that respect.
We commend the Office of the Prosecutor for
announcing its findings of the death of two Rwandan
fugitives, Mpiranya and Munyarugarama, both of
whom had been charged with genocide and crimes
against humanity. As we heard, four fugitives remain
at large. The United States continues to offer a reward
of up to $5 million for information that leads to the
arrest of those individuals, and we urge all countries to
cooperate with the Mechanism’s efforts to bring them
to justice.
We commend the Mechanism on its efforts to
support the relevant investigations and prosecutions
in domestic courts addressing atrocity crimes. We
continue to support the Mechanism for the indispensable
role that it plays in ensuring that perpetrators do not
enjoy immunity and that victims and survivors are
not left without justice, even as the Mechanism winds
down. We encourage those national jurisdictions to
vigorously pursue accountability for atrocity crimes
within their own systems, including by removing legal
barriers to prosecution and mutual cooperation on
outstanding cases.
Finally, after the success of the Mechanism
and its predecessors, the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia

S/PV.9062

since 1991 and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, in proving that serious crimes, including
genocide, were committed in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, it is very alarming to see political leaders,
veterans groups and others rejecting facts established by
the courts and distorting the past to amplify grievances
and embrace war criminals. The Mechanism has an
important role to play in that issue as a repository of
the facts and evidence established through hundreds of
trials. We applaud its outreach efforts, which include
educational programmes and social media campaigns.
But national authorities must also do more to
combat the entrenchment of ethnonationalist sentiment
and glorification of war criminals, which serves only
to inflame tensions and prevent reconciliation and
healing. Strong countries speak honestly about the past,
even when it is painful, so that they can meaningfully
address the root causes of conflict and move forward to
a peaceful, stable future.
We now know that the crimes committed in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia were not accidental.
They were not unavoidable, but were the result of
deliberate choices by those in power who unleashed
terrible violence against innocent civilians. The denial
of historical facts and the celebration of those who
committed grave crimes is an affront to the victims
and the witnesses who have courageously come
forward to tell their stories, and it is an insult to our
common humanity. The United States will continue
to speak about the legacy of these courts, and we will
continue to stand by the victims and survivors of these
terrible crimes.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Carmel Agius, and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings. We also welcome the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Serbia and Rwanda to this meeting.
Mexico wishes to express its particular thanks to
Judge Agius for his work at the helm of the Residual
Mechanism since 2019. During his tenure, the
Mechanism has made significant contributions to
international justice despite having faced significant
challenges, such as the pandemic.
In the light of the recent conclusion of the fourth
review process of the Mechanism’s work, we highlight
the progress made on the recommendations outlined by

22-3817313/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We encourage
the Mechanism to continue to make progress towards
reducing its role in the next review cycles.
With regard to the Trial Chamber’s decision in the
Kabuga case, we trust that his trial will be expedited.
We also await the judgments in the Stanišić and
Simatović and Fatuma et al. cases, as well as in the
contempt cases that remain pending.
Regarding the situation of fugitives, we welcome
the findings of the Office of the Prosecutor confirming
the death of two fugitives — in the case of Mr. Mpiranya
and the last one scheduled to be tried by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The remaining four
fugitives are expected to be tried in Rwanda.
The cooperation of the States involved is crucial to
the accomplishment of the Mechanism’s work. We call
on the States involved to increase cooperation with the
Mechanism in order to locate and arrest the fugitives so
that they can be held accountable in the pending cases.
We regret that the relocation agreement reached with
the Niger to receive persons who had completed their
sentences or were found not guilty has been reversed.
That demonstrates the need to find long-term solutions
for those in that situation, as well as to avoid such
situations in the future.
Mexico rejects rhetoric that seeks to divide and
to incite hatred, as Prosecutor Brammertz mentioned
unfortunately persists. It is time to move towards
reconciliation, cohesion and inclusion, based on justice
and truth.
In conclusion, Mexico recognizes that the work
of the Residual Mechanism has been fundamental to
accountability and to strengthening the rule of law.
We reiterate our support for its work to complete
outstanding cases and to deliver justice for those who
were victims of atrocities in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): The United Arab Emirates would like to thank
Judge Agius, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings. We also express our
appreciation to Judge Agius for his tireless efforts as
President of the Mechanism since 2019 and wish him
well as he prepares to step down from the role. I welcome
the presence of Her Excellency Ms. Maja Popović,
Minister of Justice of Serbia, and the representatives
14/25

14/06/2022

of Croatia, Rwanda and Bosnia and Herzegovina at
this meeting.
The International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda played a
prominent and significant role in the procedures for
achieving international justice and law enforcement.
Today the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals is playing an essential role in
completing the final tasks of their work and closing all
its files.
In that context, the United Arab Emirates fully
supports the mandate of the International Residual
Mechanism and welcomes its twentieth progress report.
The Mechanism plays a critical role in fighting impunity
for serious violations of international law in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia, as well as in delivering
justice for the victims and survivors of those crimes.
The United Arab Emirates would like to highlight the
following three points.
First, the United Arab Emirates would like to
commend the Mechanism for the progress that it has
made in performing its main functions. In relation
to the core crimes, the United Arab Emirates takes
note that the Félicien Kabuga case is expected to be
the last trial conducted by the Mechanism, which is
expected to commence following the judicial decision
on his fitness for trial. We appreciate the efforts made
by the judges concerned, as well as the prosecution,
to find ways to streamline that case and to decrease
the anticipated duration of the trial. We take note
of the official notice of the death of two fugitives
and commend the prosecution’s efforts to track the
remaining four fugitives.
Secondly, the United Arab Emirates expresses its
concern about the unresolved situation of the eight
acquitted and released persons. We urge the Mechanism
to continue to work with all the relevant parties to find
an appropriate solution to the current situation.
Thirdly and finally, we commend the work of the
Mechanism in implementing the recommendations of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We further
encourage the Mechanism to implement the remaining
recommendations and further streamline its operations,
in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010).
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its support for the Mechanism and its work. We support
the extension of the Mechanism’s mandate for a further
two years, and we remain committed to assisting it
with the completion of its remaining tasks. Justice is
a collective effort, and we call on all Member States to
fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the Mechanism
in order to turn the page on these dark chapters.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their respective briefings. We also thank President
Agius for his leadership of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the past two
years, during which the Mechanism has dealt with
difficulties and advanced its judicial activities in an
orderly manner.
We support the efforts of the Office of the
Prosecutor to track down fugitives. In accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Mechanism should be a small, temporary and efficient
structure whose functions and size should gradually
diminish over time. The Security Council will decide
on the extension of the Mechanism’s operating period
later this month. China hopes that the Mechanism will
continue to conduct its activities in accordance with the
mandate set forth in Council resolutions and implement
the recommendations made by the Council’s Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals and the
Office of Internal Oversight Services.

S/PV.9062

tracking down remaining fugitives, China hopes that
the Mechanism will strengthen its communication with
the relevant parties, enhance mutual trust, take their
legitimate concerns into consideration, learn from the
International Criminal Tribunals’ success stories, find
solutions and join hands in combating impunity.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank Gabon, Chair of the Council’s Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and the
Office for Legal Affairs for their efforts in coordinating
the work of the Council and the Mechanism.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, for their briefings
on the work of the Mechanism and their assessments
of its progress. We note that this is Judge Agius’s
last appearance before the Council in his capacity as
President of the Mechanism. My delegation therefore
pays tribute to him for his service as President
and wishes him success in continuing to serve the
Mechanism as a judge. I welcome the presence of the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia at today’s meeting.

Over the past two years, due to factors such as the
coronavirus disease pandemic and the state of health of
some of the accused, the Mechanism has experienced
varying degrees of delay in its proceedings. We note that
the Mechanism has completed the health assessment of
the accused Mr. Félicien Kabuga and is scheduled to start
the trial in September. China expects the Mechanism
to strictly follow the projected timetables set out in its
work plan and complete the judicial proceedings for the
remaining cases in an efficient manner. As the relevant
cases near completion, the Mechanism should allocate
budgetary resources sensibly, focus on ensuring that its
judicial activities are carried out and gradually reduce
its expenditures.

Kenya supports the work of the Mechanism, as
established under resolution 1966 (2010) and renewed by
resolution 2529 (2020). The purpose of the Mechanism
in taking up the residual functions of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is a critical part of
our collective responsibility to ensure accountability
for war crimes and genocide. We believe firmly that
States should invest more in preventive processes and
mechanisms and encourage international support in that
regard. One of the best ways to strengthen prevention
is by mainstreaming inclusive national dialogue
into national processes. We therefore underscore
the importance of ensuring that national authorities
maintain a firm grip when it comes to leading in
conflict prevention and ensuring accountability. States
should therefore be encouraged and supported, where
necessary, in strengthening their judiciaries.

Pragmatic and effective cooperation between the
Mechanism and the countries concerned is essential in
enabling it to complete its mandate and make progress.
With regard to issues such as relocating those who have
been acquitted or released, transferring cases between
the Mechanism and the countries concerned and

We have taken note of the report of the evaluation of
the methods and work of the Mechanism by the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (S/2022/148), in line
with resolution 2529 (2020). We also note the report on
the implementation of the recommendations from the
last evaluation. We acknowledge the commendable

22-3817315/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

strides the Mechanism has made towards completing its
judicial work under the mandate as it comes to a close.
We also acknowledge that that has been accomplished
largely under working arrangements constrained by
the pandemic. The completion of the Mechanism’s
judicial work is crucial to providing a level of closure
to the survivors and the families of the victims, and
that in turn will play an important role in promoting
reconciliation, which is essential to both prevention
and healing.
The Mechanism’s completion of its work will also
respond to the Security Council’s vision for it as a small,
temporary and efficient structure whose functions and
size diminish over time. We therefore urge for speedy
completion of the remaining cases, including that of
Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga, especially now that it
has been determined that Mr. Kabuga is fit to stand trial.
To that end, we call on all States to cooperate with the
Mechanism in apprehending the remaining fugitives.
In conclusion, Kenya would like to reaffirm its
support for the work of the Mechanism. We will support
the renewal of its mandate while encouraging its speedy
conclusion of its work.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to
thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their thorough report to the Security Council and for
today’s briefings. Let me also extend our appreciation
for Judge Agius’s long and committed service as
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
At the outset, I want to reaffirm Norway’s strong
support to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, which diligently implements
the important mandate given to it by the Council.
Norway commends the Mechanism’s activities during
the reporting period, with the appeal judgment of the
Fatuma et al. case scheduled for the end of June, and
proceedings in the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and
Franko Simatović appeal case continuing. Pre-trial
assessments are also ongoing in the important
Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga case. Mr. Kabuga was
recently deemed fit to stand trial. A significant number
of decisions and orders have also been issued by the
President and judges.
I would like to bring up the obligation of all
States to fully adhere to the Security Council’s
decisions. We therefore regret the lack of progress
in the Prosecutor v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta
16/25

14/06/2022

case and once again strongly urge Serbia to cooperate
fully with the Mechanism. In general, the Mechanism
is dependent on the cooperation of Member States in
order to fulfil the mandate the Council has provided to
ensure accountability and justice for the victims. With
respect to the Mechanism’s administrative windingdown, we note that the staff was downsized during
2022 and significant further reductions are planned
for 2023. That is in line with Council resolutions
and the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services.
We regret that despite an earlier agreement, the
Mechanism continues to face problems with relocating
the eight persons who have been acquitted or released.
We urge the Niger to fully adhere to the agreement with
the United Nations. Norway appreciates the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor to account for the remaining
fugitives. We note the Prosecutor’s recent confirmation
of the death some years ago of two individuals wanted
in relation to the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis in
Rwanda, with four fugitives remaining at large. We
urge all States to fully cooperate with the Mechanism
and arrest and surrender all remaining fugitives. The
Council should assume its responsibilities by examining
every possible measure to facilitate the arrest and
surrender of those wanted by the Mechanism.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I want to thank President Agius
and Prosecutor Brammertz for their comprehensive
briefings this morning.
As this was President Agius’s last briefing to the
Council in his capacity as President, I join others in
paying tribute to him for his tireless leadership in
guiding the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, including during the challenging
period of the pandemic.
The fourth review report of the Mechanism details
a range of successes over the past two years, continuing
to demonstrate that accountability can be made a reality.
The Mechanism delivered three landmark judgments,
made breakthroughs in the area of fugitive tracking and
substantially reduced its in-court activity, in line with
its mandate. In particular, we note yesterday’s decision
by the Mechanism’s Trial Chamber, which found that the
trial against Kabuga can now proceed in The Hague. We
also welcome the progress achieved by the Mechanism
in implementing the recommendations of both the
Office of Internal Oversight Services and the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals. Overall, we
have seen real and tangible advances in realizing the
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Security Council’s vision of the Mechanism as a small,
temporary and efficient structure whose functions and
size will diminish over time.
Cooperation is essential in ensuring that the
Mechanism can fulfil many of its mandated functions,
and we recall that States have an obligation to
cooperate with the Mechanism in its investigations and
prosecutions. While we note and welcome some positive
steps in terms of engagement with the Prosecutor, I
want to reiterate today our continued concern at Serbia’s
persistent failure to take action in relation to the Jojić
and Radeta case.
We urge all States to comply with their obligations
under international law, as well as to assist and
cooperate fully with the Mechanism in its efforts to
arrest and surrender the remaining fugitives.
Separately, Ireland welcomes the tireless efforts
of the Mechanism, as well as the assistance and
cooperation afforded by Member States, in confirming
the deaths of fugitives Mpiranya and Munyarugarama.
We note that only four fugitives now remain at large.
Ireland remains concerned about the ongoing
difficulties experienced by the eight acquitted or
released individuals who were relocated from Arusha
to Niamey in December and the impact of those
developments on the Mechanism’s workload. We call
on the States concerned to respect the decisions of the
Tribunal and to abide by the terms of the Relocation
Agreement. We commend the Registrar for using his
good offices to find a solution to this situation and
support continued efforts in that regard.
For reconciliation and peacebuilding, acceptance
of the truth and of facts is a precondition. Therefore,
the negative developments during the reporting period
relating to the denial of crimes and glorification of war
criminals remain concerning. Ireland again condemns
genocidal ideology, the denial of crimes and the praise
lavished on war criminals by high-level officials.
In conclusion, Ireland reaffirms its steadfast
commitment to international criminal justice, ensuring
accountability and achieving justice for all victims and
survivors of atrocity crimes. We firmly reject any effort
to undermine the work of the Mechanism.
Until it fully completes the remaining work of
the International Criminal Tribunals, the Mechanism
remains an indispensable part of the international
criminal justice system. The victims and survivors

S/PV.9062

of atrocities committed in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia deserve no less.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
congratulating and thanking Judge Carmel Agius for his
remarkable tenure as the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. In full
compliance with the mandate he received from the
Security Council, he has acted to lower the judicial
caseload of the Mechanism, which, let us not forget,
is residual and temporary in nature. He has also led
the Mechanism with zeal in order to enable it to carry
out other fundamental statutory tasks, such as lending
assistance to the States concerned in tracking fugitives
and protecting victims and witnesses.
Let me also express our appreciation to the
Prosecutor of the Mechanism, Mr. Serge Brammertz,
for his dedication to his high responsibilities, as well as
for the briefing presented to us today.
Brazil believes that States bear the primary
responsibility for holding accountable those who
perpetrate crimes in their territories. It therefore sees
international tribunals as essentially supplementary
to the national judiciaries. International courts should
step in when the national ones are unable or unwilling
to adjudicate those crimes themselves.
On the one hand, the complementarity principle
is important to ensure that States retain ownership of
their right and, above all, duty to provide justice to
their citizens. On the other hand, history has shown
how crucial it is for the international community not
to allow, in any circumstances, perpetrators of gross
atrocities to go unpunished. Impunity undermines
the rule of law and the credibility of national and
international institutions. International tribunals offer
the international community appropriate means for that
not to happen.
The Residual Mechanism is a notable example of
how we can work together as an international community
for the sake of justice. The International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, established during ongoing
wars, were pioneers in strengthening accountability
in the international arena. Their legacy cannot be put
in danger. Although the Residual Mechanism cannot
exist endlessly, it is paramount to bring justice for all
the crimes for which it was created and for which the
International Tribunals were established. Furthermore,
it would not be responsible to take for granted that

22-3817317/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

victims and witnesses would remain safe on their own
after the trials.
The Mechanism still fulfils those vital functions.
It must therefore be allowed to pursue its course of
action while necessary. Brazil strongly supports the
timely renewal of its mandate and the reappointment
of its Judges, Prosecutor and Registrar. In that sense,
Brazil is ready to collaborate in our effort and duty, as
Security Council members, to adopt a draft resolution
to that end before June 30 and commends Gabon’s work
in coordinating its drafting in the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.
Brazil would also like to express its support for
the Secretary-General in the process of appointing or
reappointing the members of the Mechanism. In 2010,
the Security Council demonstrated that it can act to
ensure accountability at the international level for
serious violations of international criminal law. Now it
is time to show that we are still able to do so.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
First of all, I would like to thank President Agius and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their insightful reports and
briefings. As Judge Agius is relinquishing his position
as President, I would like to pay tribute to his tireless
and efforts and express our hope that the Mechanism
will continue to benefit from his vast experience and
wisdom as part of the judicial body.
I wish to affirm Albania’s strong support for the
Mechanism as part of our unwavering commitment
to accountability. The work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT)
is key to continuing to ensure responsibility for the
most serious crimes under international law. We
express our appreciation for the excellent work IRMCT
over the years in the face of manifold challenges and
support its ongoing engagement to continuing justice
for the victims of atrocity crimes in Rwanda and in the
former Yugoslavia.
There is hardly any need to recall the fact that justice
contributes to reconciliation, peace and development.
Justice helps heal the wounds of the past and brings
comfort to the hearts and minds of survivors. Justice
clears and cements the path towards the future.
I would like to highlight the following points. First,
Albania supports every effort aimed at bringing to
justice those responsible for war crimes in the former
18/25

14/06/2022

Yugoslavia, Rwanda and anywhere else. We commend
States for their cooperation with the Mechanism in
capturing and arresting fugitives. We welcome the
recent progress made in the Kabuga case and look
forward to the appeals phase in the Stanišić and
Simatović case and the rendering of judgment in the
Fatuma et al. appeal that, as we learned, will happen
this month.
The legal obligation to cooperate with the
Mechanism is not optional, and arrest warrants should
be executed without delay. In this respect, the arrest
warrants for Jojić and Radeta, who have been charged
with witness interference, must be executed. Contempt
cases are part of the Mechanism’s work, and it is
important to ensure the rule of law. There should be no
illusion: lasting peace and stability will not be ensured
as long as those responsible for atrocity crimes remain
at large.
Secondly, glorification of war criminals, genocide
denial and history revisionism are unacceptable.
They should not have any place anywhere, even less
so in the Western Balkans, since they dishonour the
memory of thousands of victims of the genocide in
Srebrenica, of atrocities in Vukovar or in Račak. They
run against rulings of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and contradict the most
fundamental European values. It is utterly worrying
that such abhorrent views are openly defended in the
main squares, displayed on the streets and shouted in
school stadiums. We should stand firmly against hate
speech, inflammatory rhetoric and incitements to
violence. We cannot contemplate the risk of recurrence
of horrific crimes that should never happen again.
We must therefore confront false narratives, face the
truth — however painful — and stand firmly against
the banalization of hatred. History has taught us where
ethnic-based hatred and persecution of certain groups
can lead. We cannot afford to succumb to collective
amnesia. As we have seen in various places and on
various continents, it is only a matter of time before
what is tolerated somewhere will happen elsewhere.
Thirdly, we welcome the IRMCT’s significant
work responding to national authorities’ requests for
assistance which, as we have noticed, have multiplied.
It remains a critical aspect of the Mechanism for
its future as it continues to play an important role in
facilitating the rule of law. We therefore support the
renewal of its mandate.
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

While the Mechanism is scaled down in accordance
with the Security Council vision for a small, temporary
and efficient body whose function is reduced over
time, we must ensure that for as long as it remains
in function, the Mechanism is able to implement its
mandate in full, as provided for by the Council. Let us
not forget that over its lifetime the ICTY has achieved
a great deal. It has indicted 161 individuals, convicted
90 and acquitted 19 — of different nationalities, from
different countries.
The wheels of justice may be slow, but they grind
finely. Those behind bars know it, and we do as well.
It is in this way that we make sure that war criminals
know that they will not find safe harbour anywhere
or at any time. It is our common responsibility to
support international mechanisms and deliver justice
for the families of victims, their communities and the
countries concerned.
I would like to make one final point at this stage.
As far as the allegations of Albanian involvement
mentioned by the Russian delegation go, I just need to
say that that is an overdose of obsessional fantasy. What
we heard about my country is as credible as what we
have heard in this Chamber from the same delegation
over and over again: “there is no war in Ukraine”.
Who would believe that? “The Ukrainians are killing
themselves and staging crimes in which people are
executed with their hands tied behind their backs.”
Who would believe such a thing possible?
I will spare Council members the horrors. I do not
need to remind them that a former Prime Minister of
the Republic of Kosovo and a prominent politician,
Mr. Ramush Haradinaj, who was mentioned specifically,
was twice — not once, but twice — tried and was twice
cleared of any wrongdoing. He did not hide. He resigned
from the Office of the Prime Minister, made himself
available to justice, faced the facts, was acquitted and
was freed. Will Russian soldiers and politicians guilty
of the crime of aggression and other serious crimes, as
documented every day, do the same? I hope so.
The ICTY investigated in Albania openly freely
and found nothing — I mean nothing — to substantiate
any of the allegations, not then, not later, not now, not
ever, for the very simple reason that the allegations
were built on nothingness.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I would like to again draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which

S/PV.9062

encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Maja
Popović, Minister of Justice of Serbia.
Ms. Popović (Serbia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council on behalf of the Republic of Serbia
with respect to the six-month progress report of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and underline some of the key instances of
the current cooperation between the Republic of Serbia
and the Mechanism.
In his briefing, the President of the Mechanism
once again mentioned allegations of Serbia’s
non-cooperation in connection with the Jojić and
Radeta case. At previous Security Council meetings,
Serbian representatives explained in great detail the
reasons we do not accept annulling the decision of
the Mechanism to transfer this case to the Serbian
judiciary. The conduct of the Republic of Serbia with
regard to this case does not, as stated by the President
of the Mechanism, constitute a violation of our
international obligations, but it is an effort to comply
with the resolution 1966 (2010). We believe that, in the
current circumstances, proceedings before national
courts can improve justice and strengthen confidence
in national judicial systems which, in accordance
with the aforementioned resolution, should take over
prosecutions. This is further supported by the fact that
the Higher Court in Belgrade issued a decision based on
the merits that the preconditions for the extradition of
Mrs. Radeta and Mr. Jojić were not met. This decision
was confirmed by the Appellate Court in Belgrade,
thus making it final.
I would also like to take this opportunity to once
again remind the Council of our readiness for — and
our request that — prison sentences imposed on our
nationals by the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the Residual Mechanism be
executed in the Republic of Serbia, under the supervision
of the Mechanism. This has been presented to the
Security Council several times before. Serbia strongly
opposes the new practice of the Mechanism, which
resulted in many years of non-decisions on requests for
early release of our citizens, which flagrantly violates
their basic human rights. In addition, we strongly
believe that this new practice violates the principle that

22-3817319/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

was the basis for the actions of all the former presidents
of the ICTY and the Mechanism to provide the same
treatment to all convicts who find themselves in the
same situation. Nevertheless, the Government of the
Republic of Serbia stands ready to give assurances
and guarantees that the conditions of early release
will be fully respected, as they have been respected so
far without any exception. I must emphasize that the
Republic of Serbia has fulfilled all its guarantees in
the past.
Another outstanding issue where, for reasons
unknown to us, there has been no progress, is the return
of the extensive archives to Serbia. These archives
consist of voluminous documentation forwarded to
the ICTY and the Mechanism that was not used or
is no longer needed for the ongoing trials before the
Mechanism. There is currently only one ongoing appeal
procedure before the Mechanism, the Stanišić and
Simatović case, and we believe there is no reason for
further delay in initiating the process of returning the
original documents.
In the reporting period, the Mechanism
Prosecutor’s Office intensified its activities on issues
related to contempt of court, submitted numerous
requests for evidence and information and announced
the filing of new indictments. We believe it is important
to emphasize that the Mechanism was established by
the Security Council to prosecute persons responsible
for gross violations of international humanitarian law
committed on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
However, after more than 20 years of work, the
Mechanism began to deal with violations of procedural
discipline — more precisely, illegal behaviour that
did not represent a significant danger to society. It
therefore focused all its activities on this alleged illegal
behaviour of minor significance, as described, despite
the fact that it was not established to deal with such
matters. All the requests are related to one case alone,
that of Vojislav Šešelj, which has been finalized.
In the reporting period, Serbia responded to five of
the 12 requests submitted by the Mechanism’s Office
of the Prosecutor, and representatives of the Office
questioned 11 persons as witnesses on the premises
of the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the
Republic of Serbia. We would also like to emphasize
that the Serbian authorities served the summonses
for the hearing of the seven persons who have to be
interrogated in the Office of the War Crime Prosecutor
in Belgrade as suspects. In serving the summonses,
20/25

14/06/2022

Serbia fulfilled its obligations, and yet Prosecutor
Brammertz did not include that fact in his report.
Serbia therefore actually fulfilled two further requests
of the Office of the Prosecutor. As the Chief Prosecutor
is familiar with this matter, we assume that it will be
incorporated into the next report.
During the reporting period the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia actively
cooperated with the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism. In addition to regular high-level meetings,
cooperation was established in specific cases against
two high-ranking officials, resulting in one case in the
filing of an indictment and in an improvement to the
investigation in the other. In the same period, a working
group composed of representatives of the Mechanism
and the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of
the Republic of Serbia was established in order to
improve cooperation in specific cases, especially
where the provision of evidence was concerned. The
Mechanism’s experts also held a practical training
session for the representatives of the Office of the
War Crimes Prosecutor on investigations of conflictrelated sexual abuse as an international crime. And
cooperation between the Mechanism and the Office of
the War Crimes Prosecutor is being fostered through
the implementation of the relevant activities set up in
the Action Plan for Chapter 23.
One of the objections of the Mechanism’s
Office of the Prosecutor is that certain individuals
have delegitimized facts that contradict the official
standpoints of the Prosecutor’s Office and arise
from the judgments of the ICTY or the Mechanism.
In that context, I would like to point out that Serbia
is a democratic country in which freedom of speech,
as well as professional and scientific criticism, is
guaranteed and to which the judgments of the ICTY
and the Mechanism are subject, as in any other
democratic country.
In the report, the Office of the Prosecutor further
states that the cooperation on war crimes between
the Republic of Serbia and so-called Kosovo did not
improve. We welcome the position of the Mechanism’s
Office of the Prosecutor that all references to so-called
Kosovo should be considered in full compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999). It is indisputable that everyone
involved in the proceedings regarding war crimes and
cooperation in the fight against crime has an obligation
to act in full accordance with that resolution.
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

I would like to take this opportunity to once again
point to the problems that arose in connection with
the requests by so-called Kosovo for the extradition
of a person who had already been convicted before the
Mechanism and the obligation of the Mechanism to act
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) in carrying
out its activities. The Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICTY completely failed to conduct investigations and
hold trials for the crimes against Serbs and non-Albanian
civilians committed in Kosovo and Metohija. That
significantly damaged the reputation of and trust in the
ICTY and the Mechanism. Impunity for the horrific
crimes committed against the Serbian population
became for all practical purposes a policy that found
its main support in the work of the ICTY Prosecutor’s
Office. In that context, I would like to point out that
the Office of the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor
of the Republic of Serbia forwarded 10 requests for
assistance to the European Union (EU) Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in Pristina that remain
unanswered to this day. Let me remind members that
EULEX conducts its activities under the authority of
the Security Council.
The Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor points
to a standstill in the negotiations between Serbia and
Croatia on agreeing to the establishment of a framework
for the processing of war crimes. We note that this is a
bilateral issue that does not fall under the jurisdiction
of the Mechanism, nor is it of special interest for its
functioning, since Serbia and Croatia have very
similar provisions for their criminal and criminal
procedure codes. In addition, both countries are party
to the relevant conventions of the Council of Europe,
including, but not limited to, the European Convention
on Extradition and the European Convention on Mutual
Assistance in Criminal Matters. Those conventions of
the Council of Europe take precedence over bilateral
agreements. The Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor
did not state any reason as to why it would be necessary
to conclude a special bilateral agreement for the
effective administration of justice. Serbia remains
open to further negotiations with Croatia on improving
criminal prosecution for gross violations of international
humanitarian law committed on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, based on the principle of the rule
of law.
I would like to emphasize that the agreement
between Serbia and Croatia on processing war
crimes was not concluded because Croatia insisted
on the abolition of universal jurisdiction in Serbia’s

S/PV.9062

legal system. Universal jurisdiction is a legacy of
international humanitarian law and applies to gross
violations of human rights. For that reason, we believe
it should necessarily be an integral part of Serbia’s legal
system. That type of jurisdiction is known in Croatia’s
legal system as well as those of other EU member
States, which makes us question why Croatia insisted
that it be removed from Serbia’s legal system. In May,
for the purpose of improving regional cooperation, the
Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic
of Serbia invited the Chief State Attorney of Croatia to
hold a bilateral meeting in order to, among other things,
effectively conduct joint activities on improving the
efficiency of war crimes proceedings and cooperation
in the area of protection, support and assistance to
victims and witnesses.
In the reporting period, Serbia made significant
efforts to improve regional cooperation, especially with
the Offices of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and of Croatia, respectively. A meeting was held with
the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to discuss issues of legal assistance in specific cases,
including the issue of taking over and transferring
criminal prosecution, which is expected to be realized
in the coming period.
In conclusion, the Republic of Serbia strongly
believes that every war crime must be adequately
punished, regardless of who commits it. For that reason,
I particularly emphasize that it is essential that the other
countries of the region take the same steps, as Serbia is
the only one sincerely offering a hand of reconciliation.
In that regard, I would like to underline that the Serbian
Ministry of Justice and the Office of the War Crimes
Prosecutor stand ready to implement activities within
their competences on the issue. The Republic of Serbia
pursues a responsible policy of reconciliation in the
region, without which there can be no future, stability,
economic development or normalization of relations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, please allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you every success in performing your
duties. You can count on my delegation’s full support.
I would also like to thank the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Carmel Agius, for his leadership and

22-3817321/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

guidance during this period, as well as the Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Mr. Serge Brammertz. I am grateful to them
both for their respective reports and comprehensive
briefings today.
We commend the Mechanism on continuing to
make progress in its work since the last Security Council
meeting on the topic (see S/PV.8927) and to function
despite all the circumstances affecting the work of the
Mechanism. This unprecedented justice project can be
concluded only when all of its unfinished cases receive
proper closure. The continuation of its work until such
closure is therefore of paramount importance.
The situation arising from the coronavirus disease
pandemic has continued to have a serious impact on
the actions and activities of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as well as those of
the judicial authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, since
the previous Council meeting on this subject. Given the
challenges that the pandemic has posed for the national
prosecutors of war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the work of the Prosecutor’s Office and the Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which deals primarily with
unfinished and very complex war crimes cases, was
inevitably affected.
The judicial authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are focused on and committed to the implementation
of the revised strategy for work on war crimes cases
adopted by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. One of the strategy’s first and most
important goals is to conclude all unresolved war
crimes cases by 2023. To that end, the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina are working to resolve all open
war crimes cases among judicial authorities at different
levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All potential
perpetrators of war crimes must be prosecuted for their
personal or command responsibility. In accordance
with the revised strategy, the judicial authorities should
align court practices in order to strengthen trust in the
judicial system and ensure the equality of all citizens
before the law. The implementation of the strategy will
send a strong message that impunity will not and must
not be allowed, regardless of the nationality or ethnicity
of the victims or perpetrators. That is important for
reconciliation and progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and throughout the Western Balkans.
Speaking of reconciliation, the glorification of war
crimes and their perpetrators and, conversely, their
denial is one of the main obstacles that we are facing
22/25

14/06/2022

in this long and painful process. It is unacceptable and
as such must be punishable under the law. The proper
acknowledgement of truth, along with the punishment
and condemnation of all persons responsible for war
crimes committed in the past, is key to our shared
future, to forging relationships and cooperation built on
trust and respect and a necessary and significant step
in making progress on our path towards membership in
the European Union.
According to the records of the Prosecutor’s Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a total of 21 indictments
against 56 persons were confirmed in 2021, and five
indictments against 19 persons were confirmed in
the first five months of this year. The Prosecutor’s
Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has forwarded to
the Prosecutor’s Offices at the entity level and to the
Prosecutor’s Office of Brcko district a total of 18 cases.
In addition, the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has issued orders to open seven new cases
against 67 persons. I would like to inform the Council
that according to the records of the Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Court received 21 indictments in
2021 and one in the first four months of this year. In the
period from 2020 to the end of April 2022, the Court
therefore pronounced 25 first-instance and 20 secondinstance verdicts.
I want to emphasize once again that as
demonstrated in their reports throughout the relevant
period of operations, the cooperation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the Mechanism has been stable and
comprehensive. In that context, we commend the recent
trip by Mr. Brammertz to Sarajevo and his meetings with
the Acting Chief Prosecutor at the Prosecutor’s Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Chief
Prosecutor of the Office of War Crimes of Republika
Srpska. We remain committed to contributing actively
to the Mechanism’s efforts to accomplish its mission.
We would also like to reiterate our commitment to its
work and call on all Member States to fulfil all their
obligations and make their financial contributions to
ensure the uninterrupted work of the Mechanism. We
are grateful that the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism has continued its engagement with the
judicial authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
that it remains committed to providing Bosnia and
Herzegovina with full support in assisting, transferring
knowledge and applying all lessons learned.
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

We also want to express our gratitude for the
support of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
and the United Nations Development Programme
for strengthening the human and material resources
of judicial institutions prosecuting war crimes and
engaged in general capacity-building. I would like
to emphasize that the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has supported and implemented the
OSCE Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s project
regarding the technical needs assessment of databases,
already established in cooperation with the OSCE,
the Prosecutor’s Office and the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to
investigating, prosecuting and punishing all persons
responsible for war crimes, regardless of the offender’s
nationality, ethnicity, religion or political or other
affiliation. We would also like to emphasize that
witness protection is of the utmost importance in the
conduct and operations of all judicial institutions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Cooperation between the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and those of
neighbouring countries in the exchange of information
is also critical. We continue to search for and
identify the approximately 7,400 persons who remain
missing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard,
Mr. Milanko Kajganić, the Acting Chief Prosecutor
of the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
met Ms. Kathryne Bomberger, the Director-General of
the International Commission on Missing Persons, in
Sarajevo on 17 March. The main topic of the meeting
was improving the process of searching for missing
persons and their identification and assistance by the
International Commission on Missing Persons.
I would like to commend the continued
cooperation between the Prosecutor’s Office of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Prosecutor’s Office for
War Crimes of the Republic of Serbia. In that regard,
they organized a successful meeting held in Sarajevo
on 5 April. The main topics of the meeting were the
implementation of memorandums and protocols of
cooperation signed between the two countries and the
exchange of information in the criminal prosecution
of war crime cases. In addition, they discussed topics
related to cooperation in the fight against impunity for
war crimes, as well as the current cases in progress, in
which mutual legal assistance was requested in certain
procedural actions. One of the most important issues
discussed in the meeting was the status and stages

S/PV.9062

of criminal proceedings in cases transferred from
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Republic of Serbia and
vice versa. A draft agreement of understanding and
cooperation for the protection and support of witnesses
and victims in war crime cases has been prepared by
the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the War Crimes Prosecutor’s Office of Serbia.
We regret, however, that there has been no progress
in the matter of Novak Đukić and Milomir Savčić, who
were standing trial in Bosnia and Herzegovina and fled
to Serbia. Cooperation with the judicial authorities of
the Republic of Croatia could and should be improved
with regard to positive responses from the Croatian
authorities to the requests for mutual legal assistance
sent to them by Bosnia and Herzegovina. But they
have not responded so far. The Prosecutor’s Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina has finished a couple of
investigations, but it is not possible to file indictments
without questioning the suspected persons residing
in Croatia. In that regard, we urge the Government
of Croatia to change its attitude and start complying
with our requests. We need that if we are to improve
the fight against impunity and reconciliation in the
Western Balkans.
I would also like to inform the Council that the
Protocol on Cooperation in Prosecution of Perpetrators
of War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and Genocide
has been signed between the State Prosecutor’s Office
of Montenegro and the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Protocol will help facilitate
the exchange of information and evidence between
two countries.
We are fully committed to continuing to strengthen
the rule of law, human rights and economic development.
We will continue to work to strengthen the justice
system in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Stability, progress,
mutual trust and cooperation cannot be achieved
without full justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June. I would
also like to thank President Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their detailed briefings and the members
of the Security Council for their statements. Rwanda
welcomes the good work done by the court and the
Prosecutor’s Office in the execution of the mandate

22-3817323/25

S/PV.9062

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We also value the good cooperation that
exists between the Mechanism and the Government
of Rwanda. As Judge Agius concludes his mandate as
President of the Mechanism, Rwanda recognizes and
congratulates him on his tremendous contribution to
international justice.
We would like to focus on four points. The first is
locating and arresting the remaining fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
the second is the Félicien Kabuga case; the third is
the transfer of eight Rwandans to the Niger; and the
fourth is the proliferation of hate speech in the Great
Lakes region.
In locating and arresting the remaining fugitives
indicted by the Mechanism, Rwanda commends the
Prosecutor’s Office for its relentless and fruitful
efforts. However, while the Office has viable leads on
the whereabouts of some of the remaining fugitives,
the major remaining challenge is the lack of timely and
effective cooperation on the part of some Member States.
Rwanda has sent out more than 1,000 indictments to 34
countries around the world, requesting their cooperation
in arresting and prosecuting fugitives or transferring
them to Rwanda to face justice. Regrettably, only a
few have complied. Rwanda would like to remind
Member States that all resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and all decisions of
the African Union oblige Member States, particularly
those where genocide fugitives are suspected to be
living, to intensify their cooperation and render the
necessary assistance to the Mechanism and Rwanda so
as to quickly obtain the arrest of all remaining genocide
suspects. The Council has repeated that call in all its
resolutions, most recently resolution 2529 (2020). We
commend the countries that have heeded the call for
justice and transferred genocide fugitives to Rwanda or
prosecuted them in their national courts.
Rwanda welcomes the 13 June decision by the Trial
Chamber of the Mechanism that Félicien Kabuga is now
fit to stand trial. We would like to remind the Council
that Kabuga was one of the masterminds of the 1994
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda. The Government
and the people of Rwanda have always made justice a
priority, and given that it has been more than two years
since Kabuga was arrested, we call on the Mechanism
to commence his trial without delay.
Rwanda takes note of the situation of the
individuals who were transferred to the Niger. In all
24/25

14/06/2022

previous engagements with the Residual Mechanism,
Rwanda made it clear that we welcome all ex-convicts
who have completed their sentences and persons who
have been released to return to Rwanda and resettle. A
case in point is that of Major Bernard Ntuyahaga, who
served his 20-year prison term in Belgium and was sent
back to Rwanda, where he now lives peacefully. What
makes the eight individuals’ case so special that they
cannot be similarly resettled in Rwanda, and what kind
of precedent does that set?
As we contend with the issue of genocide fugitives
and rising genocide denial, Rwanda is also deeply
concerned about the current resurgence in hate speech
targeting the Tutsi and Rwandaphones in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that is fast developing within
public and official circles, as well as mainstream and
social media. That deteriorating environment is an
early warning sign of intentions to commit genocide.
We should all remember that on 18 June 2019, the
Secretary-General launched the United Nations
Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech, in which
he noted that hate speech is in itself an attack on
tolerance, inclusion, diversity and the very essence of
our human rights norms and principles. More broadly,
it undermines social cohesion, erodes shared values and
can lay foundations for violence, setting back the cause
of peace, stability, sustainable development and the
fulfilment of human rights. In response to the Plan of
Action, the Security Council should take urgent action
against the hate speech that we are currently observing
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, given the significance of the work
undertaken by the Mechanism and the Prosecutor’s
Office, we highly recommend that the Security
Council provide them with all the support and financial
resources they need to fulfil their mandate. Moving
forward, Rwanda hopes for improved and meaningful
cooperation between the Mechanism and Member
States. Justice can be rendered only where there is the
political will to do so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I would like to welcome
President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz, and I thank
them for their briefings today. Since this is the last
briefing by Judge Agius as President of the Mechanism,
I would like to express our gratitude for his tireless
efforts throughout his mandate, and prior to that at
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
22-38173

14/06/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

(ICTY). Croatia also wishes the next President of the
Mechanism every success. We will continue to support
the Mechanism for the remainder of its mandate.
Let me first address some pending cases. Croatia
was very surprised that in the Jovica Stanišić and
Franko Simatović case the Trial Chamber established
the existence of a joint criminal enterprise of Serbian
leaders led by Slobodan Milošević, as well as their
responsibility for crimes committed in Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but did not list Stanišić and
Simatović among them. That decision departs from
findings in the ICTY verdicts against Milan Babić
and Milan Martić for crimes committed in Croatia,
which established the existence of a joint criminal
enterprise in which Stanišić and Simatović, as Serbia’s
top security officials, participated along with others,
led by Slobodan Milošević. We sincerely hope that
the Appeals Chamber will acknowledge the necessity
of ensuring the coherence of judgments rendered by
the former ICTY and the Mechanism and will convict
Stanišić and Simatović for participation in a joint
criminal enterprise, as well as for all crimes committed
in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as requested by
the Prosecutor.
We hope that the Mechanism will complete its
remaining work soon. The Rwandan fugitives have
to be apprehended and put on trial. The Mechanism’s
repeated referral of Serbia to the Security Council for
the failure to arrest and transfer Petar Jojić and Vjerica
Radeta must be dealt with effectively, as requested in
President Agius’s report. The intimidation of witnesses
is a serious crime that undermines accountability
efforts, and it should be treated as such.
The glorification of war criminals and the denial of
genocide are unacceptable. They increase the suffering
of victims and take countries under the mandate further
away from reconciliation. We especially condemn
the consistent denial of the genocide committed in
Srebrenica. Croatia is committed to constructive,
effective, non-politicized and evidence-based judicial

S/PV.9062

cooperation with other mandated countries in war
crime matters. We reject some of the Prosecutor’s
negative qualifications regarding Croatia’s bilateral
cooperation with other mandated countries, and stress
that meaningful cooperation is not a one-way process
and that we expect other States to also actively engage
and contribute to improving cooperation.
For years, Croatia has been waiting for Serbia’s
response to its invitation to finalize the draft of a
bilateral agreement on processing war crimes, whose
conclusion would represent a significant step forward
in our judicial cooperation. Instead, Serbia is initiating
politicized criminal proceedings against Croatian
citizens, which are at odds with the international
standards of universal jurisdiction.
With regard to Croatia’s bilateral cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina, both sides should press to
implement the bilateral agreement on cooperation in war
crime matters more effectively and reduce the backlog
in responding to requests for mutual legal assistance.
Another important area of regional cooperation
is tracing missing persons. Determining the fate
of 1,839 Croatian citizens still missing is our longstanding priority. It is deeply disappointing that crucial
information is still not shared.
We encourage the Mechanism to use the short time
remaining at its disposal before the termination of its
mandate to increase its efforts to help to resolve at least
some of the roughly 10,000 unresolved cases altogether
through cooperation with the International Committee
of the Red Cross and States within its mandate. Just 19
resolved cases based on the exchange of information
in the past six months is simply not enough. At that
pace, it would require more than 250 years to complete
the process.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm our strong support
for the important work of the Mechanism and its
successful completion.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

22-3817325/25
