V.

Resolutlom adopted on tbe repom of the Second Committee

arrangements regarding the termination or expiration of
the agreement;
4. Encourages all Member States to make available
to the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
audio-visual material prepared for their programmes of
national action;
5. Appeals to all States and interested organizations
to make available to the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements the necessary resources for continuing its audio-visual and information activities;
6. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements to report to the
Commission on Human Settlements at its third session
on the progress achieved towards the establishment of a
unified information service.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979
34/ 116.

Strengthening of human settlements activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 2718 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, 3001
(XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3327 (XXIX) of 16
December 1974 and 32/162 of 19 December 1977,
Noting that in the report of the Commission on Human
Settlements on the work of its second session° 7 Member
States are called upon to deal with human settlements
programmes as an integral and important element of
national development plans,
Recognizing that the goals of the new international
economic order encompass both general economic improvements in developing countries and the achievement
of social equity in the distribution of benefits from
economic growth,
Convinced that human settlements activities can make
an important contribution to achieving both those goals
of the new international economic order,
Recognizing that one of the most urgent needs in
developing countries is to upgrade the living and working conditions of low-income and disadvantaged groups
in both rural and urban areas,
Convinced that human settlements programmes provide a direct mechanism for redressing imbalances in
access to shelter, utility services, health care, education
and community amenities, and hence can have a significant impact on the immediate, day-to-day needs of lowincome and disadvantaged groups,
Convinced that human settlements programmes offer
an effective tool for generating the energy-conserving
and resource-conserving community patterns which will
be called for,
1. Urges Member States, within the context of their
national priorities, to devote a larger share of national
resources to the strengthening of human settlements
activities as vehicles of economic and social change;
2. Suggests that Member States should examine
mul~ilateral and bilateral co-operation programmes,
particularly those financed by the United Nations Development Programme, to determine whether an increased allocation can be made to the human settlements
sector;
3. Requests Member States to report every two
years to the Commission on Human Settlements on the
67 Ibid., Supplement No. 8 (A/34/8).

107

progress made in implementing the recommendations for
national action adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements and, where possible,
on the level and sources of international and national
funding being devoted to human settlements activities.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/117.

Technical co-operation among developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 33/134 of 19 December
1978, in which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of
Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries 08 as an important
instrument of the international community to intensify
and strengthen co-operation among developing countries,
thus making international co-operation for development
more effective,
Noting the Arusha Programme for Collective SelfReliance and Framework for Negotiations, 00 adopted by
the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the Group of Seventyseven, held at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania,
from 12 to 16 February 1979,
Noting also the Economic Declaration, the Programme
of Action for Economic Co-operation and resolution 7,
containing policy guidelines on the reinforcement of
collective self-reliance between developing countries,
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, 70
Bearing in mind resolutions 112 (V) on strengthening
the technological capacity of developing countries, including accelerating their technological transformation,
~nd 127 (V) on economic co-operation among developmg countries, adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its fifth session held at
Manila from 7 May to 3 June 1979, 71
'
Reiterating that the implementation of the Buenos
Aires Plan of Action would constitute a major contribution in the evolution of international co-operation for
development and to the establishment of the new international economic order and an important element of
the international development strategy for the third
United Nations development decade,
Taking note of the report of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme on organiza68 Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30
August-12 September 1978 (United Nations publication Sales
No. E.78.11.A.11 and corrigendum), chap. I.
'
69
Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E'.79.11.D.14), annex VI.
70 See A/34/542, annex.
71
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one,
sect. A.

108

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

tional and substantive arrangements for the high-level
meeting on the review of technical co-operation among
developing countries, to be held in 1980,12
1. Requests the Secretary-General as well as the
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to continue to intensify their efforts to ensure that
technical co-operation among developing countries is an
integral part of their activities for international cooperation for development;
2. Approves the proposals made by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme in
his report regarding arrangements for the high-level
meeting;12
3. Requests the executive heads of the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations development system, including the regional commissions, in
close co-operation with the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, to contribute to the
preparation of the high-level meeting and participate
actively in it;
4. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to take fully into account the relevant elements of the Vienna Programme of
Action on Science and Technology for Development7 3 in
the preparation of the high-level meeting;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
analytical report to the General Assembly at its special
session in 1980 on the implementation of the decisions
regarding the establishment of the new international economic order, called for in Assembly resolution 33/ 198
of 29 January 1979, a review of developments regarding
technical co-operation among developing countries, including the implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan
of Action; 68
6. Urges all States to take immediate steps to implement the agreements reached at the United Nations
Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries and calls upon developed countries to
comply in particular with those contained in recommendations 35 and 38 of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action; 68
7. Invites all participants in the United Nations Development Programme to undertake all the necessary
preparations for the meeting and to be represented at it
at a high level;
8. Invites the Preparatory Committee for the New
International Development Strategy to take fully into
account, in the formulation of the strategy for the third
United Nations development decade, the special contribution to be made by technical co-operation among
developing countries.

at its fifth session, held at Manila from 7 May to
3 June 1979, 74 in which specific action in a number of
identified areas was urged in respect of island developing countries,
Mindful that the particular impediments hampering
the economic development of many island developing
countries-especially those handicaps resulting from
their smallness of size, remoteness, constraints in transport and communications, great distances from market
centres, highly limited internal markets, lack of marketing expertise, limited resource endowment, lack of natural resources, heavy dependence on a few commodities
for their foreign exchange earnings, shortage of administrative personnel and heavy financial burdens--calls
for the continued attention of Governments and of the
organizations of the United Nations system,
A ware of the special problems faced by Grenada in
respect of many of those impediments, as well as the
serious adverse effects on its economy of the persistent
world-wide economic and financial problems,
Mindful that Grenada requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement
by its people of their development objectives,
Noting the action taken by the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system, as well as by the regional bodies, particularly the
Caribbean Community and the Common Market, to
provide economic, financial and technical assistance to
Grenada,
I. Stresses the urgency of rendering all necessary
assistance to Grenada in its efforts to develop and
strengthen its economy;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including
in particular the United Nations Development Programme, international financial institutions and aid
donors to intensify their assistance to Grenada within
their respective spheres of competence;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular that of the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to helping to meet
the short-term and long-term development needs of
Grenada;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the
progress achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution.

104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/ 118.

Assistance to Grenada

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3338 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 dealing, inter alia, with efforts to meet the special problems
of developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 111 (V) adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
72

A/34/415.
of the United Nations Conference on Science and
Technology for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VII.
18 Report

34/119.

Assistance to Cape Verde

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/127 of 19 December 1978,
in which it made an appeal to the international community to provide generous and immediate assistance
to the development programme recommended in the report of the Secretary-General on the mission which he
sent to Cape Verde in response to General Assembly
resolution 32/99 of 13 December 1977,75 and in which
74
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.II.D.14),
part one, sect. A.
7 5 A/33/167 and Corr.I.
