to enable Botswana to carry out its planr,cd development projects;
9. Decides to rcmain seized of the matter.

Deeply grieved and concerned at the loss of human
life and damage to property caused by the acts of the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodcsia against Botswana.
Noting with appreciation Botswana's decision to continue to give asylum to political refugees fleeing from
inhuman oppression by the illegal racist minority
régime,
Realizing the need for Botswana to strengthen its
security in order to safeguard its sovcreignty, territorial
integrity and independence,
Reaffirming the legal responsibility of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland over Southern Rhodesia, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
1. Strongly condemns all acts of provocaticn and
harassment, including military threats and attacks,
murder, arson, kidnapping and destruction of praperty,
committed against Botswana by the illegal régime in
Southern Rhodesia;
2. Condemns all measures of political repression by
the illegal régime that violate fundamental rights and
freedoms of the people of Southern Rhodesia and contribute to instability and lack of peace in the region as
a whole;
3. Deplores all acts of collaboration and collusion
which sustain the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia
and encourage defiance with impunity of the resolutions
of the Security Council, with adverse consequcnces for
peace and security in the region;
4. Demands the immediate and total cessation of
all hostile acts committed against Botswana by the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia;
5. Takes cognizance of the special economic bardship confronting Botswana as a result of the imperative
need to divert funds from ongoing and planned development projects to hitherto unplanned and unbudgeted
security measures necessitated by the urgent need
effectively to defend itself against attacks and threats
by the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia;
6. Accepts the invitation of the Government of
Botswana to dispatch a mission to assess the needs of
Botswana in carrying out its development projects
under the present circumstances and, accordingly, requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with
appropriate organizations of the United Nations system,
to organize with immediate effect financial and other
forms of assistance to Botswana and to report to the
Security Council not la ter than 31 March 1977;
7. Requests the United Nations and the organizations and programmes concerned, including the Economie and Social Council, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the W orld
Health Organization, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development, to assist Botswana in carrying out the ongoing and planned development projects
without interruption as stated in paragraph 5 and envisaged under paragraph 6 of the present resolution;
8. Appeals to all States to respond positively in
providing assistance to Botswana, in the light of the
report of the Mission of the Secretary-General, in order

Adoptcd ar the 1985th meetilzR by 13 rotes to none, with

2 abstentions (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Nortliem Ire/and, United
States of America).

Decision
At its 2006th meeting, on 24 May 1977, the Council
decided to invite the reprcscntatives of Botswana and
Sierra Leone to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitlcd "Complaint of the Government
of Botswana against the illegal régime in Southern
Rhodcsia concerning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the letter dated 22 December
1976 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council: note by the Secretary-General
(S/12307) ."''

Resolution 406 (1977)
of 25 May 1977

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 403 (1977) of 14 January
1977,
Taking note of the letter dated 18 April 1977 6 addressed to all States by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 403 (1977),
Recalling further its resolutions 232 ( 1966) of 16
December 1966 and 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968, by
which it determined and reaffirmed, respectively, that
the situation in Southern Rhodesia constituted a thrcat
to international peace and security,
Having examined the report 7 of the Mission to Botswana established under resolution 403 (1977),
Having heard the statement of the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana 8 on the continued attacks and
acts of provocation by the illegal racist régime in Southern Rhodesia against Botswana,
Convinced that international solidarity with Botswana, as a neighbouring State to Southern Rhodesia, is
essential for the promotion of a solution to the question
of Southern Rhodesia,
l. Expresses full support for the Government of
Botswana in its efforts to safeguard its sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence;
5 Ibid., Thirty-second Year, Supplement for January, Februarv and Marc/1 1977.
•6 Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1977, document
S/12326.
7 Ibid., Supplement for January, February and Marcl1 1977,
document S/12307.
8 Ibid., Thirty-second Year, 2006th meeting.

2

tions and programmes concerned, including the Economie and Social Council, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Health Organization, to assist Botswana in the
fields identified in the report of the Mission to Botswana;
8. Requests the Sccretary-General to give the
matter of assistance to Botswana his continued attention
and to keep the Security Council informed;
9. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

2. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for having arranged to send a Mission to Botswana to ascertain the assistance needed;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Mission to Botswana;
4. Fully endorses the assessment and recommendations of the Mission to Botswana under resolution 403
(1977);
5. Further fully endorses the appeal made by the
Secretary-General in his Ietter of 18 April 1977 to ail
States to give the matter of assistance to Botswana their
most urgent attention and to provide Botswana with
the financial and material help it urgently needs;
6. W elcomes the establishment by the SecretaryGeneral of a special account at Headquarters to receive
contributions for assistance to Botswana through the
United Nations;
7. Requests the United Nations and the organiza-

Adopted ununimously, withuut a 1·ote, at the 2008th
1necting.

The question of South Africa

Madagascar, Sierra Leone and Zambia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

Decisions

At its 1988th meeting, on 21 March 1977, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Egypt, Indonesia, Liberia, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Yugoslavia to participate, without vote,
in the discussion of the item entitled "The question of
South Africa: letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12295)". 9

At its 1990th meeting, on 23 March 1977, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Algeria,
Botswana, Guinea and Senegal to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to a delegation of the United Nations Co un cil for N amibia headed by the President of
that body.

At its l 99 l st meeting, on 24 March 1977, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Ghana,
Kenya, Mauritania, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Zaïre to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council further decided,
at the request of the representatives of Benin, the
Libyan Arab Republic and Mauritius, 10 to extend invitations to Mr. Mfanafuthi Johnstone Makatini, Mr.
Potlako Leballo, Mr. Olof Palme and Mr. Abdul S.
Minty under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representatives of Benin, the Libyan
Arab Republic and Mauritius, 11 to extend an invitation
to Mr. William P. Thompson under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 1989th meeting, on 22 March 1977, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Bahrain,

At its 1994th meeting, on 28 March 1977, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Cuba, Mongolia and Togo to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the question.

9 Jbid., Tldrty-second Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1977.
10 Ibid., documents S/12299 and S/1230-0.

11

3

lhid., document S/12304.
