S/2021/292

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 26 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, as well as the statements delivered by
the representatives of Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger,
Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in
Libya” convened on Wednesday, 24 March 2021. A statement was also delivered by
the representatives of Libya.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of
the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members
of the Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-04098 (E) 300321 190421

*2104098*

S/2021/292

Annex I
Statement by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Libya and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Ján Kubiš
I am grateful for this opportunity to update the Security Council on the
situation in Libya in my first briefing to the Council in my new capacity.
Following the selection, on 5 February, by the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum (LPDF) of the new interim executive authority to govern Libya for the period
leading up to national elections set for 24 December, the House of Representatives,
on 10 March, overwhelmingly endorsed the Government of National Unity proposed
by Prime Minister Abdul Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah. More than 130 members
gathered in Sirte for the House of Representatives session, which was a historic
political milestone in itself, after years of paralysis and internal divisions.
The new Cabinet of 35 members reflects the various Libyan regions and
constituencies. While women make up only 15 per cent, Prime Minister Dbeibah
pledged to appoint more women to other senior executive positions so as to reach
the commitment of 30 per cent, as set out in the LPDF road map. Currently, the key
position of Minister of Defence is vacant and managed by Prime Minister Dbeibah.
The House of Representatives reconvened again in Tobruk on 15 March for
the solemn swearing-in ceremony of the new Government, with the attendance of the
new President of the Presidency Council, Mohamed Younis Al-Menfi, along with his
two deputies, Musa Al-Koni and Abdullah Hussein El-Lafi, who previously swore
an oath before the Chief Justice. The following day, the outgoing Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord of President Serraj completed the transfer of
power to the new Presidency Council and the Government of National Unity during
a cordial handover ceremony at the seat of Government in Tripoli. Key messages
during the swearing-in ceremony included calls for reconciliation, reuniting the
country, the protection of human rights, meeting the basic needs of the people and
freeing Libya from foreign forces and foreign interference.
This manifestation of the emerging political will for unification after years
of internal strife and conflict is, first and foremost, a result of Libyan dialogue and
Libyan decisions grounded in the wishes of the people to finally end the divisions and
confrontations of the transition period in order to reclaim their country and reinstate
its unity and sovereignty. The role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has been one of good offices and facilitation, supported by the Berlin
process and other international partners. I recognize the immense contribution of
former Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie Williams
and her team in setting up the UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan political Dialogue
Process — the LPDF.
I would also like to commend the supporting role of Libya’s international
partners, especially regional actors and neighbouring countries — notably Egypt
and Morocco — which facilitated the various supporting tracks between the High
Council of State and the House of Representatives. On 17 March, the Tunisian
President, His Excellency Mr. Kaïs Saïed, arrived in Libya — the first visit in recent
years by a foreign Head of State.
These developments represent a trend and momentum that must not be lost.
Moving forward, we all need to assist and encourage the new executive authority,
the House of Representatives and the High Council of State, to pursue an inclusive
political process, to fulfil the objectives set by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
and to maintain momentum on all intra-Libyan tracks. These entities need to
continue working in a mutually reinforcing manner. It is up to the Libyan leaders to
2/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

demonstrate the will to honour the pledges and commitments under the LPDF road
map that correspond to the will of the Libyan people. They will need the continued,
timely and aligned support of the Security Council and the international community.
UNSMIL embraces the key priorities identified by the interim executive
authority and Prime Minister Dbeibah and stands ready to support them. These
include reunifying the country and its sovereign institutions; advancing the full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement; security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; delivering basic services to Libyans on the basis of
a decentralized system; addressing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic;
fostering human-rights-based inclusive national reconciliation and transitional
justice; advancing women’s political and economic empowerment; and delivering
the national elections on 24 December.
There is broad and strong support in the country, increasingly among the young
population, for holding inclusive elections on 24 December. That should remain a
key focus for the new interim executive authority and State institutions. For the
polls to take place, it is critical to confirm a clear legal and constitutional framework
for the presidential and parliamentary elections. To that end, the Constitutional
Committee, established by the House of Representatives and the High Council of
State, reached an agreement on 12 February regarding a proposed constitutional
basis for the elections.
That agreement highlights a referendum on the constitutional proposal
adopted in 2017. Alternatively, if a referendum on the draft permanent constitution
is not possible based on a decision by the High National Elections Commission,
which is then endorsed by the House of Representatives and the High Council of
State, presidential and legislative elections would take place on the basis of an
amendment to the constitutional declaration, emanating from the so-called February
Committee 2014 report. The latter scenario envisions the election of a House of
Representatives by general, free, secret and direct suffrage, in accordance with an
electoral law promulgated by the House of Representatives, with the agreement of
the High Council of State, and a Head of State elected by universal, free and direct
suffrage and by an absolute majority of the votes cast on the same election date as
the House of Representatives, in accordance with a law promulgated by the House of
Representatives, with the agreement of the High Council of State.
The agreement has been adopted by the High Council of the State but has
yet to be considered by the House of Representatives — an urgently needed task.
Additionally, it is imperative to start working, without any further delay, on the
election laws. In that regard, the observation of the Chairperson of the High National
Elections Commission — that the necessary legislation for elections needs to be
adopted by 31 July, at the latest, for the elections to be possible in December — is
worth noting.
In parallel and in line with the LPDF’s mandate, the Forum’s Legal Committee
started deliberations and formulated proposals that could serve as a fallback
framework in the event that persistent divisions within the House of Representatives
prevent it from reaching a timely decision that will enable the holding of elections
on 24 December.
The continued functioning of the House, building on the current momentum
and positive dynamics, will be of the utmost importance for completing the vital
next tasks, including the adoption of the budget, the electoral laws and other relevant
legislation that is needed to conclude this interim phase.
The Government of National Unity has a distinct role in building a conducive
political and security environment for elections and in facilitating the work of the
High National Elections Commission through the various related ministries and
21-040983/34

S/2021/292

Government institutions. It is important that the Government ensure the timely
disbursement of sufficient funds for the Commission.
The Libyan electoral authorities are making commendable efforts to hold
municipal council elections despite COVID-19 and a precarious security environment.
Following municipal elections in January and February, six new municipal councils
took office in western Libya, including in Tripoli. The remaining elections will be
organized after Ramadan. The United Nations in Libya will continue its work to
strengthen the capacity of democratically elected municipal councils to provide
services, build social cohesion and improve the lives of vulnerable populations.
With the security assurances of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, the
holding of the House of Representatives session in Sirte was a catalyst for the
repositioning of foreign fighters and mercenaries in and around Sirte, which enabled
the reopening of Ghardabiya airbase for the arrival of the members of the House of
Representatives. However, those fighters remain in the country and, indeed, in the
vicinity of the city. Their withdrawal from Libya will go a long way in restoring
the unity and sovereignty of the country and healing the deep wounds caused by
many years of internal strife, active conflict and foreign interference. Libyans of all
stripes and across the political spectrum are vehemently calling for all mercenaries
and foreign forces to leave the country — a call supported by the Libyan authorities
and institutions.
The reopening of the coastal road remains a critical step for the steady and
sustainable — if gradual — implementation of the ceasefire agreement. Significant
progress has been made on clearing explosive remnants of war from the coastal road
connecting Misrata with eastern Libya, with the technical advice and support of
UNSMIL and the United Nations Mine Action Service. During their last meeting in
Sirte on 15 March, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission agreed to open the road in
two weeks.
On 3 March, the Secretariat deployed an advance team to Libya to assess
possible United Nations support for the Libyan-led ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
Preliminary findings were shared with the Council in the progress report issued
on 22 March (see S/2021/281). While the advance team’s work has yet to be
finalized, a number of prerequisites are coming to the fore. These include national
leadership and ownership of the implementation of the 23 October 2020 ceasefire
agreement; continued momentum on the security track, working in harmony with
the political, economic and humanitarian tracks; and the timely provision of the
necessary additional financial and human resources to establish security, logistical
and operational support to United Nations ceasefire monitors, who will enable
their deployment.
It is essential that the ceasefire implementation take into account the impact
on civilians, the restoration of essential services, access to markets and freedom
of safe movement. For that reason, among others, the team of monitors must be
balanced and include women and young people.
While the ceasefire agreement continues to hold, there are reports of ongoing
fortifications and the setting up of defensive positions along the Sirte-Jufrah axis in
central Libya, as well as of the continuous presence of foreign assets and elements.
Elements of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other international terrorist
groups continue to operate in the country. It is important to continue to support the
authorities in order to address this ongoing threat, take action to counter international
terrorism and fight unlawful armed groups and organized crime networks plaguing
the country. This is critical for the stability of Libya and the Sahel. It is encouraging
to note that the Government of National Unity, despite its limited nine-month
mandate, has shown its resolve to initiate the unification of Libya’s military and
4/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

security institutions, as well as to undertake the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of various armed groups and militias and to embark upon security
sector reform.
Since 2014, Libya has either had no budget or two parallel budgets. On 17
March, the Finance Committee of the House of Representatives announced that it
had received the Government of National Unity’s draft budget proposal of 96 billion
Libyan dinars, coming at a time when the country had just undertaken its first steep
devaluation of the dinar. It included a 20 per cent salary increase for State employees,
previously approved by the Presidency Council. It also included 1.4 billion dinars to
respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and 100 million dinars for the High National
Elections Commission.
This is a positive example of restoring the normal processes of Government
and of reunified State institutions fulfilling their constitutional roles, including the
legislative and oversight roles of the unified Parliament.
I welcome the announcement by the National Oil Corporation that oil revenue
held in abeyance is now being transferred to the Central Bank.
The country will face an acute electricity crisis this summer, and there are
risks to its water security as well. United Nations agencies estimate that more than
4 million people, including 1.5 million children, may not have access to clean water
and sanitation if immediate solutions are not found and implemented.
As the primary source of revenue and the largest employer, the oil sector also
requires continued support and investment. Libya carries over 160 billion dinars of
debt and billions more in outstanding contractual liabilities.
I was encouraged to hear from Prime Minister Dbeibah that the Libyan
authorities will operate in a way that will establish high standards of good
governance, competency, responsibility, transparency and accountability, while
fighting corruption and mismanagement.
Although the ceasefire has resulted in a dramatic reduction in civilian
casualties, UNSMIL continues to document killings, enforced disappearances,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, attacks against activists and human rights defenders,
hate crimes and sexual violence, including rape. Freedom of expression is being
undermined. Various armed groups continue to operate without obstruction, and
human rights violations continue with almost total impunity. It is also essential that
internally displaced people be able to return to their homes and that those displaced
outside of Libya consider it safe to return to their country.
Following the deeply disturbing discovery of new mass graves in Tarhouna
earlier this year, now reaching a total of 101, the security situation remains unstable,
and tensions are high and compounded by a lack of justice and accountability. It is
worth noting that, on 22 March, the European Council imposed sanctions on leading
members of the Al-Kaniyat militia. I am encouraged by the announcement by Prime
Minister Dbeibah, on Friday, of an investigation on the reported discovery of several
bodies in Benghazi.
Arbitrary detentions remain a critical concern. There are more than 8,850
people arbitrarily detained at 28 official prisons in Libya, in the custody of the
judicial police, with an estimated 60 to 70 per cent in pretrial detention. In addition,
some 10,000 people are being held in detention centres under the authority of militias
and armed groups. It is estimated that the detainees include around 480 women — of
which, reportedly, 184 are non-Libyans and 63 are juveniles and children. UNSMIL
continues to receive credible reports of arbitrary and unlawful detention, torture,
enforced disappearances, extrajudicial killings, denial of visits from families and
lawyers and lack of access to justice.
21-040985/34

S/2021/292

Continuing humanitarian needs in Libya must not be overlooked, and the
civic space must be strengthened. An estimated 38,000 displaced persons returned
to their homes since the end of January, but returns remain limited owing to a lack
of basic services and the presence of explosive hazards, especially in southern parts
of Tripoli.
The impact of COVID-19 continues to make life extremely challenging
for many of the country’s most vulnerable people. As of 21 March, some 150,300
confirmed cases had been reported, including 2,487 fatalities. On a positive note, the
national deployment plan for COVID-19 vaccinations has been finalized, with the
support of UNICEF and the World Health Organization.
Currently, only 5 per cent of the 2021 humanitarian response plan — some
$10 million out of a total $189 million — is funded. I encourage States Members of
the United Nations to contribute funding to assist some 450,000 vulnerable people
in need.
While their numbers remain low as compared to the total migrant population
in Libya, the number of migrants attempting to cross the Mediterranean increased
during the first two months of 2021 and remains steady, exposing them to protection
risks and death. From 20 to 28 February, an estimated 56 people drowned during
attempted crossings. Increasing numbers of migrants and refugees — currently
some 3,858 — are being detained in extremely poor conditions, without due process
and with restrictions on humanitarian access, in official detention centres run by
the Department for Combating Illegal Migration (DCIM). UNSMIL is concerned
about serious human rights violations being committed against migrants and asylum
seekers by DCIM personnel and armed groups involved in human trafficking.
Since taking up my responsibilities in early February, a succession of
achievements by Libyan stakeholders has demonstrated that once seemingly
insurmountable divisions can be overcome with determined political will and
receptivity to the demands and aspirations of the Libyan people. As we consider
how best to support the new interim executive authority in making progress on its
priorities, we should be mindful of the pitfalls on the road ahead, in particular those
that might cause delay or obstruct the path towards the December elections.
In conclusion, I am pleased to report that, in the two months since the new
UNSMIL leadership took up its functions, with Military Coordinator Raisedon
Zenenga and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator Georgette Gagnon on the
ground, the Mission has returned to the country and the United Nations presence
in Libya has doubled. As of 16 March, there are 112 international United Nations
staff — working either for UNSMIL or for United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes — in Tripoli and Benghazi. The United Nations presence on the ground
will be critical in supporting the priorities of the Government of National Unity.
For this to happen — for it to be able to implement even its currently mandated
objectives and tasks — UNSMIL will require adequate resources and the ability to
recruit staff to fill numerous vacant positions, including in security.

6/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Envoy Ján Kubiš for his briefing. I would like to express
Estonia’s full support for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We welcome the latest developments in Libya’s political process. The formation
of a new interim authority is a step towards stability. This will allow starting the
preparations for elections in December. It is important to ensure an inclusive process
that involves all voices, especially those of women and youth. In that regard, it shows
promise that five seats in the new Cabinet are held by women.
We are encouraged by the continuation of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
meetings and their contacts with UNSMIL and the security working group of the
international follow-up committee for Libya. We stress the importance of the full
implementation of the Libyan ceasefire agreement, including ending all foreign
interference, removing foreign fighters and opening the coastal road.
The Libyan parties have clearly expressed their vision for achieving peace,
and the international community must respect it. We call on all those involved to
put an immediate end to the blatant violations of the Libyan sanctions regime and
withdraw all foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya. All actions that violate
the Libyan arms embargo must stop immediately.
We welcome the efforts of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI in support of the implementation of the Security Council arms
embargo. Operation IRINI acts strictly under authorization from the Security
Council, is impartial in its activities and offers an important contribution to the
implementation of the sanctions regime.
Estonia supports the establishment of a credible, realistic and effective
ceasefire-monitoring mechanism that acts under United Nations auspices. We
welcome the initial meeting between the United Nations advance team for
preparing the ceasefire mechanism and the 5+5 Commission. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his progress report on ceasefire-monitoring in Libya and the
recommendations made therein (see S/2021/281). It is now important to move forward
with practical arrangements in order to allow UNSMIL’s monitoring component to
become operational.
Concrete steps need to be taken to further build trust between the Libyan
parties and in Libyan society. That includes thoroughly investigating all alleged
human rights violations, mass killings, torture, enforced disappearances and ensuring
justice for victims. It is important to root out the culture of impunity and focus on
accountability. These actions are essential to achieving sustainable peace, security
and reconciliation. To support this aim, the European Union recently decided to
impose targeted sanctions on two individuals responsible for gross human rights
violations and abuses in Libya.
We remain concerned about the humanitarian situation on the ground. The
disruptions to water and electricity supplies, the extremely dire situation and the
constant exposure to violence that migrants and asylum seekers endure are of great
concern. We call on the authorities to pay close attention to these issues and to take
concrete steps to alleviate the suffering of civilians.
It is important to note that the political process under the umbrella of the
United Nations and the Berlin process remains the only acceptable international
framework to support Libyans in achieving a lasting peace.
21-040987/34

S/2021/292

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I would like to warmly thank Ján Kubiš for his briefing and reiterate France’s
full support.
In the coming weeks and months, we have an opportunity to achieve a lasting
peace in Libya. Significant progress has been made in recent months, thanks in
particular to United Nations mediation, but after 10 years of bloody conflict we can
no longer fail.
The Security Council recently welcomed the vote of confidence by Parliament
to establish the transitional Government of National Unity that will be responsible
for leading the country to elections on 24 December 2021. This deadline must be
met. The United Nations must provide expertise and assistance to ensure that these
elections are held. An agreement must be reached that provides a legal basis for them.
France welcomes the progress made in the participation of women in the exercise
of power. The December elections will, I hope, offer an opportunity to go further.
To enable the Libyan people to freely choose their representatives, it is
essential that the ceasefire be guaranteed for the long term. In relation to this aspect
of security, I would like to stress four points.
First, the Security Council must respond to the Libyans’ request and without
further delay adopt a draft resolution authorizing the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya to deploy a credible ceasefire-monitoring mechanism. The proposals by the
Secretary-General, complemented by the Special Envoy following the deployment
of the advance assessment team, will enable us to move forward quickly. It is
essential that the confidence-building measures provided for in the agreement meet
with immediate success. This will be an important first task for the monitoring
mechanism. In that regard, I would mention in particular the reopening of all roads,
including the coastal road.
Secondly, the foreign forces and mercenaries present in Libya must withdraw
without further delay, as requested by the Libyan parties. The Libyans had set a
deadline of 90 days, but more than 150 days have now elapsed since this request
was made.
Thirdly, the flow of arms into Libya must stop, and the arms embargo must
be fully respected. The final report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2021/229) is a
cause for great concern. I would recall that the European Union is making its full
contribution to stability in Libya, with the deployment of the European Union Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which is acting impartially and in compliance
with Security Council resolutions. We call on flag States to act in accordance with
resolution 2292 (2016), and therefore to cooperate with Operation IRINI.
Fourthly, militias must be disarmed as part of a process of demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration into a unified Libyan army. The 23 October agreement
offers important prospects in that regard.
In the longer term, peacebuilding requires that two major challenges be
addressed. First, there must be a fair distribution of economic resources for the
benefit of all. In the immediate term, it is essential that an agreement be reached on
key posts, with a view to unifying Libyan institutions. The fight against impunity
must also continue to be pursued, and those responsible for violations of human
8/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

rights and international humanitarian law must be punished. France is ready to fight
human trafficking in Libya, which has involved many refugees and migrants.
Together with Germany, France has proposed that the trafficker from Zawiya,
Osama Al-Kuni Ibrahim, be subject to sanctions. It is urgent that the Security
Council proceed with such sanctions. France is ready to propose other individuals or
entities guilty of human trafficking for the sanctions list.
France is readier and more committed to peace in Libya that it has ever
been. It will continue to work tirelessly with its European partners to that end.
As announced by the President of the Republic, France will reopen its Embassy in
Tripoli next Monday.

21-040989/34

S/2021/292

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Ján Kubiš for his briefing. I
also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya, Mr. Taher Elsonni, to
today’s meeting.
The developments in recent months towards the implementation of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum (LPDF) road map and the ceasefire agreement have
heightened expectations in Libya, and rightly so. The elections for the Presidency
Council and the Prime Minister, the formation of a new Cabinet and the endorsement
of the Government of National Unity at the reunified session of the House of
Representatives in Sirte earlier this month have the potential to help Libya turn a
new page in the decade-long conflict in the country. We welcome these positive and
encouraging developments.
It is also encouraging to note that the Libyan ceasefire agreement has by and
large held, even though the calls by the Security Council for the withdrawal of foreign
fighters and mercenaries have not been heeded. The newly formed Government of
National Unity has enormous challenges ahead, including the convening of elections
by the end of the year. Overall, the current situation provides reasons to be cautiously
optimistic for Libya in the days ahead.
Ten years since the crisis in Libya started unfolding, we are now presented
with a unique opportunity for the country to return to peace and stability in line
with the aspirations and wishes of the Libyan people. The Council’s task in further
advancing the political process is an important one. In this context, let me underline
the following observations.
First, we would like to reiterate that a peaceful settlement through inclusive
and broad-based dialogue and consultations, taking into account the legitimate
concerns and aspirations of all stakeholders in Libya, is the only way forward. The
current pace of implementation of the LPDF road map must continue unhindered. It
is pertinent to mention here that the timely adoption of electoral legislation by the
constitutional bodies in Libya is vital for the electoral process. We look forward to
working with other Council members and with Libya to ensure that the elections
are conducted smoothly, in a fair and transparent manner, by December 2021. The
international community must be prepared to provide any assistance that Libya
might need in the process.
Secondly, the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Libya need to be safeguarded. The peace process must therefore be fully Libyan-led
and Libyan-owned, with no imposition or external interference.
Thirdly, the importance of the 23 October ceasefire agreement cannot be
overstated. The international community and the Security Council should ensure its
full implementation. India supports the role of the United Nations in implementing
the Libyan ceasefire-monitoring mechanism as requested by the Libyan parties. We
have seen the report of the Secretary-General on proposals for amending UNSMIL’s
mandate with regard to the ceasefire-monitoring mechanism (see S/2021/281). We
are currently studying the report and will work with other Council members on the
way forward.
Fourthly, it is a matter of serious concern that, despite the clear provisions
in the ceasefire agreement and repeated calls by the Security Council, foreign
fighters and mercenaries continue to be present on Libyan territory. It is imperative
that these fighters depart from Libya so that the peace process can move forward
10/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

without external interference. We should not allow “spoilers” — foreign countries
that interfere, as well as mercenaries and foreign fighters — to hinder the country’s
progress towards peace and stability.
Fifthly, the final report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2021/229) makes it
clear that the sanctions provisions are being blatantly violated, especially those
related to the arms embargo. These violations pose a serious threat to peace and
stability in Libya. We have also expressed our strong concerns with regard to news
articles and speculation in the media that reflect some of the contents of the final
report. Such unauthorized disclosures undermine the credibility of the sanctions
regime. The Security Council also needs to look at options to address the issue of
the management of frozen funds.
Sixthly, we must ensure that terrorist forces and organizations are not allowed
to rise again in Libya, since this may lead to a cascading effect throughout the
region. The international community must speak in one voice against terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations.
India has enjoyed close and mutually beneficial relations with Libya, which
have been driven by India’s public- and private-sector companies contributing to the
Libyan economy. The strong presence of the Indian diaspora has also contributed to
Libyan society. The steel plant, power stations, transmission lines and oil pipelines
built by Indian companies are positively contributing to the Libyan economy to
this day. The presence of Indian professionals in critical sectors such as oil, steel
manufacturing, education and health has helped Libyan society and its economy
overcome the difficulties of past international isolation. We therefore wish to see
peace and stability return to Libya. India remains committed to supporting Libya
and the Libyan people in their endeavour to bring about lasting peace in the country.
To this end, we look forward to working with the Government of National Unity
for providing capacity building and training assistance to the Libyan Government
officials and people in mutually identified areas.

21-0409811/34

S/2021/292

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
Thank you very much indeed Madam President, and I want to also say welcome
and thank you to Special Envoy Ján Kubiš for his briefing this morning.
The endorsement of the Government of National Unity by the House of
Representatives on 10 March was indeed a welcome step towards unified institutions
and national reconciliation.
Ireland welcomes the historical political milestone — as Ján Kubiš called it
this morning — the Government’s formal swearing in on 15 March, as well as its
firm commitment to holding inclusive elections on 24 December. We hope to see the
new Government accord the highest priority to preparations for those free and fair
national presidential and parliamentary elections.
Ireland and its European Union (EU) partners are ready to assist in whatever
way we can.
We wish Prime Minister Dbeibah, his Government and the Presidency Council
well. We commend former President Serraj for his leadership and his facilitation of
a smooth transition of power.
The new Government now must work together to provide improved
basic services, especially health care and the provision of electricity. This will
demonstrate to the Libyan people themselves that they will be directly benefitting
from political change.
Ireland welcomes the appointment of women to senior ministerial positions.
We hope that the 30-per cent target set out by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
will be achieved at the earliest opportunity. As women delegates themselves to the
Forum have said, we must ensure that political participation by women is empowered
and effective, as well as full, equal and meaningful.
Ireland urges the Libyan Government to restructure and to activate the Women’s
Empowerment Unit and also to ensure that it is adequately staffed and resourced.
Ireland also encourages the Libyan Government to facilitate a safe operating
environment for all of civil society to undertake its crucial work freely and effectively.
I want to thank the Secretary-General and his team for the report on the
ceasefire monitoring preparations (S/2021/281), which we know now must be a
Libyan-led process. We welcome the openness to have monitors from the EU and
other regional organizations.
We urge further confidence-building measures, including the reopening of
the coastal road from Sirte and the creation of conditions for the safe and effective
deployment of the monitoring mechanism itself around Sirte.
The Council should ensure that the proposed ceasefire monitoring
arrangements fully integrate a gender perspective, and we encourage continued
dialogue with women’s organizations on that point.
Ireland reiterates the need for effective implementation of all provisions of
the 23 October ceasefire agreement, in particular the immediate withdrawal of all
foreign fighters and mercenaries.
I welcome the publication last week of the report of the Panel of Experts on
Libya established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1973 (2011) (S/2021/229),
and in this context reiterate our call for an end to breaches of the United Nations
arms embargo.
12/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

As acknowledged by the Panel of Experts, the EU European Union military
operation in the Mediterranean (Operation IRINI) has provided support to the
Panel’s investigations. Operation IRINI works impartially, and in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of this Council.
Ireland calls for further progress on the human rights track. The Council
should highlight the need for accountability, including in respect of the massacres
at Tarhouna, as well as credibly documented work by human rights organizations
and the Government of National Accord. Ireland strongly supports the work of
the United Nations Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya and welcomes the
willingness expressed by the Libyan government to engage and cooperate with the
Fact-Finding Mission.
The Council should condemn threats, attacks and killings of women leaders,
including women human rights defenders.
My country shares concerns about the continued detention of migrants at
unofficial centres and urges further action by the Libyan authorities. We also urge
access to these centres for international humanitarian organizations. We call on the
Libyan authorities to put in place measures to protect and assist detainees who have
suffered or are at risk of sexual and gender-based violence, including by transferring
women detainees to facilities with sufficient female guards.
The Council should also urge the Libyan authorities to adopt anti-trafficking
legislation and, with the support of the United Nations, we can work to strengthen
Libyan rule of law institutions to ensure that allegations of sexual and gender-based
violence can be effectively investigated and prosecuted.
In conclusion, I want to say that this is a time of hope and expectation for the
Libyan people. We have faith in their commitment to traveling on the difficult path
to a peaceful future for all Libyans. We stand ready to do all in our power to support
the people of Libya in arriving at that well-deserved destination, as Ján Kubiš said
this morning, with determined political will and receptivity to the desires of the
Libyan people themselves.

21-0409813/34

S/2021/292

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
The Kenya delegation thanks Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Libya and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), for his briefing. We congratulate him, this being the first time he is
briefing the Council since taking up office, and assure him of our support and
cooperation. I also welcome the participation of the Permanent Representative of
Libya, Taher Elsonni, in this meeting.
The milestones we celebrate today would not have been achieved without the
resilience of and strong push by the people of Libya. Therefore, Kenya commends
the people of Libya for their abiding commitment to peace in their country.
We congratulate them for the establishment of a Government of National Unity.
We welcome the fact that it reflects a significant development in the representation of
women in high-profile portfolios, including the foreign affairs and justice ministries.
The newly established Government bears on its shoulders the responsibility
to pursue the aspirations of the Libyan people, as spelled out by Prime Minister
Abdul Dbeibah, including the delivery of national elections slated for 24 December,
the restoration of services in all parts of Libya, ensuring the departure of foreign
fighters and mercenaries, the revival of the economy and national reconciliation.
Kenya commends Ms. Stephanie Williams, former Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as all stakeholders — including
neighbouring countries, particularly Tunisia — for the roles they played in helping
the Libya peace process reach where it is today.
To protect these gains and sustain the current momentum, it is important, that
the Security Council continue to speak in a strong, unified voice in support of the
peace process. The presidential statements of February and March were timely. We
believe that a stronger voice within a resolution would send a resounding message to
the stakeholders to stay the course of the Libya-led and Libya-owned peace process.
Even as we celebrate the positive developments, Kenya remains concerned
about the continued presence of foreign fighters and mercenaries, who are not adding
value to the quest for peace and stability of Libya and the region. We therefore
continue to call for their exit, in line with the ceasefire agreement of 23 October 2020.
One of the risks associated with foreign fighters is the proliferation of arms
falling into the wrong hands, not just in Libya but also in neighbouring countries.
Kenya continues to insist on the need for a coordinated disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme in a manner that corresponds with the
withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries. For the sustainable success of the
DDR programme, it should be carried out in cooperation and coordination with the
neighbouring States and the African Union.
Kenya is further concerned about the continued violations of the arms
embargo. We cannot overemphasize the need for respect for the arms embargo and
holding all violators accountable.
We note the Secretary-General’s report regarding the advance team (see
S/2021/281) and the fact that it has not completed its work. We are keen to receive
the full report of the team soon, noting that it will inform the Council’s decision on
the form of support that the United Nations should provide.
Meanwhile, I wish to underscore the imperative for the United Nations to
support the Libya ceasefire monitoring mechanism. Kenya also supports the
14/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

expansion of the UNSMIL mandate to include a ceasefire monitoring component,
including the 5+5 Joint Military Commission’s request for unarmed, non-uniformed
individual international monitors, to be deployed under the auspices of the
United Nations.
Finally, national reconciliation must be given priority to ensure that the peace
dividends are sustainable. With the establishment of the Cabinet, the sitting of the
House of Representatives and the continued dialogues, the conditions are ripe.
Kenya welcomes the support offered by the African Union in advancing
national reconciliation in furtherance of the peace process. We therefore anticipate
close cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union in that regard.

21-0409815/34

S/2021/292

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
At the outset, I would like to welcome Special Envoy Ján Kubiš. I thank him
for his briefing on the situation in Libya and express Mexico’s support for him in his
new and challenging responsibilities. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Libya, who is with us at this meeting.
Mexico welcomes the recent formation of the Government of National Unity,
headed by Prime Minister Abdul Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah, which is a decisive
step towards unifying the institutions and holding elections on 24 December. By
integrating representatives from the different regions of the country, this Government
is overcoming the divisions that fuelled the Libyan conflict in the recent past and
opening up new possibilities for genuine national reconciliation.
The appointment of five women to the new Libyan Government, some in key
positions, such as in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Justice,
is also a significant step forward. However, we must recognize that that number is
below the 30 per cent agreed in the road map of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
Of further concern is the misogynistic rhetoric that has recently been spread on the
Internet to attack some of those women. There needs to be an urgent response from
the relevant authorities to stop it.
The situation reminds us of the enormous challenges that we still face in
ensuring the full, meaningful and equal participation of women in Libya’s political
life. To move in that direction, it is important to ensure the timely deployment of the
women’s protection advisory team provided for in resolution 2542 (2020), adopted in
September last year, so that it can support the organizational phase of the electoral
process. Previous reports of the Secretary-General make it clear that women in
politics are targets of attacks and threats. Protection advisers could help to reduce
those risks and, in close cooperation with the Libyan judiciary, combat impunity for
violence against women.
Mexico notes the report prepared by the advance team with a view to creating
a ceasefire monitoring mechanism, as requested by the Libyan parties last October.
We believe it to be a priority that such a mechanism should help in the short term
to resolve disputes with regard to the implementation of the ceasefire in order to
prevent any single dispute from jeopardizing the progress made to date. We also
agree with the Secretary-General’s report (see S/2021/281) about the importance of
using the mechanism to build confidence among the parties.
Meanwhile, to maintain the ceasefire, the countries of origin must repatriate
their fighters present in Libya, and the arms embargo must be rigorously enforced.
Unfortunately, the latest report of the Panel of Experts on Libya (see S/2021/229)
shows that no progress has been made in either of those two areas despite the fact
that they are key commitments of the ceasefire agreement.
Furthermore, Mexico believes that it is essential that efforts to facilitate the
departure of foreign mercenaries be coordinated with Libya’s neighbours, from
where a significant number of those fighters come. In that way, developments in
the Libyan conflict can be prevented from having a negative impact on the fragile
situation of the States of the region through new flows of weapons and fighters.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the call to the Libyan authorities to address
the situation of the most vulnerable groups as a matter of priority. Unrestricted
16/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

access to humanitarian assistance for the population in need must be ensured. The
vulnerability of the nearly 350,000 migrants and refugees in Libya is of particular
concern. Mexico calls on the new Government to take measures to close illegal
detention centres and to punish abuses against migrants.
We believe that justice for the victims of the atrocities committed during the
conflict is a necessary condition for national reconciliation in Libya and a basis for
lasting peace.

21-0409817/34

S/2021/292

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
After years of standstill, the situation in Libya has entered a new era, inspired
by international conferences, such as that in Berlin, and by initiatives of neighbouring
countries, all driven by the will of Libyan political actors to change the destiny of
their people. It is fortunate that it is in such a context that Mr. Ján Kubiš has taken
up his duties as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Libya. The first-hand
information he has just provided us allows us to take stock of the situation in Libya
in terms of progress achieved and challenges still to overcome.
Progress in the process of emerging from crisis in Libya is just recompense
for the joint and complementary commitments by several actors, foremost among
them the Libyans themselves, who have proven to the world that they are capable
of dialogue, understanding and moving forward together, when interference and
intrusion leave them sufficient space and opportunity.
To borrow the famous quote from the Spanish philosopher Seneca, “If a
man knows not to which port he sails, no wind is favourable”. Today Libya knows
where it wants to go: it knows it must organize free and credible elections by the
end of this year; it knows that those elections cannot be held without peace and
reconciliation among all Libyans, excluding no one; it also knows that it is up to
Libyans themselves, their sense of commitment and their commitment to the stability
and unity of their country to forge the most lasting solution to the grave crisis their
country has experienced.
Because Libyans today know where they want to go, they were able, with
the support of many among us, to come away from Geneva with consensus on the
transitional authorities, which have now been put in place. The assumption of office
by Mr. Mohamed Al-Menfi as President of the Presidential Council and of Mr. Abdul
Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah as Prime Minister of the Government of National Unity,
are major positive developments, which should be welcomed. The trust placed by
Parliament in the Prime Minister and the steps he has already taken, including the
composition of a Unity Government, which includes five women among its number,
two of whom hold strategic portfolios, reflects the fact that Libyans now know where
they are going.
Now it is up to the Council and the international community to help the Libyan
ship stay on course. That course, to continue benefiting from fair winds, must head
for the holding of elections as planned on 24 December 2021. The United Nations,
through the Special Envoy, will have to mobilize all the support Libya needs to
succeed in taking that important step.
For their part, neighbouring countries, together with the African Union,
should, without further delay, lay the foundations for the holding of the forum on
national reconciliation. To keep up the current positive momentum, we must support
the interim authorities in creating the necessary conditions to hold the elections,
as well as to send serious warnings to all those who may be tempted to derail the
electoral process or undermine the hard-won national unity.
My delegation is of the view that the Security Council, now that Libya knows
where it is going, should adopt a draft resolution framing the process under way,
which would serve as a road map for the various actors. My country also hopes to see
support for the Secretary-General’s call to give the United Nations Support Mission
18/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

in Libya (UNSMIL) the appropriate mandate and means to guarantee the deployment
of monitors to ensure respect for the ceasefire throughout all Libyan territory.
With regard to security, the Niger encourages the Libyan parties to continue
implementing the ceasefire agreement through the monitoring mechanism, including
the priorities identified by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, notably the opening
of roads, the withdrawal of foreign contingents and the resolution of the conflict.
We welcome the deployment of the advance team, which will help lay the
foundations for a scalable component for UNSMIL, in support of the Joint Military
Commission, to monitor the aforementioned ceasefire, taking into account the
discussions under way on the implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
We remain gravely concerned about the presence of mercenaries and other
foreign fighters as well as the non-compliance to date with the arms embargo. The
Niger fears seeing these mercenaries and foreign fighters spread across the porous
borders of the countries bordering Libya if the mechanism for monitoring their
withdrawal is not established with the greatest of care. It is therefore essential that
measures be taken to avoid yet another repetition of what largely contributed to the
insecurity the Sahel countries faced at the start of the Libyan conflict in 2011.
In my delegation’s view that a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme would be useful in order to supervise the withdrawal of combatants and
prevent their return from becoming another source of concern for the Governments
of their countries of origin or of neighbouring countries.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, which has become more worrisome
with the recent discovery of a new coronavirus-disease variant in the city of Misrata,
the Niger reiterates its concerns about the living conditions of migrants. We reaffirm
the need to review policy on the disembarkation on Libyan soil of migrants and
refugees intercepted at sea.
In conclusion, it is now time for us to evaluate and adjust our actions. We must
rethink and harmonize our intervention strategies in order to allow the Libyans to
take the lead in stabilizing their country. We in the Niger dearly hope to see Libya
and its people, battered by so many years of conflict, continue to benefit from fair
winds, its daughters and sons happy, its neighbours untroubled, the region secure
and stable and all the initiatives under way crowned with success, allowing Libya to
regain its former glory.

21-0409819/34

S/2021/292

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank Special Envoy Kubiš and congratulate him on taking up this
important post.
Since the last Security Council meeting on Libya (see S/2021/97), we have
seen further encouraging progress on the political track. We welcome the new
Government of National Unity, led by Abdul Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah. That is a
positive development but only a first step in the process towards a political solution
in Libya. It is critical that the interim Government prioritize measures important to
the daily lives of the Libyan people, such as restoring basic water, electricity and
health-care services.
Norway fully supports the Libyan people in their quest for peace and
reconciliation through an inclusive political process. Efforts should now be geared
towards the upcoming elections in December and securing legitimacy for a Libyan
Government through the people’s democratic choice. It is critical that the integrity
of the political process be respected and that international actors contribute
constructively and in good faith.
The fact that the ceasefire is still holding is a positive sign. However, the
entrenched military situation is not sustainable in the long term. A comprehensive
and inclusive political solution is needed to break the military deadlock. An important
first step would be the reopening of the coastal road. Closely related to that is the
need for foreign fighters and mercenaries to leave the country, in accordance with
the ceasefire agreement of October 2020.
A comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process is
needed for returning foreign fighters in order to avoid spreading instability in the
region. I would also like to reiterate the obligation of all countries to respect the
weapons embargo instituted by the Council.
As the report of the Panel of Experts on Libya (see S/2021/229) clearly shows,
there are blatant and systematic breaches of the embargo. That fuels the two sides
and the conflict. Norway welcomes the progress report regarding the proposed
mechanism for ceasefire monitoring in Libya (see S/2021/281). We support a role for
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya in such a mechanism and look forward
to Council discussions on the matter. As the report emphasizes, the mechanism
should be Libyan-led and Libyan-owned.
I now turn to an increasingly worrisome issue. Norway is concerned by the
lack of accountability for serious human rights violations and abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law. I would especially highlight the mass graves
discovered in Tarhounah. We urge the Government of National Unity to investigate
and prosecute those responsible without delay and to provide its full cooperation
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). Warrants of arrest issued by ICC must
be executed, and the international fact-finding mission to Libya needs to be given
access to carry out a comprehensive investigation.
Let me end by reiterating the need for a strong and clear message from the
Security Council on the political process. There are many spoilers, and there will
be several hurdles ahead. There should therefore be no doubt about the Security
Council’s support to the interim Government of National Unity and to the election
process. It is our responsibility as Council members to provide the Libyans with the
support that they need.
20/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Ján Kubiš as the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Libya and the Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya. We thank Mr. Kubiš for briefing us on the situation in Libya.
This March not only marks the tenth anniversary of the Syrian crisis, as
our Western colleagues were so emphatically recalling just some days ago (see
S/2021/265). There is another sad and no less important date to be marked this month
that they would rather not remember. Ten years ago, in gross distortion of resolution
1973 (2011), NATO started bombing Libya, which led to the collapse of Libya’s
statehood, plunged the country into a fratricidal war and contributed to the growth
of extremism, the emergence of terrorists, destabilization in Mali and the SaharaSahel region in general and uncontrolled migration in the Mediterranean. From the
very beginning, there were violations of resolution 1970 (2011), when arms deliveries
started to arrive in support of the NATO operation in Libya and with foreign trainers
and special forces units working there. The Libyan people have suffered a great deal
over this decade on the path to restoring peace. We hope that such suffering was not
for nothing. We call on our Western colleagues not to forget that dreadful lesson,
for which Libyans are still paying the price, and to refrain from interfering in the
internal affairs of independent States, including Libya. Incidentally, today is another
sad date. It is 22 years since NATO started bombing Yugoslavia.
Over the past two weeks, Libyans have made an important step towards peace
in their country. Prime Minister Abdul Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah formed the new
interim Government of National Unity, which received a vote of confidence from
Parliament, and members of the Presidency Council, headed by Mohammad Menfi,
were sworn in. It is symbolic that those events took place in Tripoli, Sirte and Tobruk
as a sign of the unity of Libyan society. We welcome the incoming reports about the
ceremony held in Benghazi, where the authorities of the eastern part of the country
handed over their powers to the Government of National Unity. We welcome the
formation of Libya’s new civilian authorities, which have the task of preparing the
country for the general elections to be held at the end of this year.
That is not an easy task. A great deal needs to be done to ensure the prompt
normalization of the situation in Libya, build unified governance, merge State
structures and financial and economic institutions and establish unified armed
forces. The most important thing that Libyans must do is to overcome the burden of
mutual distrust caused by the long-standing conflict.
We are convinced that inclusiveness, taking into account the interests of
representatives of all regions and major political forces, including supporters of
the former Jamahiriya and the Libyan National Army, can resolve all the abovementioned tasks and lay a solid foundation for national dialogue in Libya. For our
part, we are ready to provide all possible support to stabilize the situation in Libya as
soon as possible, including through contacts with all Libyan representatives, whereby
we will encourage them to take a constructive approach, and we will continue to
support the efforts of Special Envoy Kubiš.
The 5+5 Libyan Joint Military Commission plays an important role in
maintaining the ceasefire. We call on all Libyan sides to show restraint and adhere
to their commitments under the ceasefire agreement. We also call for compliance
with the arms embargo imposed on Libya.
21-0409821/34

S/2021/292

We welcome the steps taken to enable communication between the various
parts of the country, which will help to normalize the lives of ordinary citizens
and facilitate humanitarian assistance. In addressing the situation in Libya, the
international community should be guided by solutions that have been developed,
agreed and endorsed by the Libyans themselves. In that regard, we have noted the
report of the United Nations advance team for the ceasefire monitoring, which
continues its work in Libya.
Dialogue aimed at ensuring the stability of the oil sector constitutes an
important element of stabilization given the understanding that Libya’s natural
resources belong to all citizens of the country. The financial and economic areas
also need regulation. In that regard, we are concerned by the fact that the relevant
Security Council subsidiary bodies are receiving an increasing number of requests
to use some part of Libya’s frozen assets to cover their servicing. We recall that
Western companies were instructed to safeguard the assets rather than profit off the
Libyan people.
We have frequently heard about actions of the Russian military in Libya and
have said on many occasions that there are no Russian military in that country. If any
our citizens are present in Libya, they do not represent the Russian State. Incidentally,
we have repeatedly spoken of the inaccuracy of the data at the disposal of the Panel
of Experts on Libya, which does not even bother to verify the information “leaked”
to them from open sources. Such information can easily be refuted, and Russian
journalists did that. All those findings are readily available on the Internet.
I would recommend to our colleagues that they address the conclusions of
the Panel of Experts regarding citizens of their countries actively operating in
Libya. It is clear that some of those operations cannot be carried out without the
support of Governments. Instead of making such allegations, one should instead
look in the mirror.
We would like to react to a comment regarding the interim report of the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Since the final version of the document was not agreed within the Committee, we
do not wish to raise the sensitive issues pertaining to its endorsement in the public
sphere. However, we feel compelled to respond to the allegations that we heard and
clarify that the report failed to be endorsed owing to disagreements about the legality
of the activities of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI.
We believe that things must be called by their real names and that the opinions of the
Committee members must be taken into consideration, despite how uncomfortable
they might appear to some of our colleagues.

22/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I begin by extending my sincerest appreciation to Special Envoy Ján Kubiš for
his briefing.
Libya continues to make tangible progress on its path towards restoring peace
and stability. The formation of the Government of National Unity underscores the
importance of dialogue in resolving conflicts and embodies our steadfast conviction
that the only viable solution to the crisis is a political one.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its full support for the United
Nations multitrack process in Libya and appreciates responsible initiatives by
neighbouring countries. We also reiterate our support for the Berlin process and
maintain that Libya’s territorial integrity and sovereignty must be respected.
It is imperative that the resolve reflected in the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum (LPDF) continue during the transitional phase in the lead-up towards national
elections on 24 December.
The road ahead is difficult, and the mandate of the Government of National
Unity, under the leadership of Prime Minister Abdul Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah,
to unite the country, bring about order and stability, ensure national reconciliation
and prepare for elections is even more arduous, especially in a country that has never
had national elections.
As Libya prepares for inclusive, free, fair and transparent elections, we
encourage all stakeholders to consolidate the existing momentum and finalize all
arrangements. The international community, including the Security Council, the
African Union and the League of Arab States, remains committed to providing the
requisite support.
We are disturbed that foreign fighters and mercenaries remain entrenched in
Libya, in violation of the 23 October 2020 ceasefire agreement, and call for their
swift withdrawal and full compliance with the agreement. We also look forward to
the operationalization of the Libyan-owned and Libyan-led comprehensive ceasefire
monitoring mechanism.
Equally of grave concern is the incessant violation of the arms embargo. It was
never, or can it ever be, acceptable that Security Council resolutions be flagrantly
violated. We therefore urge all parties to adhere to their international obligations.
Building a harmonious, democratic Libyan society requires an all-inclusive
approach, and it is a significant responsibility that all Libyans should shoulder
together. In this context, we commend the Government of National Unity for including
five female ministers in the new Cabinet and stress that women and children are the
cornerstone, if not the spinal cord, of any democratic society.
The Government of National Unity ought to be guided by the stipulations
outlined in the LPDF road map. And we hope that responsibilities — including
ensuring the reunification of all Libyan institutions, undertaking essential economic
reforms and enabling a comprehensive national reconciliation process to usher in
the new Libya — will be fulfilled. The African Union has committed to facilitating
the latter, and we look forward to its constructive role in this regard. Furthermore,
the Security Council should adopt a draft resolution to accompany all positive
developments in Libya.

21-0409823/34

S/2021/292

The human rights and humanitarian situation remains worrisome. It is my
delegation’s passionate belief that peace, development, security and human rights are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing. Impunity therefore must end.
We emphasize the need to bring justice to the victims and reiterate our
support for the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, including investigations
pertaining to the mass graves found in Tarhouna.
Similarly, arbitrary and illegal detention centres remain conflict drivers and
must close. We urge the authorities to facilitate safe humanitarian access to refugees
and migrants, as well as to respond adequately to the devastating coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We repeat our views that Libya is an unsafe port for the disembarkation
of refugees and migrants and underline the importance of creating the necessary
environment to ensure the well-being of vulnerable groups.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages Libyans to look to the future with
hope — a hope that acknowledges that the pain and anguish of their immediate
history will not be washed away overnight, or on 24 December, but one grounded in
the belief that all Libyans, through an inclusive democratic approach, will decide,
shape and build the future to which they aspire.

24/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

Annex XII
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to thank Ján Kubiš sincerely for his valuable briefing.
I reiterate that Tunisia stands ready to support him in his tasks and will continue
to provide facilities for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
and its Coordinator, Raisedon Zenenga, and the various other United Nations
and international entities operating in Libya out of Tunisia. I also welcome the
participation at this meeting of His Excellency the Permanent Representative of
Libya, Ambassador Taher Elsonni.
Tunisia reiterates its deep satisfaction with the progress in the political process
in Libya and the vote of confidence in the new Libyan Government of National
Unity from the House of Representatives. We take this occasion to congratulate
the members of the executive branch and the Libyan people for this important step
towards ending division, emerging from the crisis and realizing the legitimate
aspirations of Libyans’ for development and reconstruction.
In keeping with the fraternal relations and unique historical ties that bind
the State of Libya and the Republic of Tunisia, and out Tunisia’s commitment
to supporting the democratic process in Libya, on 17 March the President of the
Republic, Kaïs Saïed, led an official visit to the sister State of Libya so that he
could be in the vanguard of supporters of a peaceful transfer of power in Libya
in accordance with the provisions of the road map for the preparatory phase of a
comprehensive solution, which was adopted in Tunisia.
Tunisia reaffirms the importance of the commitment of all parties to holding
legislative and presidential elections as scheduled on 24 December 2021, to ensure
that the move from the transitional stage to permanent institutions takes place in an
environment of freedom, democracy and the rule of law. Tunisia urges all the parties
concerned — local, regional and international — to help create suitable conditions
and provide the support and facilities necessary for the success of national elections.
That is the way to fulfil the aspirations of the Libyan people for an end to the crisis,
restore security and stability and bring about national reconciliation.
Tunisia reiterates its satisfaction with the commitment of the Libyan parties to
respect the ceasefire. In that connection, we would like to especially commend the
efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission during this critical stage in the history
of Libya. We also call for continued compliance with the terms of the ceasefire
agreement and joint action to implement them. In that regard, we stress the need
to accelerate the departure of mercenaries and foreign fighters from Libya. Their
continued presence poses a threat to Libya and the region.
We join our voice to those calling on all parties to comply fully with the arms
embargo imposed on Libya, to refrain from interfering in its internal affairs and to
respect its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Tunisia welcomes the Secretary-General’s interim report (S/2021/281)
on options for monitoring the ceasefire in Libya, which contains information on
progress towards a Libyan-led ceasefire monitoring mechanism and requirements
for the deployment of a United Nations ceasefire monitoring component as part of
UNSMIL. In that regard, we encourage continued coordination among UNSMIL,
the United Nations advance team and the 5+5 Joint Military Commission to ensure
effective monitoring of the ceasefire in Libya.
21-0409825/34

S/2021/292

Given the intimate connection between developments on the ground and the
success of the political process during this crucial stage of Libyan history, Tunisia
calls on all the parties concerned to support the establishment of a Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring mechanism and to meet the requirements for
United Nations support for that process. We also stress the importance of Security
Council support for progress towards a settlement in accordance with the road map,
so that elections can take place under propitious conditions.
In that connection, Tunisia emphasizes the need to comply with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law. It calls for the situation of
migrants and refugees to be duly addressed and for enhanced accountability to ensure
that the grave violations and crimes committed in Libya do not go unpunished.
Tunisia also calls on all international stakeholders to support the efforts of the
Libyan authorities to address the repercussions of the coronavirus disease pandemic
and to ensure that humanitarian assistance is delivered to the rightful beneficiaries.
In conclusion, Tunisia renews its strong commitment to support the
aspirations of the Libyan people to establish democracy, security and reconstruction
and to continue to support United Nations and international efforts to achieve a
political settlement that ensures that Libya regains its stability and its regional and
international stature.

26/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I thank you, Special Envoy Kubiš, and your team for all your work and for
your report today. I would like to highlight three points today.
First, I welcome the endorsement of the new interim Government of National
Unity and the Presidency Council by the House of Representatives. This, as we have
heard, is a significant step forward in the Libyan-led, and now Libyan-endorsed,
political process, and we applaud the determination of the Libyan people in reaching
this point.
The appointment of five female Ministers, including the first female Foreign
Minister, is also welcome. We urge the new Government to facilitate women’s
participation in the political process, including in the elections this year.
The priorities for the new Government are clearly set out in the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum road map: to organize free and fair presidential and parliamentary
elections in December 2021, to address the basic needs of the Libyan people, to
commence a process of national reconciliation and to implement fully the 23 October
ceasefire agreement. A long path still lies ahead, but the United Kingdom stands
ready to help.
Secondly, it is essential that all parties, Libyan and external, implement the
ceasefire fully. We have seen positive steps, including the announcement by the
5+5 Joint Military Commission on the opening of the coastal road. The temporary
withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries from Sirte in order to allow members
of the House of Representatives to participate safely in the parliamentary session
was welcome, but their return was a retrograde step.
The removal of foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya must be complete
and irreversible. This includes the contractors working for organizations, such as
the Russian Wagner Group, and the Syrian mercenaries fighting on both sides. This
demand is made at the behest of the Libyan people, as Prime Minister Dbeibah
reiterated in his speech to the House of Representatives earlier this month.
Thirdly, on the question of next steps, we have, as Special Envoy Kubiš said, a
trend and momentum that must not be lost. We welcome the deployment of the United
Nations advance team and their report on the ceasefire monitoring mechanism. We
look forward to Security Council discussions on the recommendations in the report
and hope to begin discussions soon on amending the mandate of United Nations
Support Mission in Libya accordingly.
We also welcome the United Nations Panel of Experts report (see S/2021/229),
which provides stark evidence on the scale of arms embargo violations, including by
a permanent member of the Security Council. We call on all Member States to fulfil
their obligations to respect the arms embargo. This is not optional.
We all have a part to play in supporting the Libyan-led political process in
Libya and ending the foreign interference, which continues to undermine Libyan
sovereignty and stability, and in supporting the steps to prepare for elections
on 24 December.

21-0409827/34

S/2021/292

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Let me start by thanking you, Special Envoy Kubiš, for your briefing today.
It is a pleasure to welcome you to this first Security Council briefing in your new
role. And I also want to thank Ambassador Tirumurti for his efforts as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya.
The Libyan political process has advanced dramatically over the past six
months, and particularly over the past six weeks since you arrived as Special Envoy.
Libya has taken tremendous strides forward, and the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya to support this progress have been critical.
The vote of confidence by the House of Representatives and the swearing-in of
the Cabinet of a new, unified, interim Libyan Government, which has been charged
with leading the country up to the elections, could mark a turning point for Libya.
We commend all Libyan actors for constructively participating in this process, as
well as the Libyan people for their determination to restore unity to their country.
These are welcome developments. We are encouraged by this progress. But we
cannot become complacent. It is time to press forward and to help Libya’s Cabinet
with the hard work ahead of pulling the country together.
Today I would like to talk about the three main steps for permanent peace in
Libya: unity, transparency and free and fair elections.
First, with regard unity, while Libya has taken great strides economically,
we are concerned that Libya does not have a unified budget. A unified budget is
necessary to provide for the needs of the Libyan people. We urge swift action. The
new interim Government will need to earn its credibility with the Libyan people, and
meeting their basic needs is essential to doing so.
Secondly, with regard to transparency, trust is what democratic Governments
are built on. Any peaceful, sustainable, unified Government must be transparent and
free from corruption. That is particularly true when it comes to any agreement on the
management of oil revenues. The interim Government of National Unity must resist
and root out corruption wherever possible — and it is up to us to make that clear to
them. That includes taking control away from militias that have abused their power
for personal gain, making sovereign institutions apolitical and creating mechanisms
to identify and punish those who engage in corruption.
Thirdly, and most important, the top priority for our Mission and the country
needs to be organizing free and fair elections on 24 December 2021. International
support for these efforts will be essential. We must honour this timeline in order to
sustain the confidence of the Libyan people and the international community. And
that means all external actors involved in this conflict must cease their military
intervention, respect the Libyan ceasefire agreement and begin withdrawing from
Libya immediately. The Libyan people demanded this withdrawal in their 23 October
ceasefire announcement. The 5+5 Joint Military Commission recently reaffirmed
this request.
There can be no exceptions to this stipulation. The continued presence of
some forces has become an excuse for continuing the presence of others. It is time
for everyone to de-escalate and end this perpetual cycle. In addition, all military
support in violation of the United Nations arms embargo must end — including the
training and financing of mercenaries and proxy forces.
28/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

And to further ensure Libyans continue down the path towards free and fair
elections in December, we call on members of the Security Council to adhere to
their Berlin process commitments. That means genuinely and actively supporting
the United Nations political process, implementing the ceasefire agreement and
respecting the United Nations arms embargo.
We must also hold to account perpetrators of human rights violations and
abuses and ensure humanitarians can access those who are in desperate need
of help.
We welcome the deployment of the United Nations advance team to Libya
as the next step in the ceasefire agreement, and we welcome the proposals on the
tasks and scale of the ceasefire-monitoring mechanisms from the Secretary-General
this month.
The past few weeks have shown us that, when given the means, the people
of Libya are ready to take responsibility and move their country forward. Libyan
decisions have driven this process. Those decisions were made in public view
through live transmissions and, most important, they are supported by the Libyan
public. Now it is time to turn promising progress into full and lasting peace.

21-0409829/34

S/2021/292

Annex XV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I would like to welcome Mr. Jan Kubiš, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
on Libya, to his first Security Council meeting in this capacity and to thank him for
his comprehensive briefing. I also welcome Ambassador Taher Elsonni, Permanent
Representative of Libya, to this meeting.
The significant progress on the political and security fronts in Libya since
the beginning of 2021 is greatly encouraging. The Government of National Unity
has been formed, and the permanent ceasefire continues to be largely upheld. Viet
Nam reiterates our consistent support for an inclusive, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
political process, on the basis of respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country. In the light of the recent historic developments,
it is critical to maintain the positive momentum. I wish to highlight the three
following points.
First, we call on the Government of National Unity to put in its best efforts
in facilitating the transitional period and make all the necessary preparations for
the holding of national elections, in line with the agreed road map. We hope that the
Libyan parties will continue to demonstrate a spirit of mutual understanding and
trust, as they have shown in the past months, to advance the political process. We
note with encouragement that, out of 35 ministers of the new Libyan Government
of National Unity, five are women — especially the reaffirmation by the Prime
Minister of the commitment to have more women in executive positions. We look
forward to the increasingly active and meaningful participation of women and youth
in the political life of the country.
We commend the collaboration among the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), regional organizations, neighbouring countries and other
international partners in promoting the peace process in Libya. The international
community should continue to foster dialogue and support confidence-building
measures among the relevant parties at this crucial time.
Secondly, we urge the relevant parties to fully respect and implement the
provisions of the ceasefire agreement. This must also be in line with the commitment
to uphold the arms embargo in line with relevant Security Council resolutions
on Libya, in order to maintain a safe, secure and conducive environment for the
transition in the country.
In this regard, we reiterate our support for UNSMIL to support to the Libyanled and Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring mechanism, in line with relevant Security
Council resolutions on Libya. We will study the recent report (see S/2021/281) of
Secretary-General and work closely with other Council Members in this regard.
Thirdly, further attention and efforts are needed in addressing the
humanitarian and economic challenges in the country. While Libya has achieved
economic progress over the past months, over 1 million people, according to Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, still require humanitarian assistance
due to the consequences of conflict and the coronavirus disease pandemic. We call
on all international partners to continue to provide technical and financial support
for Libya and countries in the region in this regard.
We also commend the efforts by the parties since 10 February to clear the
coastal road from Sirte to Abu Qurayn of mines and explosive remnants of war, with
the support of the Libyan Mine Action Centre and the United Nations Mine Action
Service. We call for adequate efforts in risk mitigation to protect civilians from
explosive remnants of war.
30/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms our strong support for the pursuit of peace,
stability and development of Libya. We would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the work of UNSMIL and Mr. Ján Kubiš.

21-0409831/34

S/2021/292

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations, Taher Elsonni
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to congratulate you on your appointment as the
representative of the United States as well as on your assumption of the Presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We also welcome Ján Kubiš, thank him for
his first briefing and wish him and his team the best of luck in their new mission.
Permit me to speak to you today directly and explicitly, and not necessarily
from the script. There can be no doubt that this meeting is different from previous
ones. Our meeting today coincides with a historic and important transformation
in the history of the crisis in my country. Today I speak to you not of competing
legitimacies, internal divisions and the positions of one party versus another. Today
I speak on behalf of a single unified State of Libya.
Despite all the challenges and difficulties and against all expectations, the
Libyan-led political process has resulted in an achievement that many had thought
impossible. After years of division and conflict, we now see harbingers of hope that
Libya will make a comeback and turn the page on the suffering that has affected us
all. Today we must pay tribute to all the innocent Libyans who lost their lives to the
conflict over the past 10 years, as well as those who sacrificed their lives to fight
terrorism and extremism and to defend the dream of building a civil State.
The new executive branch was elected through the Political Dialogue Forum
held in our sister State of Tunisia. The participants in the Dialogue carried out their
responsibilities despite all the challenges. This important event culminated in the
vote of confidence by the House of Representatives in the Government of National
Unity, in a scene that many were betting would end in failure. That was followed
by administration of the constitutional oath and the peaceful transfer ceremonies
in the east and west of the country. These events proved to all that, given the right
conditions, Libyans are able to meet challenges. They affirmed that the democratic
path and peaceful transfer of power is the best and only solution for stability and the
exercise of State sovereignty over all of Libyan territory, and that there is no military
solution to the Libyan crisis. In that regard, we welcome all international expressions
of support for the recent agreements.
The crisis of competing legitimacies, which for years had been a major source
of conflict, has now come to an end. Thanks to the declaration of the Presidency
Council and the Head of the Government of National Unity, the will of Libyans
will be resolutely fulfilled through early national elections, despite the short amount
of time. The most important tasks at hand are to improve the living and working
conditions of citizens fairly across all regions, consolidate institutions, establish
security and stability throughout the country, support the work of the Joint Military
Commission, combat terrorism and launch a comprehensive national reconciliation
effort to pave the way for the presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for
24 December.
These elections, which all Libyans have looked forward to for so long, will
undoubtedly face numerous challenges at the internal and external levels. The
State’s lack of a monopoly on arms and the proliferation of extra-legal armed groups
remain among the most important internal challenges. Externally, the international
community is presented with an opportunity to contribute positively at this stage.
It can act to correct its mistakes and support the will of Libyans to make up for
the suffering it has caused to my country through direct and indirect interventions
since 2011.
32/34

21-04098

S/2021/292

The Security Council has a moral responsibility to Libyans for allowing
conditions to deteriorate to where they are now. It has a moral responsibility to the
innocent victims, including children, young people and women, wherever they may
be, and those left behind, whoever they are. In the end, they are all Libyans.
We have heard time and again that the solution must be Libyan-owned and
Libyan-led. We call on the Security Council to invest in the momentum and broad
national and international support for the recent agreement. It must demonstrate its
readiness to stand behind the legitimate demands of the Libyan people to transition
towards building the State for which they have made such great sacrifices. The
Council should adopt a draft resolution supporting the will of Libyans, the outcome
of the Political Dialogue Forum and the road map leading up to the general elections.
Such a draft resolution should affirm full support to ensure a transparent and fair
electoral process and respect for its outcome, with participation by all Libyans at
home and abroad, including displaced persons and migrants. The draft resolution
should hold accountable anyone trying to obstruct the national electoral process.
In that connection, we call on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to
expedite its support for efforts by both the House of Representatives and the Council
of State to coordinate the constitutional and legal committees to reach agreement on
the constitutional procedures and laws for the elections. As we know, these elections
are not within the responsibility or purview of the executive branch. The Chair of the
High National Election Commission has repeatedly pointed out that, if the necessary
legislation is not enacted within the next two months, it will not be possible to hold
the elections on the scheduled date approved by Libyans.
The outcomes of the Libyan Political Dialogue can be achieved only with
the support and success of the Joint Military Commission, whose members have
demonstrated unparalleled courage and patriotism. They have paved the way to the
point we have reached today. The Security Council should support the Commission
and support the implementation of the provisions of the ceasefire agreement, the most
important of which is the immediate departure of all mercenaries and foreign forces
from all regions of Libya. That must occur in conjunction with disarming them so that
they do not become a new source of threat elsewhere, particularly in neighbouring
countries or the Sahel States. I believe that the recent report (see S/2021/229) of
the Panel of Experts showed the magnitude of these types of interventions and the
names of those involved. I call on the States cited in that report to repudiate what is
attributed to them, exonerate themselves and correct their mistakes. If these charges
are mere allegations, then what is the point of these reports?
The departure of all mercenaries and foreign forces from Libya is a sovereign
demand that cannot be compromised. It is the only way to ensure the stability of the
country and the region as a whole. This demand must be complied with first and
foremost by the States that have inserted themselves into Libyan affairs and involved
us in their proxy wars. Their cannon fodder is our youth.
We are grateful for all the United Nations and international efforts in
support of the Libyan dialogues in their various tracks. We particularly thank the
international working groups that emerged from the Berlin Conference and take this
opportunity to call upon them to officially include the Libyan Government in their
upcoming meetings. We believe that the reasons for excluding Libya from official
representation at previous meetings are no longer applicable.
Speaking of those different tracks, we reiterate the importance of supporting
an essential track that has been neglected over the past few years. I refer to a dialogue
on national reconciliation and transitional justice, which the Presidency Council
and Government of National Unity have just announced. National reconciliation
and transitional justice are priorities because they are the true guarantors of the
21-0409833/34

S/2021/292

sustainability of any other dialogues or tracks. The problem in Libya is not division
of power or who will occupy which post. The real problem in Libya is that the wounds
suffered since 2011 have yet to healed. The problem in Libya is that some have
pursued a policy of exclusion, marginalization and domination. The solution lies in
starting from the ground up to bolster social peace and restore trust. We have seen
numerous violations of human rights and crimes against humanity in recent years in
most parts of the country. To this day, we continue to see innocent people in prisons,
forced disappearances, extrajudicial killings and unidentified bodies discovered in
mass graves, as happened in Tarhounah.
Recovering from these wounds and establishing the principles of mercy
and forgiveness can be done only by enforcing the law, uncovering the truth,
acknowledging fault and redressing damage. There can be no peace without justice.
We reiterate our call on the African Union — through the African States represented
here on the Council — to support the launch by the new executive branch of a
comprehensive national reconciliation effort along the lines of the several successful
experiences seen on our African continent.
In conclusion, the Presidency Council and the Libyan Government call on the
Libyan people to work hand in hand to shepherd country to safety and move from
chaos and strife to stability and peace. It is time to embark upon the development
and reconstruction stage and put an end to destruction and ruin. We can assure you
that Libya will work to regain an active role at both the regional and international
levels, with a view to strengthening cooperation and solidarity on a foundation of
friendly relations, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya and
respect for its people’s right to determine their fate of their own free will and without
foreign dictates.

34/34

21-04098
