United Nations

S/PV.5312

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5312th meeting
Wednesday, 30 November 2005, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Denisov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. D’Alotto
Mr. Idohou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Li Song
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Lacanilao
Mr. Motoc
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Brencick

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-62208 (E)

*0562208*

S/PV.5312

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Gambari: I returned last week from my first
visit to the Middle East in my capacity as UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs. I accompanied
the Secretary-General on his visit to Iraq, and then
proceeded to Lebanon, Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory.
In this briefing, I will present the Secretariat’s
assessment of events on the ground since the previous
briefing to the Council on 20 October and will share
with members some impressions gained during my
visit. In doing so, I will try not to go over the ground
covered by the Secretary-General himself and by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
in their recent briefings to the Council.
Two weeks ago, the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority reached an Agreement on
Movement and Access. The Agreement was made
possible by months of very hard work by Quartet
Special Envoy James Wolfensohn and his team and, at
the end, by the personal engagement of the Secretary of
State of the United States, Condoleezza Rice, and the
European Union High Representative for Foreign and
Security Policy, Javier Solana. The Agreement
envisages an unprecedented third-party role for the
European Union, an enhanced contribution by the

2

United States Security Coordinator, support from the
Quartet Special Envoy and the continued close
involvement of the United Nations and the World
Bank.
The first aspect of the Agreement was
implemented last Saturday, when the Rafah crossing
reopened under Palestinian control for travellers in
both directions and for the outgoing passage of goods,
with supervision by the European Union as a third
party. On that day, 757 people entered Gaza at Rafah
and 830 exited. The European Union’s 90-man-strong
Border Assistance Mission will be responsible for
resolving any disputes between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority arising from the Agreement.
Secondly, the parties agreed that the crossings
between Gaza and Israel would operate continuously,
unlike in the past. The aim is for 150 export trucks to
be processed daily by the end of 2005 and for 400 to be
processed daily by the end of next year. Goods will
enter Gaza through Kerem Shalom, where Israel, Egypt
and Gaza meet. The European Union will monitor
customs arrangements, with its mission being reviewed
in a year’s time.
Thirdly, bus convoys between Gaza and the West
Bank will start on 15 December, with truck convoys
following on 15 January 2006. Fourthly, the
Government of Israel has undertaken to review the
system of movement restrictions in the West Bank and
to reduce them to the maximum extent possible by the
end of this year. Fifthly, the construction of the seaport
is to begin immediately. Finally, the parties will
continue discussions on the airport.
The Agreement addresses a number of the issues
that were left hanging after Israel’s withdrawal of
settlements and military infrastructure from the Gaza
Strip. The recent Agreement resolved those issues or
set up frameworks for doing so. Everything now hinges
on the full and timely implementation of the
Agreement.
Meanwhile, representatives of the United States
Government are working closely with the parties on
implementation, and Mr. Wolfensohn’s team will be
tracking progress on behalf of the Quartet. They
deserve our collective support and encouragement. The
Quartet Special Envoy intends to issue reports every
two weeks, so as to keep the international community
informed of progress. His first report, issued yesterday,
shows, among other things, that over 800 people are

05-62208

S/PV.5312

passing through Rafah every day, even though the
crossing is currently open for only four hours a day.
Those numbers are expected to increase as Rafah
moves towards 24-hour operation.
In this regard, the United Nations will be playing
its part in tracking progress in the implementation of
the Agreement, including with regard to the easing of
movement restrictions in the West Bank. According to
figures from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the number of obstacles
to movement has increased in the past two months
from 376 to 396. OCHA will be confirming that figure
with the Israel Defense Forces, but it appears that
much of the increase has been in the northern West
Bank — the area where in August four Israeli
settlements were removed and where movement had
previously been eased.
Meanwhile, a picture is emerging of the West
Bank divided into three distinct areas — north, central
and south. While movement is relatively free inside
those areas, travel between them — with the exception
of Nablus — is severely hampered by a combination of
checkpoints, travel permits and physical obstacles. As
part of its ongoing work, which will now feed into
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access, the United Nations is compiling a
comprehensive set of recommendations to reduce
obstacles, improve movement and enhance Palestinian
access to essential services and markets.

tackling a number of outstanding issues in its own
plan. The Palestinian Authority’s fiscal situation is also
of immediate concern, and urgent action will be
required before the end of the year to address the
anticipated fiscal crisis.
I would add that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) held a successful conference of donors and
host countries in Jordan this month to raise funds for
continued support for Palestinian refugees in the
region. Continued support for UNRWA programmes
will be vital for stability and recovery in the occupied
Palestinian territory in the post-disengagement period.
The fragile security situation and the need for
more decisive action in accordance with the road map
have been underlined by continued violence.
Throughout the reporting period, the Israeli army
targeted alleged militants in the West Bank and Gaza
and undertook major arrest campaigns in the West
Bank. On 26 October, a suicide bomber blew himself
up at Hadera market in Israel, killing six Israeli
civilians. The Secretary-General promptly condemned
that act of terror. Violence took its toll on Palestinian
civilians as well as on Israelis. During the reporting
period, at least seven Palestinian civilians were killed,
including, tragically, an 11-year-old boy carrying a toy
gun, who was fatally shot by Israeli forces in Jenin on
3 November.

The full implementation of all aspects of the
Agreement on Movement and Access is a vital step
towards Palestinian economic recovery. Recovery will
also require the strengthening of Palestinian
institutions and economic management and the
effective distribution of international aid. Those issues
will be on the agenda of the mid-December meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, which is the primary
policy-making meeting of donors, the Palestinian
Authority and the Government of Israel.

The Palestinian security services have taken some
action, including arrests, against those who persist in
carrying out terrorist attacks. Measures have also been
taken to keep weapons off the streets and to assert the
rule of law in areas under Palestinian control. More
work needs, of course, to be done in that regard. There
have also been efforts to rehabilitate former militia
members by employing them in the security services.
That, however, has given rise to serious fiscal
concerns. Continued efforts are necessary to develop
viable and effective strategies to deal with the militias.

At the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting, it is
hoped that the Palestinian Authority will announce new
aid coordination structures designed to enhance
Palestinian control of the coordination of donor
assistance and present a full outline of its medium-term
development plan. Together, those initiatives should
contribute to the process of Palestinian institutional
development, as envisaged in the road map. It is hoped
that that the Palestinian Authority will commit itself to

President Abbas has established a leadership
committee on security reform, which, in turn, has
mandated a technical team to develop a white paper on
safety and security for Palestinians. That process will
involve public dialogue in an effort to build national
consensus. Those efforts have the strong support of the
United States Security Coordinator, Lieutenant General
William Ward, whose successor, Lieutenant General
Keith Dayton, will soon be on the ground. The United

05-62208

3

S/PV.5312

States Security Coordinator has also been supporting
efforts to improve Israeli-Palestinian security
cooperation.
Let me turn to the issues of barrier construction
and settlement activity. The road map calls for a freeze
of all settlement activity, including the natural growth
of settlements, and for settlement outposts constructed
since March 2001 to be dismantled. On 24 November,
the Israeli press reported that Housing Minister Yitzhak
Herzog published tenders for an additional 350 housing
units in the West Bank settlement of Ma’ale Adumim.
Israel has also continued construction all along
the projected route of the barrier, including on
occupied Palestinian territory in East Jerusalem and
between Jerusalem and Ramallah. A new terminal was
opened at the main entrance to Bethlehem, located
some 500 to 600 metres further inside occupied
Palestinian territory than the previous checkpoint and
functioning much like an international border crossing.
Israel officials have indicated that there will be a series
of such crossings along the route of the barrier between
East Jerusalem and the remainder of the West Bank.
The Israel Defense Forces have also continued to issue
military land requisition orders in various parts of the
West Bank to acquire land for barrier construction.
As I witnessed during my visit to the region, the
combination of settlement activity and barrier
construction is creating new and significant facts on
the ground in the West Bank. That is particularly the
case in and around East Jerusalem, where the route of
the barrier fragments and isolates Palestinian
neighbourhoods. I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call
on Israel to abide by its legal obligations as set forth in
the 9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice and in General Assembly resolution
ES-10/15.
Against that backdrop, we are entering a delicate
electoral period, with further rounds of Palestinian
municipal elections in December, Palestinian
legislative elections scheduled for 25 January 2006 and
Israeli elections scheduled for the end of March,
following Prime Minister Sharon’s request to the
President of Israel to dissolve the Knesset.
Primary elections for the ruling Fatah party have
already taken place in several locations, but after
claims of fraud and the storming of a number of Gaza
polling stations by militants two days ago, the
primaries were suspended. Nevertheless, technical

4

preparations by the Palestinian Central Election
Commission are well under way to meet the unchanged
target date of 25 January 2006 for the legislative
elections. The United Nations will assist the
Commission through a liaison and support unit to
coordinate international observers, similar to the unit
set up for last year’s presidential election.
The main concerns of the Central Election
Commission, whose President I met in Ramallah, are
that the modalities of the poll in East Jerusalem be
finalized as soon as possible, that the freedom of
movement of candidates be assured by Israeli
Authorities during the January campaigning period and
that prisoners in Israeli jails be allowed to vote.
The Israeli authorities, while expressing their
intention not to interfere with the poll, said that they
would not cooperate in its conduct. Under the road
map, the Palestinian Authority is committed to holding
free, open and fair elections, and Israel must support
the development of Palestinian democracy and
facilitate elections, including in East Jerusalem.
Meanwhile, in Israel, the Labour Party has
elected a new leader, Amir Peretz, who has informed
Prime Minister Sharon that Labour will leave the
coalition Government. New elections are expected by
the end of March. Mr. Sharon has announced his
intention to leave the Likud party and seek re-election
as Prime Minister as head of the new Kadima — or
Forward — Party. It is too early to say what the impact
of those major political realignments will be on Israel’s
approach to the peace process, but this is no doubt an
important time for the future of both Israel and the
Palestinians.
Lebanon is also at a critical stage in its history
and faces a number of important challenges. During my
visit to Beirut, I told all Lebanese interlocutors of the
commitment of the United Nations to continue working
closely with the Government of Lebanon and to
support Lebanon’s independence, sovereignty, stability
and security. I reiterated our belief that the challenges
facing Lebanon should be met through a process led by
the Lebanese people themselves and supported by the
United Nations and the international community as
necessary.
In my discussions on the work of the
investigation into the assassination of former Prime
Minister Hariri, I underlined that resolution 1636
(2005), adopted recently by the Security Council, made

05-62208

S/PV.5312

clear Syria’s obligation to extend its full support and
cooperation to the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission. I reiterated
that the modalities of such cooperation should be
agreed in a bilateral fashion between the Syrian
authorities and the Commission. As reported last
Friday, the Commission and the Syrian authorities have
reached an agreement to conduct the interviews of the
Syrian individuals concerned in Vienna.
My visit confirmed my earlier assessment that
Lebanon remains committed to moving ahead with a
challenging and important programme of political and
socio-economic reform. Prime Minister Siniora’s
Government has been working to formulate a financial
and economic plan that will be the subject of the next
meeting of the Core Group of countries, which have
offered their support for Lebanon’s various reform
initiatives.
The critical importance of the Government of
Lebanon extending its full control over all its territory
was underlined on 21 November, when Hizbullah
initiated heavy attacks in Ghajar village and the Shab’a
farms area from the Lebanese side of the Blue Line.
The exchange of fire subsequently extended all along
the Blue Line. Mr. Guéhenno briefed the Council on
those attacks last week, and the Council has spoken
very clearly on them.
Consistent with its mandate, the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, in collaboration with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, played an
important role in bringing about a ceasefire and
securing the handover of the bodies of the three
Hizbullah fighters killed, while Special Coordinator De
Soto and Mr. Pedersen, Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General for Lebanon, remained in close
touch with Israeli and Lebanese interlocutors
respectively.
I must also report that Israel violated Lebanese
airspace along coastal areas on many occasions during
the reporting period, including before the Hizbullah
attacks. There were also two large sonic booms over
civilian areas. And after the attacks, leaflets were
dropped over Beirut. Since 21 November, 12 air
violations by Israel have been recorded. Israel claims
its actions were necessary in the face of evidence of
possible hostile acts by Hizbullah, while the
Government of Lebanon claims that the violations
serve to provoke attacks. Their cessation, which the

05-62208

United Nations has repeatedly called for, would
contribute to the maintenance of calm along the Blue
Line. Nonetheless, it is the policy of the United
Nations — and we will continue to assert before both
parties, in the strongest terms — that one violation
cannot justify another. It is thus imperative to reduce
tensions and achieve security on both sides of the Blue
Line.
To conclude, I returned from the region hopeful
about the future but with a renewed appreciation of the
immense challenges the region faces. I returned an
optimist, but without illusions.
I have seen many things that make me optimistic:
the Rafah crossing, where Palestinians have assumed
control of part of their border for the first time in their
history; the Gaza settlements that Israel evacuated and
destroyed, setting a vital precedent for the future; the
resolve of Palestinian officials to proceed with
elections and economic and security sector reforms;
and the awareness of Israeli officials that they must
consider the impact of their actions on the very
Palestinian partner with whom they must try to make
peace. And in Beirut, I witnessed the determination of
the Government of Lebanon to assert its control over
the entire country, which is vital if regional peace is to
be secured.
On the other hand, I have also discussed with
interlocutors, or seen with my own eyes, a number of
very real challenges to progress: the extent to which
the barrier, checkpoints and Israeli settlements
dominate the landscape in the West Bank; the dire
economic and social situation of many people in Gaza
and the West Bank; the weakness of the rule of the law
in the areas under Palestinian control; the genuine
insecurity and fear that Israelis face on a daily basis;
and the border between Israel and Lebanon — always
tense, recently volatile — where the Government of
Lebanon has yet to assert its full sovereignty and
control. I have also seen, with great admiration, the
determination of the United Nations system on the
ground to help improve the situation and to do so in a
better coordinated manner.
Above all, I return from the region with the
strong belief that the only way forward for Israelis and
Palestinians alike is, on the one hand, for the parties to
ensure the success of disengagement by fully
implementing the recent Agreement on Movement and
Access; and, on the other, for both parties to take

5

S/PV.5312

renewed action, in parallel, to fulfil their obligations
under phase one of the road map.
The Palestinian Authority must implement proper
restructuring of its security services and must take
action against individuals involved in violence. Israel
must act with restraint. It is in its own interest to
support the Palestinian Authority’s efforts to establish
calm during the coming weeks and months. In addition,
Palestinians need an Authority that manages budgetary
resources carefully and that plans effectively for a
future Palestinian State. I look forward with great
interest to reports on Palestinian institutional
strengthening and economic development, which will
be delivered to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in two
weeks’ time.
The Government of Israel has yet to fulfil its road
map obligations to cease settlement activity and to
dismantle settlement outposts constructed since March
2001. Israel’s continued creation of facts on the ground
damages the Palestinian leaders who are seeking to be
elected on a platform of peaceful negotiations with
Israel. It also complicates efforts to achieve a viable
two-State solution with contiguity of the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and with meaningful
linkages between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
Finally, the coming electoral period calls for the
utmost wisdom and political determination on both
sides and should be turned into an opportunity for
forward movement, not stagnation. The Palestinian

6

elections can serve as a platform for the necessary
transition from a heavily and disparately armed society
to a society built on the rule of law in which the
Palestinian Authority holds a monopoly on instruments
of violence. We hope that all will support the
Palestinians’ right to decide on their conduct —
including participation — and that Israel will cooperate
so that the playing field is level.
If the Palestinian elections are successfully
conducted and once Israelis have determined at the
ballot box which political direction they wish their
leaders to take, we may yet see the emergence of new
circumstances in which to press forward, quickly and
decisively, with the implementation of all phases of the
road map towards the goal of a just and lasting peace
based on two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and within secure and recognized
borders, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions. The United Nations will, of course,
continue to work towards the goal of a comprehensive
and just peace in the region. I believe strongly that that
goal is both imperative and achievable.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Gambari for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

05-62208
