Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2859 (XXVI).

Youth ami dependence-producing
drugs

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2719 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, Economic and Social Council resolution
1578 (L) of 20 May 1971 and World Health Assembly resolution WHA24.57 of 20 May 1971,
Considering that the abuse of narcotics and psychotropic drugs has become an extremely serious problem
in many countries with disastrous results for the populations of these countries,
Acknowledging that measures hitherto adopted in the
fight against the abuse of drugs have not been sufficiently effective, as sorne countries have taken positive
steps . while others have not yet taken adequate and
effectlve measures for the suppression of illicit traffic
in dependence-producing drugs,
A<;knowledging further that developing countries determmed to prevent illicit production of and illicit
tra~c in nar~otic drugs do not succeed in achieving
the1r goal owmg to economic and technical difficulties,
Emphasizing that the abuse of dependence-producing
drugs presents an especially serious threat to the youth
of the world, among whom this disease has been
growing at an alarming rate and now threatens the
well-b<?ing of young people in a great number of
countnes,
Warning in particular against attempts directed
towards the weakening of existing controls over the
drug substance cannabis,
. Noting that only through the consistent implementatlon by States of their relevant measures coupled with
international co-operation can the dangers of drug
abuse be reduced and this social malady effectively
countered,
Strongly endorsing the activities of the ·International
l':larcotics Control Board, the World Health Organization and other agencies, and their decision to redouble
their efforts to control and combat drug abuse throughout the world,
~. Urge~ all States to give wide support to the
Um~ed Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control and, in
particular, to involve youth in activities aimed at controlling drug abuse;
2. Requests ali competent bodies of the United
Nations dealing with the question of narcotic drugs
to provide appropriate and effective assistance to developing countries with a view to enabling them to
combat more effectively illicit production of and illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs;
. 3. Appeals to all States to enact effective legislatlon agamst drug abuse, providing severe penalties for
those engaged in illicit drug-trafficking;
4. Urges that steps be taken by Governments to
inform in particular youth about the dangers of drug
abuse, and to promote the establishment of compre~~nsi_ve COIJ?J?-~nity-based drug treatment and rehabilltation fac11it1es, especially for young drug users;
5. Requests the Secretary-General in consultation
with the specialized agencies concern'ed, to submit a
repart to !he Economic and Social Council at its fifty!hlrd ses~1on on _how th~ United Nations system can
m_crease I!s effectiveness m the fight against drug abuse
w1th specrnl reference to the problems of youth in this
respect.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

95

2860 (XXVI). Celehralion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Noting that Human Rights Day in 1973 will mark
the t~enty-fifth anniversary of the adoption and proclamat10n by the General Assembly of the U ni versal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Convinced of the historie significance and enduring
value of the Universal Declaration as a common
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations,
Recalling that the United Nations provided for
special observances of the tenth, fifteenth and twentieth
anniversaries of the Universal Declaration, including the
observance of the twentieth anniversary, in 1968, as the
International Y ear for Human Rights,
Desiring to n_iark, in 1973, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration in a manner which
would fit the occasion and serve the cause of human
rights,
1. De<;ides to consider at its twenty-seventh session
the questlon of the preparation of an appropriate progra!llme to observe the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Umversal Declaration of Human Rights;
2.. Req_uests the Secretary-General to present, for
cons1derat101: by the General. Assembly at its twentyseventh . sess1on, such suggest1ons as he may consider
appropnate concerning suitable activities which could
be undertaken in celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration .
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2861 (XXVI). Town twinning as a mrnn~ of
intcrnaíional co-operation

The General Assembly,
Considering that:
(a) It is a function of the United Nations to serve
as ~he nodal point of the efforts of all peoples to
ach1eve peace and international co-operation,
( b) It is necessary therefore to establish active
co-operation _between the Secretariat and collaborating
local and regional bodies whose objectives are the same
as those of the Organization,
Convinced that:
(a) Town twinning _is an exceptionally valuable
means of co-operatlon m that between countries it
brings into contact not only 'local leaders but ltlso
whole populations,
( b) . If carried out between towns in industrialized
countnes_ and t~?se in devel<?ping countries, twinning
aff~rds, m add1t1on to the mtellectual and spiritual
ennchment of tho~e parties to it, technical and material
s~pport for growmg towns which is sometimes cons1de~a~le a~d can be brought to bear directly without
admm1strat1ve expenditure and without detriment to
the sense of equality existing between the partners,
(e) The jnternational co-operation of local bodies
can play an 1mportant role in bringing peoples together
Recalling:
'
(a) Economic and Social Council resolution 1028
(X~XVII) of 13 August 1964, in which the Council
cons1dered town twinning as onc of the means of co-
