S/PV.8378

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8378th meeting

Tuesday, 23 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2018/922)

*

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-33375 (E)
*1833375*

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

from Brussels, Koen Vervaeke. I am also happy to see
Ambassador Adom.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2018/922)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic; Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special
Representative of the African Union to the Central
African Republic; and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa, European External Action Service.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga and Mr. Nébié are joining
this meeting via video-teleconference from Bangui, and
Mr. Vervaeke is joining the meeting via teleconference
from Brussels.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/922, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic,
15 June-15 October 2018.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Mr. Nébié and
Mr. Vervaeke, as well as by Ambassador Kacou Houadja
Léon Adom, Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire,
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): I
am very pleased to brief the Security Council this
morning, together with my friends Moussa Nébié and,
2/26

23/10/2018

I am very honoured to be able to address the Council
today to provide an update on the situation in the
Central African Republic since the publication of the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2018/922).
I am confident that, despite persistent challenges,
we have laid the necessary foundations for building
lasting peace in the Central African Republic. Such
an objective is indeed achievable, provided that, in the
quest for lasting peace, the region and the international
community as a whole remain committed to our
collective support for the Government and the people
of the Central African Republic. To achieve this result,
however, the Central Africans themselves will have to
take the lead and set an example.
Since the establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in 2014, we
have made significant progress in our efforts to put out
the flames of the devastating intercommunity conflict
that was engulfing the Central African Republic. Our
mandate included protecting civilians, supporting the
transition process and preserving the territorial integrity
of country. The Mission faced a great challenge in
carrying out these tasks. When I took office in August
2015, the security situation was such that simple acts of
crime could turn violent and destabilize entire cities or
even the entire country. The threat of a coup d’état and
State collapse or the fear of seeing the country fall back
into the way it was in the early days of the terrible civil
war of 2013 haunted everyone.
After a little more than three years of work
together, I would like to thank each member of the
Council for the support offered, particularly during the
difficult times that we have been through together. I am
immensely grateful for Council members’ empathy and
encouragement, including during the happy moments
we have also shared, such as when the country returned
to constitutional order. I also thank the Council for
the additional troops it authorized at the request of
the Secretary-General. These troops strengthen our
capacity on the ground and bolster the determination
of our civilian and uniformed personnel. I would like to
express my deep gratitude to the troops for their work in
the service of peacekeeping, and we pay a solemn and
heartfelt tribute to those who have sacrificed their lives.
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Clearly, our work is not yet done. The country
still faces many challenges. The drivers of the conflict
remain, and attacks on civilians persist, leading to
massive population displacements. Half of the country
continues to need humanitarian assistance, and the
provision of such assistance is becoming increasingly
difficult, due in part to violent attacks against
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. The State
is not in a position to overcome these challenges on
its own.
Nevertheless, although the crisis persists, there is
reason for hope. Thanks to the hard work of the United
Nations and the international community in support of
the Government of the Central African Republic, the
overall security situation has been brought under control,
democratic elections have been held, and the country
has returned to constitutional order. State authority
is being restored in Bangui and beyond. The Mission
prevents atrocities on a daily basis and continues to
preserve the territorial integrity of the State. Security
has considerably improved in several prefectures,
thanks, in particular, to support stemming from local
peace agreements. The prefects and sub-prefects have
been redeployed throughout the country, as have civil
servants from the Ministries of Education, Health,
Agriculture and Livestock, Water, and Public Health.
The national security and defence forces have also been
deployed, and the justice and reconciliation processes
are beginning to take shape.
I am pleased to inform the Council that yesterday,
22 October, the inaugural session of the Special
Criminal Court was held. That is an important step in
the country’s commitment against impunity.
In the area of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, half a dozen armed groups have
committed to participate in the national programme and
the Government will begin the disarmament of some of
these groups in the west of the country before the end
of the year. Most importantly, a peace process has been
seriously initiated under the auspices of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which is the sole basis for peace and
reconciliation in the Central African Republic. My
friend and brother, the Special Representative of the
President of the African Union Commission, Moussa
Nébié, and Chair of the panel of facilitators, will speak
of that shortly.

S/PV. 8378

Beyond the work of MINUSCA, the country has
made progress in implementing the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan, with the support of the
Mission and partners. I am pleased to announce that
the rate of fundamental distribution has increased since
the beginning of the year and that nearly half of the
$2.2 billion pledged by donors has been disbursed.
MINUSCA, the United Nations country team, the
European Union, the World Bank, France and other
partners are collaborating with the Government in
the planning and implementation of projects under
the Plan, which will strengthen peace, security and
reconciliation, basic services, infrastructure and
economic development. Other key bilateral partners,
such as China and the United States, are also making
necessary investments in the aforementioned areas.
(spoke in English)
This progress that we have made together makes
me hopeful that we have laid the foundations needed
to build sustainable peace. Like the foundations of
a house, they yield no dividends on their own, but a
house without foundations will certainly collapse.
Together with the Central Africans, we must now help
move the country from a phase of containment to one
of transformation, in which the dividends of peace can
be felt by all communities and all citizens.
The recommendations of the independent
comprehensive review led by Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdés,
endorsed by the Secretary-General and recently
presented to the troop- and police-contributing
countries by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, identify
some critical next steps for the Mission. In the context
of mandate renewal, helping the African Initiative
to succeed must indeed be the Mission’s main focus.
I am pleased to inform the Council that, as a followup to the conclusions of the high-level ministerial
meeting on the Central African Republic, held in
New York on 27 September, I have been participating
in the African Initiative panel of facilitators as a full
member. In this new capacity, I have held a series of
strategic meetings and consultations within the panel
and with the Government in preparation for the launch
of the dialogue between the Government and the armed
groups. The Mission is henceforth strengthening its
substantive and mediation support to the Initiative.
The path towards peace and reconciliation will
not be an easy one, as demonstrated by the many
peace processes that have come before in the Central

18-333753/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

African Republic, and faltered. We in the international
community must work with the Government of the
Central African Republic to ensure that this peace
process is people-centred and does not fail. We must
be patient, we must be realistic and we must put in
place the critical conditions that will give the African
Initiative the greatest chance to succeed.
First, we must ensure that the parties enter into
negotiations in good faith and with a true commitment
to the dialogue and its outcomes. This means that
parties must be willing to make some challenging
compromises, which will require vision and leadership
on the part of all. It will also require an inclusive followup mechanism to ensure that parties adhere to and fully
implement the agreement reached.
Secondly, the peace agreement must have the buyin of the Central African people. Although the agreed
dialogue framework does not allow for the direct
participation of civil society actors, it will be critical
to find innovative ways to ensure that the voices of the
people are heard, especially those of women and youth.
Their engagement in the follow-up mechanism will also
be essential moving forward.
Thirdly, we must put in place security conditions
conducive to the dialogue and the enforcement of
its outcomes. Our engagement must be backed by
credible, effective and sustained pressure, including
military, when and where needed. I therefore ask for
the support of the Council in ensuring that deployed
troops are properly trained and equipped to meet this
task and the challenging operational environment we
are facing daily.
Finally, if the peace process is to succeed, it will
require the unified political support of the members
of the Council, the countries of the region and the
international community at large. We must have a
shared vision and ensure that our engagements with
the Central African Republic are both well coordinated
and coherent.
The success of the peace process, though necessary,
will not be sufficient on its own. If the outcomes are
to be sustainable and if transformation is to take hold,
MINUSCA should also support the Central African
Republic in a number of critical areas.
First, we must strengthen the rule of law and
eliminate ungoverned spaces in the country. This
includes helping the Government in the long term to
4/26

23/10/2018

regain control of mining sites from armed groups,
as failure to resolve this issue will jeopardize the
outcomes of any peace agreement. That also includes
helping the State to rebuild and strengthen its key
institutions, particularly its national security apparatus,
so that it can better protect the country, its people
and democratic institutions. Working closely with
partners, the Mission must expand its support to the
re-operationalization of national defence and security
forces, in close coordination with the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic, the European Union delegation in the Central
African Republic, and other bilateral partners, such as
France, Russia and the United States. These forces have
a multiplier effect on the communities in which they are
deployed. Partners have already provided exemplary
support to the security sector reform process, and this
has yielded remarkable progress. However, short- and
mid-term needs are significant, and we must sustain
and even expand this support to enable the country to
meet its ambitious yet vital security priorities. I seek
the Council’s support to ensure that MINUSCA will
have the appropriate mandate and resources to take on
this task and succeed, as requested by the SecretaryGeneral in his letter to the Council in May (S/2018/463).
Secondly, we must work hand in hand with the
Central Africans to promote a culture of democracy, in
which power is taken through the ballot box and not the
bullet. The upcoming elections represent an important
opportunity in this regard and for building a culture
of inclusion. I again request the Council’s support in
mandating the Mission to aid the Government through
the election period, and request its advocacy among
Member States to ensure that we have the resources to
take on this task and succeed.
Thirdly, we must continue to support the Government
in the fight against impunity and the restoration of
the rule of law through the operationalization of the
Special Criminal Court and support for judicial actors
and in the regions. We must also advance the national
reconciliation programme, including by ensuring
that the rights of victims are respected, in particular
the rights of those hundreds of thousands of Central
Africans who have been displaced by the conflict. To
that end, we must help authorities develop an integrated
transitional justice strategy that responds to the needs
and expectations of communities that have deeply
suffered as a result of the conflict.
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Finally, the Mission must redouble its efforts to
enable the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
2.9 million people currently in need of assistance
and protection, more than half of whom are children.
Achieving that objective and improving the overall
implementation of the mandate will greatly depend on
the Council’s decision to enhance the force’s mobility
and flexibility so as to allow us to overcome the
prevailing operational and logistical challenges.
The people of the Central African Republic are
aware that the road ahead will be difficult. Nonetheless,
the steps we have collectively taken so far to help
stabilize the country give hope for the future. While the
current situation remains unpredictable and precarious,
I believe that the progress that has been achieved in
various areas and the foundations that have been laid
are essential ingredients that can help bring about
sustainable peace in the Central African Republic. We
must redouble our efforts to ensure that the remaining
challenges are addressed fully and in a timely manner.
We must do everything possible to ensure that the peace
process succeeds. We owe it to the people of the Central
African Republic, who have suffered far too long.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nébié.
Mr. Nébié (spoke in French): It is always an honour
for me to address the members of the Security Council,
whom I thank for the invitation to update them on
the situation in the Central African Republic, as well
as for their ongoing interest in the country. It will be
difficult to describe everything that is going on and that
we are doing in the Central African Republic in five
minutes, but I will strive to do so while doing justice to
the issue. Without further delay, allow me to make the
following points.
Since my previous briefing, on 21 June (see
S/PV.8291), it should be noted that there have been
significant developments pertaining to the African
Union Initiative, designed to lead to the signing of
a peace and reconciliation agreement between the
armed groups and the Government. In accordance with
its agenda, the panel of facilitators has continued its
activities at an accelerated pace.
The progress that has been made on convening the
dialogue includes, first, the designation of the members
of the Government delegation by the President of

S/PV. 8378

the Central African Republic, which demonstrates
his determination and commitment to the African
Initiative; second, the preparation of 14 armed groups
for the dialogue by holding workshops on modules for
negotiations and the peaceful resolution of crises; third,
dialogue preparations for the Government delegation
through similar modules; fourth, preparations for civilsociety actors, including women leaders and young
people, to monitor the implementation of the agreement
that will emerge from the dialogue; fifth, a visit by two
former Heads of State of the Central African Republic,
Mr. Michel Djotodia and Mr. François Bozizé, who
have taken on board the message from the Chair of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
expressed their commitment without reservation to the
African Initiative road map and told the panel that they
would spare no effort in helping to stabilize and restore
peace in their country; sixth, a working trip by the
panel to the subregion in July, during which it visited
N’Djamena to meet with President Deby Itno to ask
for his political support for the Initiative, to which the
President responded by assuring the panel of his total
willingness in that regard and urged Central Africans
to use the dialogue as a path to settling the crisis and
achieving peace and national reconciliation within
the framework of the African Initiative; seventh, the
panel’s holding from 28 to 30 August of a workshop on
harmonizing the claims of armed groups; eighth, the
panel’s formal submission on 31 August to President
Faustin Archange Touadera of a consolidated claims
document; ninth, the Government’s prompt response by
way of a document entitled “Draft political agreement
for peace and reconciliation in the Central African
Republic”; and, tenth, the next and final step, the
convening of the dialogue.
We should welcome that progress as a sign
that new prospects are opening up for peace and
reconciliation. The parties concerned now know what
the dialogue will focus on, and that is important. In
that regard, I would note the joint efforts led by the
international community in Bangui, including the
members of the G5+ — the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the European Union, France and the United
States — which continue to demonstrate their shared
determination to work for peace and stability in the
Central African Republic.
I can inform the Council that the consultations
and exchanges with stakeholders are forward-looking

18-333755/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

and that the dialogue could be convened in the next
few weeks. However, I should remind members that
in my previous briefing here I emphasized the panel’s
financial difficulties. I repeat that message today, and
I want to stress that failure is not an option. The one
and only option is the success of the dialogue and
the restoration of peace for the people of the Central
African Republic. To achieve this significant aspect
of the Security Council’s task of maintaining and
restoring international peace and security, it now
falls to the Council to take specific, robust measures
and action in support of the stakeholders of the
international community on the ground, to foster and
speed up the restoration of peace for the people of the
Central African Republic, who have been imploring the
Council to do everything possible to ensure peace and
freedom of movement in their country.
As I said the last time I spoke to the Council, if
its members consent to this effort and give the panel
concrete support, I will be very happy to announce at the
Council’s next meeting on the subject that the dialogue
has indeed been held, a consensus agreement reached,
a monitoring mechanism put in place, that peace is no
longer an empty word and that the implementation of
the activities under the agreement is under way.
I should not conclude my statement without
mentioning our cooperation with my brother Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and all his colleagues at the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, with whom
we continue to work tirelessly to explore ways and
means to support dialogue and mediation efforts for a
resolution of the crisis in the country. I can emphasize
that since the holding of the special meeting here in New
York on 27 September, the Special Representative is
now participating actively in all of the panel’s meetings
and its consultations with the Government delegation.
Allow me to say that all that those of us on the
ground simply hope that some means can be put at our
disposal and that we can make a difference after all that
has happened in the past several decades. The Central
African people have suffered enough from the crisis.
With the Council’s support, we want to make a decisive
contribution so that peace can return to a country that
all of us hold so dear.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Nébié
for his briefing.
6/26

23/10/2018

I now give the floor to Mr. Vervaeke.
Mr. Verbaeke: I am honoured by this opportunity
to brief the Security Council, as well as for the
opportunity for the European Union (EU) to address
the Council today, have an exchange with Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
and Ambassador Nebié. This is the second time since the
holding of the high-level event on the Central African
Republic on the margins of the General Assembly that
we discuss the Central African Republic. It is crucial
to continue sending out clear signs of interest in the
situation in that country.
We have to acknowledge that presently the country
represents a combination of fragility and instability,
together with a severe and still protracted humanitarian
crisis. That is why we collectively need to engage and
help the country to end violence and achieve lasting
stability. That should also lead to accountability on the
part of local actors. It is crucial that all actors remain
fully focused on peace and reconciliation. The solution
to the crisis is political, not military.
For its part, as expressed just last week by the
European Union Foreign Ministers in Brussels,
the European Union is committed to maintaining
its substantial engagement and support for the
Central African Republic. Our road map is clear: the
consolidation of democratic institutions, the stability
of institutions and security sector reform must go hand
in hand. We have identified the following objectives
in that process: first, the fight against impunity,
including through the establishment of transitional
justice; secondly, the restoration of the rule of law and
of social cohesion; and, thirdly, the provision of basic
services and the restarting of the economy, including
through legal and sustainable use of natural resources.
We welcome the efforts and progress made by President
Touadera and his Government in those areas. We
encourage them to continue in that direction with
greater determination.
We are entering a critical phase in the Central
African Republic that will require the mobilization
of all international actors to coordinate our efforts in
full transparency. The European Union recently held
consultations with several partners, including France,
Russia and the United States, in order to achieve better
coordination in the field.
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

First and foremost, on peace and reconciliation, I
would like to reiterate the European Union’s full support
for the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
under the auspices of the African Union and the
leadership of President Touadera. The work done by the
panel of facilitators under the leadership of Ambassador
Nébié lays the ground for a settlement. We call on all
actors, international and regional, to support the action
of the Government and of the African Initiative in a
properly coordinated and fully transparent manner.
We now need to progress quickly and obtain results.
In that regard, the intention of President Touadera to
launch negotiations with the armed groups is positive.
The process must remain a home-grown one. We
stand ready to support all efforts in that direction.
The decision to appoint a joint United Nations-African
Union envoy is a good sign of increased engagement.
They will complement the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
specifically the efforts of the Special Representative
and the MINUSCA team in the country. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend their efforts under
very difficult circumstances and to pay tribute to all
MINUSCA personnel.
The renewal of MINUSCA’s mandate will soon
be discussed. Its multidimensional role will remain
essential to contribute to further stabilization in the
Central African Republic. It will be crucial that the
Mission remain able to strengthen and expand the
authority of the State throughout the territory of the
Central African Republic. That will not be achieved
without a further build-up and deployment of security
forces into the regions. MINUSCA must be able to
provide operational and logistical support to the
deployed Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA), as
recommended by the Secretary-General.
In that vein, the European Union will continue its
substantial engagement in the area of security. The
mandate of the European Union Training Mission has
been extended until September 2020. A third FACA
battalion was successfully trained. A fourth battalion is
currently being trained. Additionally, most of the needed
laws, decrees and doctrines have been developed with
the support of the European Union Training Mission
strategic advice. About a third of the FACA leadership
has gone through the Training Mission’s programme.
That is a testimony to the Training Mission’s leading

S/PV. 8378

role in building the capacity of the FACA and in defence
sector reform in general.
European Union Mission activities also aim
at facilitating the redeployment of FACA and the
implementation of the national defence plan in Bouar.
That is one of our priorities. In that regard, I would also
like to stress the need for the mission to be able to work
together with FACA and access all training premises
in order to fulfil its mandate. That support to FACA in
the military domain is complemented by EU support to
the civilian security forces. We are using various EU
instruments to advise the Ministry of the Interior, the
police and the gendarmerie. That is without prejudice
to possible increased support in future in support of
capacity development and the deployment of internal
security forces.
The European Union will also continue assisting
the Central African Republic by strengthening the
resilience of the population and of the State, while fully
applying the approach linking relief, rehabilitation and
development and the humanitarian-development nexus.
The overall European Union development assistance
for the Central African Republic for the period 20172020 amounts to close to €500 million.
I hope I have given you, Mr. President, a fair
account of our commitment to continue supporting the
Central African Republic as an illustration of strong
trilateral coordination and cooperation among the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union. I know the European leadership will remain
engaged in the coming months, and I urge all partners
to join our collective efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Vervaeke for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Adom.
Mr. Adom: I have the honour to make this
statement in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013), concerning the Central African Republic.
In my presentation I intend to provide an overview of
the Committee’s work since my predecessor last briefed
the Council (see S/PV.8187) on 22 February 2018, and,
in doing so, highlight the activities of the Committee
and the Panel of Experts, particularly my recent visit to
the Central African Republic.
The security situation in the Central African
Republic has remained volatile throughout the country

18-333757/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

over the course of 2018, with marked deterioration in
the humanitarian situation and continued attacks on
civilians and humanitarian personnel by predatory armed
groups. Despite that downturn, the Government of the
Central African Republic has made tangible progress
in terms of security sector reform, with the valuable
assistance of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the European Union Training
Mission, the Russian Federation, the United States and
France, as well as bilateral, regional and international
partners. We can now see that progress on the ground
as the Central African Republic armed forces and
internal security forces are gradually deploying across
the country, together with MINUSCA personnel.
Since my predecessor’s previous briefing to the
Council, the Committee has held a total of six meetings:
on 23 February, 16 March, 25 May, 22 June, 20 July
and 7 September. The press releases summarizing
those meetings are available on the Committee’s web
page. Nonetheless, I would like to highlight several of
the Committee’s activities, which are focused on the
monitoring of the sanctions measures.
The Committee has advanced its close cooperation
with the Central African Republic authorities and
regional and neighbouring States in order to strengthen
the implementation of the sanctions measures and
to improve regional cooperation in that regard. On
7 September, the Committee convened a briefing for all
Member States, including the Central African Republic
and its neighbouring and regional States, to discuss
the midterm report of the Panel of Experts and the
recommendations contained therein (see S/2018/729).
The deliberations proved to be of great value and
provided an opportunity to exchange ideas on how
to enhance regional cooperation in countering arms
embargo violations and addressing cross-border arms
trafficking and the exploitation of natural resources by
armed groups. The root causes of the conflict in the
Central African Republic cannot be addressed without
the close involvement of the region and neighbouring
States. I see the sanctions regime as a valuable
vehicle to help bring the countries of the region closer
together to address the management of small arms and
light weapons.
Following a recommendation of the Panel’s midterm
report, the Committee has encouraged the authorities of
the Central African Republic and neighbouring States
to establish, activate or reactivate commissions to
8/26

23/10/2018

address transborder issues, including matters that are
relevant to the United Nations sanctions regime or that
affect insecurity in the Central African Republic, such
as the implementation of the travel ban on sanctioned
individuals, transhumance or trafficking in arms and
natural resources.
In addition, I would like to commend the work of
the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS),
which provided training to the Forces armées
centrafricaines and internal security forces on the safe
and effective management of weapons and ammunition
in the country. UNMAS will continue to improve
weapons and ammunitions storage facilities and
construct permanent armouries outside Bangui, such
as in Bouar, in the months to come. Together with the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research,
on 22 June UNMAS briefed the Committee on its
assistance to the authorities of the Central African
Republic, which, unfortunately, has been placed at risk
due to a scarcity of funding. In that regard, I would
like to call on Member States to provide additional
funding to UNMAS and earmark it for weapons and
ammunitions projects in the Central African Republic. It
is important that the international community continue
to assist the authorities of the Central African Republic
in ensuring the effective management of weapons and
ammunitions, which is a prerequisite in countering the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the
Central African Republic and the wider region.
Concerning the travel ban, the Committee and the
Panel of Experts have actively engaged with relevant
actors and Member States and provided information
on the appropriate travel ban exemption procedure to
advance mediation activities, pursuant to resolution
2399 (2018) and Committee guidelines. In that regard,
once again I would like to encourage the authorities
of the Central African Republic and relevant Member
States to use that tool to fully comply with the sanctions
regime. It is unfortunate that no Member State, since
the establishment of the sanctions regime in 2013, has
requested an exemption to the travel ban, although the
Committee is well aware that sanctioned individuals
are travelling.
With regard to the assets freeze, in its midterm
report the Panel of Experts reiterated that the authorities
of the Central African Republic had yet to freeze the
accounts and assets and halt the payment of salaries
to sanctioned individuals Alfred Yékatom, Eugène
Ngaïkosset and Habib Soussou. I stressed the same
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

during my recent visit to the Central African Republic
and hope that appropriate measures will be taken as
soon as possible.
Along those lines, I would like to express my sincere
words of gratitude to the authorities of the Central
African Republic for their hospitality and engagement
during my visit to Bangui and Kaga Bandoro from 2 to
5 October, together with Committee representatives
of France, Kuwait, the Netherlands, Peru, Poland, the
United States, the Embassy representatives of China and
the Russian Federation in Bangui, and several members
of the Panel of Experts. I would also like to convey my
words of gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and his colleagues at the Mission for their outstanding
support to my delegation.
My visit to the Central African Republic was
the third by the Chair since the establishment of the
Committee in 2013, but the first since May 2016. During
the visit, the authorities of the Central African Republic
unanimously called for the lifting of the arms embargo
as it relates to the Government so that the armed forces
can deploy throughout the national territory and protect
the population from the predations of armed groups.
They also expressed the view that the embargo is
affecting only the Government and not preventing the
armed groups from receiving weapons and ammunition
via the country’s porous borders.
For my part, I underlined that it is the prerogative of
the Security Council, and not the Sanctions Committee,
to ease, strengthen or lift the arms embargo. I also
echoed the conclusions of the Secretary-General’s letter
of 31 July to the President of the Security Council on
benchmarks to assess the arms embargo — namely, that
the “embargo has not prevented the Government from
receiving weapons through the prevailing exemption
provisions” (S/2018/752, p.7). As the Secretary-General
noted in his letter, it would be important to assess the
embargo according to the three key benchmarks: first,
progress on security sector reform, including the armed
forces and the internal security forces and their needs;
secondly, progress on national weapons management
and ammunition capacity; and, thirdly, progress on
the effective monitoring and management of borders
to address the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.

S/PV. 8378

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Adom
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting, which is being held at a particularly
important time for the Central African Republic.
I would also like to thank our briefers for their very
enlightening statements.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains especially fragile because of the violence
perpetrated by armed groups against civilians, in
particular women and children, humanitarian and
medical personnel and the Blue Helmets. Abuses
committed against internally displaced persons in
Bria in September, during clashes between ex-Séléka
and anti-balaka factions, are tragic and unacceptable.
In that challenging environment, we reiterate our full
support for President Touadera’s efforts to promote
national reconciliation and re-establish State authority.
We encourage him to continue working for justice,
disarmament and the country’s economic recovery.
We also believe that the message to armed groups
must be clear. They must lay down their weapons,
commit themselves immediately and unconditionally
to the peace process and understand that the violence
they perpetrate will not go unpunished. In that regard,
France welcomes yesterday’s inaugural session of the
Special Criminal Court, which marked the official
launch of investigations into gross violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law committed in
the country. It is an important step in the crucial fight
against impunity.
The current situation, as worrisome as it is, must
not overshadow the genuine progress that has been
made since last year. It shows that a solution to the
crisis is possible.
We therefore welcome the holding of the highlevel meeting on the Central African Republic on the
margins of the General Assembly, which reaffirmed
the international community’s support for the Central
African Republic and emphasized that the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic is the only framework for the peace
process in the country. That is an essential point. In
that context, while the list of the claims of the armed

18-333759/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

groups was finalized and sent to the Central African
authorities at the meeting in August organized in Bouar
by the panel of facilitators of the African Initiative,
the priority now must be to move forward, without
delay, towards a direct dialogue between the Central
African Government and the armed groups in order to
reach a comprehensive political agreement that leaves
no issue aside, particularly that of the fight against
impunity. In that regard, I would like to highlight three
elements that we consider crucial to the success of the
African Initiative.
First, we believe it is essential to avoid parallel
initiatives, which lead to confusion, and to ensure that
all partners of the Central African Republic are wellcoordinated. That is a prerequisite for the success of
the African Initiative. It is also crucial that the African
Union and all of the States in the region continue their
commitment, at the highest level, in order to ensure
the success of the next steps in the implementation of
the road map adopted in Libreville. In that regard, we
welcome the recent decision of the United Nations and
the African Union to appoint a joint special envoy to
support the African Initiative, and who, of course, will
have the full support of France. Finally, we believe it is
important that the direct dialogue between the Central
African Government and the armed groups involve
other segments of Central African society, in particular
women, whose participation in the peace process
is essential.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming France’s
full support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic. As a mission
that operates in a difficult environment, MINUSCA
plays an indispensable role, whether in protecting
civilians, supporting the peace process, facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance or supporting
the recovery of the Central African Republic. As such,
MINUSCA requires the full support of everyone. In that
regard, I would like to pay tribute to the peacekeepers
who pay a heavy price for their service in the Central
African Republic. I would also like to commend all
the efforts undertaken by MINUSCA to increase its
mobility, reduce its footprint, improve its operational
performance and continue the work that has already
begun with the troop-contributing countries to prevent
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse and ensure that
10/26

23/10/2018

they do not go unpunished. Those welcome efforts must
clearly continue.
In that context, as the renewal of MINUSCA’s
mandate approaches, France fully supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendations, in particular
that of maintaining MINUSCA’s robust format and
mandate. We also feel it is crucial that MINUSCA be
able to strengthen its role in supporting the political
process. In that regard, we welcome the decision
of the United Nations and the African Union to
integrate MINUSCA into the African Initiative and to
integrate the Special Representative into the panel of
facilitators. France strongly urges the Security Council
to authorize UNMISCA to provide limited logistical
support for the gradual and controlled redeployment
of the Forces armées centrafricaines trained or
certified by the European Union Military Training
Mission (EUTM) in the Central African Republic.
That support, alongside internal security forces, is
essential to enable the restoration of Government
authority in all its administrative, security and judicial
components — that is our collective priority. It is a high
expectation of the Central African authorities and the
Central African population itself. I would like, once
again, to commend the excellent work of the EUTM
in supporting the reform of the security sector in the
Central African Republic.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance for the Council and the entire international
community to remain mobilized and united in support of
MINUSCA and in favour of lasting peace in the Central
African Republic. That is one of the conditions for
success in supporting the Central African Republic and
all Central Africans, and it is in that spirit that France
will present, in the coming days, a draft resolution for
the renewal of MINUSCA’s mandate.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to
take the floor in my capacity as the representative of the
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire. My delegation also thanks
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, for his briefing on the situation in the Central
African Republic. We also thank Mr. Bédializoun
Moussa Nébié, Special Representative of the African
Union to the Central African Republic and Head of
the African Union Mission for the Central African
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Republic and Central Africa, and Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service, for the quality of their statements.
My delegation welcomes the progress made by the
Central African authorities in the process of emerging
from the crisis, in particular in their implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration pilot
project; community violence reduction programmes;
security sector reform and the deployment of defence
and security forces; and the restoration of Government
authority, justice and reconciliation.
Despite the progress made, there are still many
political, security and humanitarian challenges to
overcome. At the political level, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the Central African authorities’ stated willingness to
prioritize dialogue with all national and regional actors.
That willingness to engage in dialogue, particularly
with armed groups and all civil society actors, which
is perfectly in line with the African Union’s African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, leads us to believe in a peaceful and
sustainable way to end the crisis in the Central African
Republic. Côte d’Ivoire therefore expresses its support
for the African Initiative and welcomes, in that regard,
the decision of the United Nations and the African
Union to jointly appoint a special envoy to foster efforts
to effectively implement the Initiative.
The recurrence of attacks against civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers, as well as the
looting and burning of many villages by armed groups,
particularly in the central and south-eastern parts
of the country, are areas of concern to which prompt
responses must be provided. We must also condemn
the violence perpetrated by those groups, which has
resulted in the deaths of several displaced persons
and three Russian journalists. My country encourages
the Central African authorities to continue efforts to
restore Government authority throughout the national
territory, which to date has enabled districts such as
Bangassou, Bouar and Paoua to regain relative security.
The process of restoring Government authority must be
carried out based on the joint deployment operation of
the Forces armées centrafricaines and United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) forces. In
that regard, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the efforts made by
the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic, whose renewed mandate will

S/PV. 8378

make it possible to train and expand the defence and
security forces of the Central African Republic.
On the humanitarian front, the situation on the
ground is marked by the looting and burning of
villages by armed groups in areas under their control.
Those acts of violence are causing massive population
displacement and worsening the humanitarian
situation; there are more than 600,000 displaced people
and 572,000 refugees. Similarly, frequent attacks on
humanitarian convoys by armed groups constitute major
obstacles to the delivery of aid to the population and
make the situation on the ground particularly difficult
and complex. My delegation pays tribute to the memory
of all the humanitarian workers who have lost their
lives during their noble mission in the Central African
Republic and wish the wounded a speedy recovery.
We urge MINUSCA to strengthen protection for
civilians and for humanitarian workers in carrying
out their tasks in the Central African Republic. In
that regard, my delegation commends the excellent
work done on a daily basis by Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga and his colleagues. We also call on the
international community and bilateral and multilateral
partners, as well as donors, to increase their support
for the work of humanitarian agencies in the country.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support for MINUSCA
and endorses the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral aimed at strengthening its presence and tasks
in view of the renewal of the Mission’s mandate.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the United
Nations, the countries of the region and neighbouring
States in particular, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to maintain
their level of commitment to the success of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express my
delegation’s thanks to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA); Mr. Bédializoun Moussa
Nébié, Special Representative of the African Union
to the Central African Republic; Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director of the European External Action
Service for Africa, as well as Ambassador Kacou

18-3337511/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

Houadja Léon Adom, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic, for
their comprehensive briefings on the current situation
in the Central African Republic.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea remains concerned about the sporadic
resurgence of violence and the virulence with which
the ex-Séléka and anti-balaka armed groups have taken
control of part of the country and are attacking civilian
and military targets. We strongly condemn the incidents
that took place on 4 October in the town of SossoNakombo, in the south-west of the country, where three
Chinese citizens were killed by residents of the area and
another three were injured. We equally condemn the
attacks against civilians in the town of Bria and on the
Bria-Irabanda route, in the south of the country, where
at least 30 people died and four were injured. We recall
that such attacks are unacceptable and can constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea expresses its deepest condolences
to the Governments of the People’s Republic of China
and the Central African Republic for those irreparable
losses in human life, while expressing our solidarity
with the families of the victims of the attacks. We wish
those who have been injured a swift recovery.
As we commend the excellent work being carried
out by MINUSCA in the Central African Republic,
the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
encourages it to persist and to spare no effort to support
the Central African authorities in order to ensure that
the perpetrators of such criminal acts are prosecuted
and brought to justice. We call on the ex-Séléka
coalition and the anti-balaka groups operating in those
regions to put an immediate end to all attacks against
the civilian population and to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law. We stress that
only a comprehensive and inclusive political solution
that supports the development of effective and inclusive
public institutions and guarantees accountability for
such acts will help to put an end to the attacks against
the rule of law and civilians.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is optimistic about the high-level meeting held
on the sidelines of the current session of the General
Assembly, co-chaired by the President of the Central
African Republic, His Excellency Mr. Faustin Touadera;
Secretary-General António Guterres; Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
12/26

23/10/2018

Commission; and Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi, SecretaryGeneral of the Economic Community of Central African
States. The meeting undoubtedly made it possible to
reaffirm the importance of an inclusive political process
in the Central African Republic, as well as reforms in
the security sector, through the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation. Moreover, political efforts
and dialogue are the only alternatives likely to bring
about long-awaited peace dividends and national and
regional stability. They are also the most likely means
to incite armed groups to sign a peace agreement with
the Government, hand over their weapons and engage
in the country’s development efforts.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea firmly believes
in supporting the African Initiative in strengthening
the general framework for dialogue between the armed
groups and the Central African Government. We
recognize and appreciate the efforts of MINUSCA in
playing a more important role in the Initiative process.
In that context, it is necessary to welcome the continued
progress made by MINUSCA in the implementation
of its political strategy in support of Government
reform efforts and the national peace process through
agreements at the national level, adapted to specific
local contexts and prevailing armed groups. Those
efforts have had a significant impact on the decrease in
attacks against civilians in recent months. In Bangui,
for example, intercommunal dialogue in the third
district facilitated the gradual return of displaced
persons following Operation Sukula. Local peace and
reconciliation processes in Markounda and Zemio
helped to reduce violence and increase the freedom
of movement, as well as facilitating the return of
State authorities.
Our delegation also welcomes the valuable
contribution of the Sudan and the Russian Federation
to efforts aimed at achieving peace by organizing and
supporting a meeting with the three main ex-Séléka
factions and an anti-balaka faction in Khartoum on
28 August. In their statements, the armed factions
committed themselves to support peace and dialogue
within the framework of the African Initiative.
We also want to highlight the role of the
Central African Government in the disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
repatriation
programme, which is supported by MINUSCA and
was successfully launched in the western part of the
country with seven armed groups. As we speak, the
Government continues to work with other armed groups
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

to reach new agreements and extend disarmament and
demobilization to other parts of the country. It should
be emphasized that the programme constitutes a
precondition for the establishment and strengthening of
State authority, and therefore for the full training and
rearmament of the Forces armées centrafricaines.
Despite all those efforts in the reconciliation process
of this brotherly country and the achievements made, the
Central African Republic remains an extremely fragile
State, threatened by a risk of reversion. The Central
African Republic is on the verge of a humanitarian
crisis in the absence of opportunities for development
and recovery due to continuing insecurity and a lack
of purchasing power for its better development. In that
regard, we reaffirm the notion that the multifaceted
problems faced by the Central African Republic cannot
be solved by focusing on security-based solutions alone.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
believes in a comprehensive and sustainable solution to
respond to instability in Central Africa. The absence
of peace and stability in the country requires us to go
beyond simply containing violence. We must build a
resilient society and institutions that guarantee human
security in Central Africa.
On the other hand, we remain concerned about
widespread rape and sexual assaults on women
committed by ex-Séléka and anti-balaka armed groups
and the Lord’s Resistance Army, who maintain a
strong presence in various areas. The vast majority
of identified cases of sexual violence of an ethnic
and sectarian nature impede the mobility necessary
for women in the Central African Republic to carry
out vital economic and livelihood activities, such as
gaining access to crop fields, markets and adequate
education. Consequently, we urge Government and
non-State actors to agree on and implement a structured
commitment within a set time frame to prevent and
respond to those violations, including the development
of a comprehensive national strategy on sexual and
gender-based violence. In accordance with the Protocol
on the Provision of Assistance to Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse, the alleged victims must be
assisted by the United Nations system through medical
and psychosocial support.
Looking to the future, we must continue to strive to
transform the political and security context and support
national efforts to bring the country from war to peace.
The need for all countries in the subregion to continue
to participate constructively and for all mediation

S/PV. 8378

efforts to be closely coordinated within the framework
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic to strengthen the peace
process is also of fundamental importance. Likewise,
we must achieve an inclusive and transparent electoral
process that will lead to the presidential and legislative
elections of 2020 and 2021, respectively, as an integral
part of the political process.
We align ourselves with the press release on
19 September by the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, which underscores the need for
political actors in the Central African Republic to
fully and in good faith take ownership of the peace and
reconciliation process in their country, in the knowledge
that the countries of the region and partners cannot
substitute the Central Africans themselves in seeking
a sustainable solution. In that regard, the words of
Mr. Nébié concerning the meeting held by Mr. Mahamat
with former Presidents François Bozizé and Michel
Djotodia fill us with optimism and hope, the result of
which we hope will lead the way to reconciliation and
peace in Central Africa.
I would like to reiterate our congratulations to
the Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga for his
considerable efforts and leadership in successfully
completing the process of peace and political
development, in spite of the extremely difficult context,
as well as to His Excellency President Touadera and the
Central African Republic Government for the efforts
being made in favour of peace and reconciliation. I
would also like to express the support of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea for the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General in his latest report of 15 October
(S/2018/922) on the extension of MINUSCA’s mandate
for one more year until 15 November 2019, which
is why we have already expressed the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea’s support for the draft resolution
that is soon to be presented by France in that regard.
Finally, we suggest that the Council visit this suffering
brotherly country in the course of this year to bring a
message of encouragement, support and solidarity to its
Government and the population, just as the Holy Father,
Pope Francis, did a few years ago.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened attentively to today’s briefings.
Under the leadership of President Touadera, the
political process in the Central African Republic
has recently made positive progress, but the security

18-3337513/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

situation in the country remains fragile. There are
still violent clashes between armed groups and the
realization of lasting peace and stability in the Central
African Republic continues to face challenges. China
welcomes the efforts of the Government of the Central
African Republic to strengthen the deployment of
national security forces, advance security sector reform
and enhance capacity-building. We call on parties in
the Central African Republic to proceed based on the
interests of the country and its people to concretely
advance disarmament and the peace and reconciliation
process and resolve differences through dialogue
and consultation.
China appreciates the important role of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
in maintaining stability in the Central African
Republic and supports the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and the whole of MINUSCA in actively fulfilling
their mandates and carrying out their activities.
China also supports MINUSCA in enhancing its selfdefence, security and early-warning capabilities. The
Secretariat should fully heed the legitimate concerns of
the troop- and police-contributing countries and take
concrete and effective measures to ensure the safety of
the peacekeepers in order to improve the effectiveness
of MINUSCA.
China notes the Secretary-General’s assessment of
the work of MINUSCA and the relevant recommendation
of adjustment in his latest report (S/2018/922). We will
actively participate in the consultations on relevant
draft resolutions of the Security Council and will
play a constructive role. Regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States, as
well as the countries of the region, all play an important
role in advancing the peace process in the Central
African Republic. The United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union, should strengthen their coordination with
the Government of the Central African Republic to
promote peace, reconciliation and dialogue and jointly
help the Central African Republic to realize peace
and development at an early date. China calls on the
international community to continue to provide support
to the Government of the Central African Government
in its efforts to enhance national capacity-building and
provide necessary assistance to the Government in its
14/26

23/10/2018

efforts to maintain social security and stability, deal
with the humanitarian crisis and resolve the root causes
of the conflict.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting
and the briefings of Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Mr. Koen Vervaeke
and Ambassador Kacou Houadja Léon Adom.
Peru notes with deep concern the persistence
of the crisis in the Central African Republic, despite
the efforts made by the international community
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). The progress made in the political sphere
has not yet been reflected in security improvements or
alleviating the serious humanitarian situation. Most
of the country is living in a state of conflict due to,
among other factors, the precarious situation of the
State, the illegal exploitation of natural resources by
armed groups, the illicit trafficking of weapons and the
incitement to violence, including inter-ethnic violence.
We regret that that violence is affecting the civilian
population, humanitarian personnel and MINUSCA,
and that the number of internally displaced persons and
refugees continues to increase, in a country where more
than half of the population is in need of humanitarian
assistance. Given that situation, we deem it necessary
for the Security Council to continue supporting the
authorities of the Central African Republic in their
efforts to assert State authority and achieve peace and
national reconciliation. At the same time, we believe
that the mandate of MINUSCA, which is about to be
renewed, should prioritize the following three points.
First, it should provide support for the political
process. The Mission should help implement the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and support the authorities in
organizing and conducting the 2020 and 2021 elections.
We emphasize the importance of linking the African
Initiative with the peace agreements reached in places
such as Bangassou, Bangui and Bouar, as well as
promoting greater citizen participation in the political
life of the country, especially women and young people.
Secondly, it should support the security strategy.
Political progress depends to a large extent on the
ability of the armed forces and police to protect the
civilian population. We consider it of the utmost
importance to reinforce the support that MINUSCA
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

has been providing in that area, in cooperation with the
European Union. We also consider it necessary for the
political process to prioritize the full implementation
of security sector reform and programmes on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
on reducing communal violence. In that regard, we
also underscore the role of local, subregional and
regional cooperation to effectively address the complex
situation in the Central African Republic. In particular,
the mixed commissions should serve to strengthen the
border controls required to deal with illicit trafficking
in persons, natural resources and arms.
Thirdly, I turn to institutional strengthening.
Achieving sustainable peace requires national
institutions and capacities equipped to prevent and
resolve disputes peacefully, guarantee access to justice
and accountability for crimes committed and, on that
basis, promote national reconciliation. To that end, we
stress the importance of MINUSCA’s contribution to
the establishment of the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission in the context of a national
transitional justice strategy that, inter alia, will make it
possible to assist the victims of sexual violence and the
recruitment of children by armed groups. We recognize
the efforts of the Central African authorities to establish
and operationalize their national judicial institutions,
especially the Special Criminal Court.
The solution to the crisis requires a long-term
multidimensional approach to address the root
causes of the conflict. In that regard, we highlight
the Government’s efforts embodied in the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. We also highlight
the work of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the Peacebuilding Commission in
conflict prevention and resolution and institutional
development and strengthening.
I conclude by renewing our commitment to building
sustainable peace in the Central African Republic and,
as a troop-contributing country, our strong support
for MINUSCA, and by stressing the importance of
the renewal of its mandate for the Central African
population and the stability of the subregion.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I too thank
each of our three briefers today for their presentations
and for the work that they have done in support of peace
and security in the Central African Republic over the
past year. We would also like to extend our thanks
to Ambassador Adom for his exceptional leadership

S/PV. 8378

in bringing the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) to Bangui earlier this month for a
trip that was enlightening and instructive for everyone.
We particularly note his leadership in sharing Côte
d’Ivoire’s positive experience with a post-conflict
arms embargo.
One year ago, the United States joined other
Security Council members to support an increase in the
troop ceiling of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) by 900 military personnel,
thereby reaffirming the depth of our commitment to
the peace and security of the Central African Republic.
Despite notable delays in receiving those troops,
MINUSCA continued to make progress on its mandated
tasks, which resulted in significant gains in the security
and stability of the Central African Republic. That
became clear to us when a United States delegation
visited Bangassou earlier this month — something
that would have been impossible year ago. They heard
first-hand accounts of the positive impact MINUSCA
has had there. There is no doubt in our minds that
MINUSCA is making a positive difference in the lives
of Central Africans.
There has also been notable progress in restoring
State authority and building the capacity of the Central
African Government, including the Forces armées
centrafricaines (FACA) and internal security forces.
The fact that there are now four FACA battalions, and
more to come, trained by the European Union (EU) and
deployed around the country, proves that the Central
African Republic is on a positive trajectory.
We further commend the progress of the Central
African Government, assisted by MINUSCA and other
international partners, in operationalizing the Special
Criminal Court. The official opening of investigations
by the Special Criminal Court this month marks an
important step forward in the fight against impunity
and ensuring justice for victims. There are still many
challenges to overcome. We are particularly concerned
about the situation around Bria, with attacks on civilians
in August and September and the kidnapping last week
of United Nations police officers.
Our collective goal should be a political solution for
durable peace and recovery. The United States believes
that the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic represents the best path
to achieving that goal and enabling the conditions for

18-3337515/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

the extension of State authority to promote development.
However, in order for the African Initiative to be
successful, every actor must commit to transparency
and coordination. As I said at the high-level ministerial
meeting on the Central African Republic peace process,
the Central African people have seen previous dialogues
that produced agreements, but not results. We must all
work together in good faith to change that narrative and
to support President Touadera and his Government as
they strive for peace, justice, accountability and the
prevention of future atrocities.
For our part, the United States will financially
support the African Initiative. We are working in
partnership with the EU, MINUSCA and Central
African officials to ensure that peace talks address
the underlying causes of armed conflict. We are
also carefully considering the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for changes to MINUSCA’s mandate
and look forward to a conversation about the best means
to achieve our common goals.
The people of the Central African Republic have
already seen multiple peace agreements signed, followed
by collapse. They have heard about programmes to
demobilize, disarm and reintegrate former combatants,
which enriched the few, but not the many. They have
seen previous attempts at security sector reform fail and
they continue to rely on humanitarian aid to survive.
Whatever we agree in the next mandate renewal, it
should be based on the lessons that we have learned
from the past to help the Central African people seize
a brighter future. We look forward to working with
the Council and our United Nations counterparts in
that effort.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to extend
our thanks to all of our briefers. I would like in particular
to ask Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Onanga-Anyanga and Special Representative Moussa
Nébié to pass on to their teams on the ground the
thanks of the Council for the work they do in difficult
circumstances, and I echo my American colleague’s
thanks and tribute to the Ambassador of Côte d’Ivoire
for the very important work he has personally been
spearheading on behalf of us all.
We share the Secretary General’s assessment that
the security situation in the Central African Republic
remains extremely fragile — a message repeated in a
letter sent to all of us today by 45 non-governmental
organizations active in that country. As our briefers
16/26

23/10/2018

today have illustrated, there are some positive signals
of progress in the Central African Republic, but the
security, humanitarian and justice situations remain
concerning. The international community must not
relax its efforts towards building a secure, stable and
peaceful Central African Republic.
Civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers
continue to be attacked. More than one in four Central
Africans remain displaced. Half of the population is in
desperate need of humanitarian assistance. Only 36 per
cent of the 2018 humanitarian response plan has been
funded. We encourage all Member States to help fill that
gap. The United Kingdom has provided £63 million, or
$81 million, in humanitarian aid to the Central African
Republic since 2015. We believe that this aid supports
progress towards a stable, secure and peaceful Central
African Republic — something that remains in all of
our interests.
It is clear that in order to achieve peace in the
Central African Republic, efforts to stabilize the
country in the short-term must go hand in hand with
longer-term progress on reconciliation, justice and
peacebuilding. We therefore welcome the efforts of
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, which remains the
only viable path to peace. I agree wholeheartedly
with the French Ambassador on the need to avoid
parallel initiatives, which risk confusion, or worse.
Coordinated and sustained international support is
vital if the Central African Republic is to achieve longlasting peace and stability. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that there should
be greater United Nations involvement in the Initiative
to ensure link up between political peace and security
efforts and to reinforce coordination between national
and international partners on the Central African
Republic’s road to peace.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has an essential role to play in supporting
the peace initiative, and the United Kingdom is
committed to working with colleagues on the Security
Council to ensure that MINUSCA can deliver that
support as part of its stabilization mandate. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation
for MINUSCA’s renewed focus on the peace process,
including through more direct engagement.
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Also, in support of MINUSCA’s mandate delivery,
we commend the Secretary-General’s plan to introduce
a performance management mechanism to alleviate
some of the pressures on the Mission. That will give
it a greater ability to improve performance and to
enforce the zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse
and exploitation and sexual harassment. I note in that
context Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga’s
comments about ensuring that troops that are deployed
are properly trained and equipped. He is right in saying
that it is a responsibility of the Council.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to establish and implement a
comprehensive, strategic outreach and communication
plan, making clear what MINUSCA is delivering for
the people of the Central African Republic, building a
better understanding of the peace process and making
sure we take into account the views and needs of Central
Africans. As we have all heard and seen many times in
the Council, an inclusive peace process that ensures the
participation of women is more likely to be sustainable
and successful.
Among these concerns respecting the Central
African Republic, we must remember that there can
be no peace without justice. Incitement to violence,
including on religious and ethnic grounds, and
attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers will continue unchecked if perpetrators
perceive impunity to be the standard. We recognize
the efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic, together with MINUSCA, to bring some of
the perpetrators of serious crimes to account. In that
regard, we hope that the positive news of the inaugural
session of the Special Criminal Court yesterday will
soon translate into concrete progress in the fight against
impunity, especially now that the Court’s investigations
can officially commence.
We urge the Central African Republic to work
with international partners to expedite progress on
criminal and transitional justice and ensure that judicial
mechanisms are in place to support due process on these
and other cases. That remains an essential component
to bringing stability to the Central African Republic.
The international community and the Government of
the Central African Republic have come a long way
since elections in 2015. We must continue to unite in our
focus on building peace and stability in the country and
on creating the conditions for the long-term protection
and prosperity that the people deserve.

S/PV. 8378

Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga;
the Special Representative of the African Union to
the Central African Republic, Mr. Moussa Nébié;
the Managing Director for Africa of the European
External Action Service, Mr. Vervaeke; and the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic,
Ambassador Adom of Côte d’Ivoire, for their important
updates and outstanding leadership. We also welcome
to the Chamber Ambassador Kpongo, Permanent
Representative of the Central African Republic.
My delegation has some observations to share on
key salient points.
First, on the political front, we underline that the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic remains the principle
framework for the peace process in that country. In that
regard, we welcome the work of the Initiative’s panel
of facilitators to prepare the dialogue between the
Government and armed groups. We express our hope
that all stakeholders will cooperate in a constructive
manner and are committed to pursuing dialogue and
confidence-building measures.
It is also important that all peace initiatives
within the framework of the African Initiative be
harmonized to ensure the coherence of the peace
process, and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) should be an integral partner.
In that regard, we welcome the decision of the United
Nations and African Union leadership to nominate a
prominent figure as a guarantor of the peace process
who will coordinate the efforts of all involved partners,
thereby facilitating enhanced regional engagement.
The committed support of regional and international
partners in that process is also crucial. In that
connection, we appreciate the mediation efforts of the
Sudan, with the support of the Russian Federation,
and look forward to peace negotiations in Khartoum,
hopefully in December. We believe that the Sudan
should be an important part of the solution.
We also note the important role that MINUSCA
plays in advancing the peace process through a wide
range of activities, including by providing its good
offices, formulating its security posture, offering its
substantive expertise and facilitating the disarmament,

18-3337517/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

demobilization and reintegration process. It also plays
a critical role in security sector reform and transitional
justice. We therefore endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to reinforce MINUSCA’s priority
mandated task to support the political process by
increasing its substantive and mediation components
to promote that initiative and to align its political and
security strategies with the African Initiative.
We also reognize the need for the Government,
the African Initiative and MINUSCA to undertake
comprehensive strategic communications and outreach
plans, aimed at informing the population about the
peace process, understanding local perceptions and
motivations, and explaining the Mission’s mandate
and actions.
We further acknowledge the committed efforts of
the Government of the Central African Republic, under
the leadership of President Touadera, to extend State
authority throughout the country, including through
the implementation of local peace and reconciliation
initiatives. We call on the international community to
extend greater support to the Central African Republic
authorities in order to increase the State’s security
and institutional capacities, which take on greater
importance in the light of upcoming elections in 2020
and 2021.
Secondly, on the security front, we strongly condemn
the continued attacks by armed groups on civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. Intensified
sectarian rhetoric and intercommunal disputes result
in higher levels of violence, thereby undermining all
efforts to achieve national reconciliation.
We underline that with MINUSCA, as the primary
force providing security while at the same time being
overstretched, national authorities bear the primary
responsibility to protect civilians. To that end, the
greater support of international partners to boost the
capacity of the national security forces is needed, as
is the development of a comprehensive strategy on the
protection of civilians involving all relevant actors. We
commend the invaluable contribution of the European
Union Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic, with the operational support of MINUSCA,
in training and deploying the Central African armed
forces. We also draw attention to the need to ensure the
security of peacekeepers.
On the humanitarian front, against a backdrop of
underfunding and a reduced humanitarian presence,
18/26

23/10/2018

the increasing numbers of internally displaced people
and refugees from the Central African Republic in
neighbouring countries demand the international
community’s immediate attention and financial support.
Finally, we would like to stress that all international
efforts to stabilize the Central African Republic must
be complemented by a comprehensive strategy to
address the root causes of the crisis, including through
increased investment in the economy, job creation and
better living conditions for the Central Africans. We
welcome the continued engagement of the European
Union and the World Bank in their efforts to create a
conducive economic environment. We also support the
draft resolution on MINUSCA, to be submitted soon
by France.
Lastly, it is just as crucial that MINUSCA and the
United Nations country team, along with other partners,
continue to support the Government in implementing
the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan for the
2017-2021 period.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga; the Special
Representative of the African Union to the Central
African Republic, Mr. Moussa Nébié; and Mr. Koen
Vervaeke for their briefings on the latest developments
in the Central African Republic and the activities
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). We also appreciate Ambassador Léon
Adom for his briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic and the
outcome of his recent visit to Central African Republic.
We also welcome the Permanent Representative of
the Central African Republic, who is participating in
this meeting.
The Central African Republic continues to face
enormous challenges. The absence of State authority in
most parts of the country and the activities of armed
opposition groups and self-defence militias fighting for
land and resources by illegal parallel administration
and taxation structures are plunging the country into
yet another cycle of violence and conflict. We recognize
the efforts of President Touadera and his Government,
including in the areas of security sector reform and the
establishment of functioning State structures, with the
support from MINUSCA. We appreciate the role of
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic, as well as several bilateral,
regional and international partners in that regard.
However, we wish to emphasize the importance
of creating strong national ownership and building
the necessary momentum for genuine and inclusive
dialogue, in the context of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, to address the most pressing challenges
facing the country in stabilizing the security situation,
expanding State authority and putting in place inclusive
governance structures.
We are encouraged by the increasing support for
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic led by the African
Union (AU). We underscore the need for closer
coordination and synergy among African Union, the
United Nations, the European Union and all other
actors involved in bringing peace and stability to the
country. In this context, we welcome the holding of the
high-level ministerial meeting on the sidelines of the
General Assembly, which reaffirmed the support of the
international community to the African Initiative.
We support the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission in
jointly appointing a special envoy, who will also be a
guarantor of peace process on the ground and facilitate
the effective implementation of the African Initiative,
including by liaising with all partners of the Central
African Republic and the region. That will, we hope,
help to expedite the peace and reconciliation process in
the Central African Republic. We also acknowledge the
outcome of the recent consultations led by the President
of the Republic of the Sudan, His Excellency President
Omer Al-Bashir, and the declaration of commitment
issued by the anti-Balaka militia, led by Maxime
Mokom, and the ex-Séléka led by Noureddine Adam,
towards peace in Central African Republic.
The role of MINUSCA remains indispensable,
and we appreciate the Mission’s efforts in fulfilling
its mandated tasks under difficult circumstances.
We strongly condemn the attacks against MINUSCA
peacekeepers and other humanitarian actors operating
on the ground. We pay tribute to those who have paid
the ultimate sacrifice for the cause of peace.
We are confident that the Security Council will
continue to strengthen MINUSCA so as to enable
it respond to the evolving situation on the ground.

S/PV. 8378

Particularly, the quick-reaction battle groups, the
reserve battalion, the special forces company, the quickreaction force company and its enabling units must be
strengthened. In this regard, we note the outcome of
the strategic review and support the implementation
of the relevant recommendations of the review. The
Mission’s support to the Government-led local peace
and reconciliation initiatives remains vital, and we note
its contribution to reducing violence, building trust
between communities and facilitating the return of
internally displaced persons.
We therefore support the renewal of the mandate
of the Mission and we look forward to constructively
engaging in the upcoming discussions in this regard.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): Let me first thank the speakers for the clarity
of their statements. Their suggestions are valuable
in view of the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
recommendations of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/922). I should like to join in the congratulations
offered by the Ambassador of France on yesterday’s
inaugural session of the Special Criminal Court. The
Court is essential to the fight against impunity.
Today, I would like to address three points: first,
the peace process; secondly, the protection of civilians;
and thirdly, security sector reform.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic. As President Touadera
said before the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.9), it
remains the only framework for peace negotiations
in the Central African Republic. In recent months,
we have considered how the United Nations could
strengthen its support for the African Initiative. The
invitation to join the panel of facilitators extended to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga,
and the announcement of the appointment of a Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the African
Union mark important milestones. That encouraging
development can only strengthen the momentum of the
peace negotiations. The various stakeholders must now
step up their efforts.

18-3337519/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

We call on the armed groups to lay down their arms.
We remind them that the Council can apply sanctions
against those who undermine peace. With a view to
establishing lasting peace, we call on the Government
to ensure the substantial participation of women in
the negotiations. The commitment of the countries of
the region is indispensable. We welcome the Sudan’s
efforts for peace in the Central African Republic,
which are an integral part of the African Initiative. We
encourage MINUSCA to strengthen its coordinating
role in support of the political process, in line with the
report of the Secretary-General.
My second point concerns the protection of
civilians. This is a key task of MINUSCA in support
of the Central African authorities. That task remains
a challenge and will be particularly difficult if we do
not give the Mission the equipment and the means to
increase its mobility. At the same time, the Council
needs to learn from its experience, positive or negative,
in the area of operations. We committed to doing so
in the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
My third point concerns security sector reform.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands commends the work
of the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic and other partners that have
contributed to the rehabilitation of the security forces.
Sharing the same goal, all partners must cooperate
in a coordinated and transparent way. We call on the
authorities of the Central African Republic to contribute
to that approach.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s letter
(S/2018/463) on the logistical support of MINUSCA
to the Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA). The first
deployments of the FACA have yielded encouraging
results. However, it lacks essential means, including
basic equipment. MINUSCA has a vital role to play in
preparing the FACA to resume the paramount task of
protecting civilians. That support must be in accordance
with the due diligence policy on human rights.
I will conclude by underlining that the moment
is critical for the people of the Central African
Republic. The humanitarian situation has deteriorated
significantly. Half of the population has been displaced.
Mistrust prevails, including towards the Mission. As the
warring parties prepare to meet soon at the negotiating
20/26

23/10/2018

table, we remind them that they hold the key to a better
future for the people of the Central African Republic.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic, for his valuable briefing
to the Council. I should also like to thank Mr. Moussa
Nébié, Special Representative of the African Union
to the Central African Republic; Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service; and the Permanent Representative of
Côte d’Ivoire, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), for their
informative briefings.
In my statement, I shall address three issues related
to our discussion today: the security situation, the
humanitarian situation and the political situation.
First, as to the security situation, during our
participation in the official visit to the Central African
Republic, from 2 to 5 October, we observed a number
of positive steps that had been taken at the security and
political levels, despite the continued fragility of the
security situation in the capital, Bangui, and in Kaga
Bandoro, which was included in our visit. The security
situation in general is unstable. Since the outbreak of
violence in the Central African Republic in 2013 and
2014, the gravity of the situation has been exacerbated
by acts of violence committed by armed groups and
parties to the conflict and as a result of hate speech and
incitement to religious and sectarian violence.
We would like to express our serious concern about
the continued violations and attacks carried out by
those extremist armed groups against United Nations
personnel, members of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and humanitarian workers. We
strongly condemn the attacks targeting Muslims and
their religious symbols, setting fire to their homes
and attacking places of worship, just as we condemn
any attacks targeting people on the basis of their
religion or place of worship, regardless of what party
they belong to. We support the efforts by the Central
African Republic authorities to halt such actions and to
raise people’s awareness in order to limit hate speech
and consolidate the principle of peaceful coexistence
among society’s various sectors.
Strengthening justice in the Central African
Republic will represent an important step forward for
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

the stability and security of the entire country. In that
regard, we pay tribute to yesterday’s inaugural formal
session of the Special Criminal Court, which we hope
will contribute to ending the culture of impunity and to
bringing those who perpetrate crimes against civilians
to justice. We also welcome the proposed appointment
of a joint United Nations-African Union special envoy
and the proposal to consolidate all African initiatives
in support of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
Secondly, we regret that the humanitarian situation
is still critical and that nearly half of the inhabitants
of the Central African Republic require urgent
humanitarian assistance. There are more than 616,000
internally displaced persons and 572,000 refugees
living in neighbouring countries, making the Central
African Republic one of the countries most in need of
humanitarian assistance in the whole world. Even more
worrying is the fact that many of those in need are
women and children.
Thirdly, with regard to the political situation,
the African Initiative, which enjoys a high level of
acceptance among most of the political parties in the
Central African Republic, is an essential pillar for
a dialogue between the Government and the armed
groups. We call on all the parties to participate in the
dialogue process in order to resolve this prolonged
conflict. In that regard, I would like to pay tribute to the
efforts of the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the European Union,
through its Military Training Mission in the Central
African Republic, which handles the training of Central
African armed forces. I would also like to salute the
efforts deployed in the region with the aim of bringing
the conflicting parties to the dialogue table within the
African Initiative. They will help to achieve security
if they can continue until the holding of presidential
elections in 2020 and 2021, which we hope all segments
of society will participate in, including young people
and women.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore our
support for extending MINUSCA’s mandate for
another year, until 15 November 2019. The Mission is
an essential element in achieving the priorities of the
Central African Republic — support for the political
process, the protection of civilians, the creation of an
environment that ensures access for humanitarian aid
and support for the national armed forces. We also
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation to

S/PV. 8378

add two new tasks to the Mission’s mandate — support
for the electoral process and the provision of limited
logistical support to the armed forces and internal
security forces — as well as the recommendation on
amending the Mission’s role with regard to national
resources. We sincerely appreciate the Special
Representative’s tireless efforts and pay tribute to all
those working in MINUSCA.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking our briefers, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic, Mr. Bédializoun Moussa
Nébié, Special Representative of the African Union
to the Central African Republic, Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service, and our colleague Ambassador Kacou
Léon Adom for their insightful presentations.
Poland welcomes the fact that some positive
progress has been made under the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation, which remains the main
framework for resolving the crisis in the Central
African Republic. However, further efforts are needed
to ensure that the achievements made so far are not lost.
We call on all parties to the crisis to fully engage in
dialogue and to fulfil their commitments.
While commending the support provided by
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and the African Union, as well as the
engagement of regional and subregional actors in
the mediation and reconciliation efforts, Poland
emphasizes that consistency is key. To bring about real
change, the political process must involve all political,
social and ethnic groups, as well as women, and must
be conducted at both the national and local levels. To
that end, it is essential to ensure transparency in all
actions undertaken by external actors. The country’s
political, administrative and judicial structures must be
rebuilt and the sense of impunity in society reduced.
It is critical to create closer links between the peace
process and justice, and in that context we emphasize
the importance of the elections planned for 2020 and
2021, which should provide the necessary impetus
for implementing the processes of decentralization,
establishing transitional justice and extending
State authority.
At the same time, the efforts to overcome the
political impasse and ensure the delivery of urgent

18-3337521/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

humanitarian aid should be complemented by longterm development programmes that address the root
causes of the conflict and that include all groups from
every side of the conflict.
Poland welcomes the redeployment in several
areas of the country of the armed forces trained by the
European Union Training Mission with MINUSCA’s
operational support, which is essential in order to
reinforce national ownership and responsibility for the
country’s security. Nevertheless, the issue of logistical
support to the national security forces must be urgently
addressed. Poland would like to point out that all
international partners providing assistance on the
ground should work in a coordinated and transparent
manner, which is the only way to achieve a unified
approach to operationalizing the Central African
Republic forces and ensuring their compliance with the
highest standards. Considering the fragile situation in
the Central African Republic, MINUSCA’s priorities
and core tasks remain valid. We value its engagement
in supporting the political process, protecting civilians
and ensuring a secure environment for the delivery of
humanitarian aid.
In conclusion, while we appreciate the achievements
made so far, there is still a long road ahead for the
Central African Republic. In our view, the international
community and the country’s people must stay the
course in order to preserve what has already been
accomplished. Poland supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/922). We commend the important work being
done by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), the European Union mission and other
international partners in the Central African Republic.
I would also like to assure Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga and his team of our full support.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic,
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of
the European External Action Service, and Ambassador
Léon Adom of Côte d’Ivoire for their briefings.
We share the concern expressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the Central African Republic
(S/2018/922) about the continuing unstable situation
22/26

23/10/2018

in the country, especially on the security front. A
significant part of its territory is still controlled by
armed groups. Despite some positive improvements
regarding the issue of expanding State authority,
the local Government bodies cannot fully carry out
their functions.
We would like to express our sincere condolences
for the peacekeepers who lost their lives this year. The
courage of the Blue Helmets in the Central African
Republic cannot be overestimated. We want to express
our support for the efforts of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and of
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga personally. We realize that the
Mission’s task is not an easy one, considering the size
of the country and the presence there of a large number
of armed groups.
Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council and a member of the International Support
Group for the Central African Republic, intends to
continue its full support to the process of national
reconciliation that has begun there, acting in
coordination with the authorities in Bangui, the African
Union, the leadership of the Republic of the Sudan
and the other stakeholders involved in the quest for
ways to normalize the situation in the Central African
Republic. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic is vital as a pathway to
a political settlement. We support the comprehensive
implementation of the road map for a Central African
settlement adopted in Libreville on 17 July 2017 through
the mediation of the African Union.
The progress made in implementing the African
Initiative is a positive step, and we particularly
welcome the talks held in the city of Bouar from 28 to
30 August by the Initiative’s panel of facilitators with
the representatives of 14 armed groups. We hope that
the consolidated document that resulted will lead to an
early start to a direct dialogue between the Government
and the armed groups. We believe that the talks held on
28 August in Khartoum under the auspices of President
Bashir of the Sudan between the leaders of the largest
armed groups, including some formerly allied with the
Séléka and anti-balaka, represent an important step
within the framework of the general African effort to
find ways to help the Central African Republic emerge
from conflict.
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

The declaration signed at the conclusion of the
meeting in Khartoum announced the creation of a
united Central African opposition with the aim of
achieving a lasting and sustainable peace in the Central
African Republic, recording their commitment to the
African Union Initiative, their willingness to start a
peace process with the central Government and their
obligation to respect human rights and ensure the free
and safe movement of representatives of humanitarian
and other non-governmental organizations throughout
the country. We presume that such an association will
enable them to reach concrete agreements with the
Government of the Central African Republic.
As we have repeatedly emphasized, Russia
supports harmonizing the various Central African
Republic peace initiatives to help advance the
negotiation process, which will help to prevent them
from competing with one another, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report cautions against. Russia’s assistance
in organizing the contacts in Khartoum is in line with
the efforts of the African community, which is making
a decisive contribution to ending the stalemate in crisis
situations on the African continent in accordance with
the African Union’s principle of African solutions to
African problems. We consistently advocate for the
backing of the international community and especially
the Security Council for agreements that are being
developed through the mediation of the African Union
and other African bodies, and for providing them with
political, moral and material support.
We note the steps that Bangui has taken in reforming
the security sector with a view to regaining control
over the entire country. Together with the support of
the international community, they are designed to help
normalize the situation in the Central African Republic
and to implement the national defence plan approved
by President Touadera with the aim of gradually
transferring responsibility for the country’s affairs
to its lawful authorities. For our part, we affirm that
Russia will continue to support the Central African
Republic’s authorities in reforming the national security
sector, including in the area of strengthening the armed
forces’ combat capability and staff potential. Russian
military specialists managed to achieve significant
results in a short space of time in training more than
1,000 Central African troops. We also intend to
continue to increase our assistance on the humanitarian
front, particularly through the provision of medical
services to the population. Our collaboration with the

S/PV. 8378

Central African Republic’s legitimate authorities in
rebuilding its national security forces is constructive
and transparent, as testified to by the latest report of
the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic and by the results of recent
thorough inspections by United Nations representatives
of a first batch of military equipment donated by Russia
to the Central African Republic’s Ministry of Defence
at the beginning of this year. Besides that, we hope that
our military and technical assistance to Bangui will
cease to provoke what might be termed jealousy among
our Council colleagues. We believe that in the current
circumstances on the ground in the Central African
Republic, constructive collaboration on the part of all
international stakeholders is urgently needed.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
thank all today’s briefers for their valuable input and
perspectives, and for their efforts to build peace in
the Central African Republic. I would especially like
to thank our colleague Ambassador Adom for his
leadership on the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central
African Republic.
We are encouraged by President Touadera’s
commitment to advancing the peace process, including
at the recent high-level meeting during the general
debate of the General Assembly. The country’s national
ownership and leadership are of course critical to
progress. United, well-coordinated and transparent
international support is now needed. We therefore fully
support the African Union-led African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
as a framework for all international engagement. We
also welcome the proposal to appoint a special envoy to
lead the Initiative who would mobilize and coordinate
regional and international engagement. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
should also have a strong role in supporting the process.
The African Initiative must become more inclusive
in its approach, however. For instance, in its current
composition there is no space for representatives of
civil society. Women have key roles as mediators in
local initiatives, and we believe there is potential for
their increased participation in the African Initiative’s
panel of facilitators, as well as for women as parties to
the dialogue. We encourage the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, as a new member of the panel,

18-3337523/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

together with Special Representative Nébié and others,
to work to improve the inclusion of civil society, as well
as the participation of women.
Progress in advancing the peace process is
also important for stable and credible elections in
2020 and 2021. We support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to include limited logistical support
to the electoral process in the MINUSCA mandate. It
is needed to strengthen capacity and ensure that the
constitutional timeline can be met.
The security situation remains volatile. We are
concerned about the continued widespread violence by
armed groups, as well as targeted attacks on civilians
and aid workers. Sexual and gender-based violence
is increasingly used as a weapon of war, and women
have become an expendable currency in the political
economy of that war. The Council sent a strong signal
earlier this year by making sexual and gender-based
crimes a stand-alone designation criterion for the
sanctions regime. That must now be effectively and
actively implemented.
Like others, we commend and pay tribute to
MINUSCA for its impressive efforts in a very
challenging and often dangerous environment. Given
the dire security situation, MINUSCA must be able
to effectively exercise its core mandate to protect
civilians and to do it increasingly in partnership with
the national defence and internal security forces. There
are good examples of that. The robust operations in the
north-western province of Ouham-Pendé have led to a
drop in attacks on civilians and the return of internally
displaced persons. They have been based on a proactive
approach by MINUSCA and coordinated with the
activities of the Central African armed forces.
We therefore support the recommendation that
MINUSCA should provide limited logistical support
to national defence and security forces, enabling
it to increase its footprint outside Bangui. Central
African security forces must be fully and sustainably
operationalized. A formal monitoring process should
be put in place to ensure that MINUSCA’s support is in
full compliance with the United Nations Due Diligence
Policy on Human Rights. The European Union (EU)
and its Training Mission has already made important
contributions in that regard. Trilateral efforts among
the United Nations, the EU and the African Union can
play a significant role in restoring peace and security
in the country.
24/26

23/10/2018

We welcome the efforts to address sexual
exploitation and abuse, in line with relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Secretary-General’s new
policy. However, we note with concern that nine new
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were
recorded against MINUSCA forces during the reporting
period. We expect that those cases will now be swiftly
followed up, in accordance with agreed procedures.
With regard to the upcoming mandate review, we
welcome the initiative by the Central African Republic
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission to provide observations to the Security
Council, which include the importance of strengthened
international support to the Government in its
implementation of reforms and the advancement of
the political peace process, and should now be duly
considered in our review process. Transitional justice
will play a critical role in the peacebuilding efforts. The
people of the Central African Republic have repeatedly
demanded that past grievances be addressed. We
therefore welcome the progress made in establishing
the Special Criminal Court and encourage further steps
to secure financial support and political commitment
for its functioning.
The humanitarian challenge in the Central African
Republic is immense. As we have heard, half of the
population is in need of assistance and only about a third
of the humanitarian appeal has been funded. Additional
funding is therefore urgently needed. We also need
initiatives to combine development, humanitarian and
peacebuilding efforts for long-term sustainable peace.
In conclusion, we must remain mobilized and united
in our efforts to support the Central African Republic.
The situation remains fragile, and only by working
together can we help the country achieve lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
My delegation thanks all of today’s briefers,
especially Ambassador Adom, as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
According to the Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2018/922), the situation in the Central
African Republic remains unstable due to the ongoing
violence and insecurity perpetrated by armed groups.
That instability hampers the country’s development,
capacity-building and State presence, despite progress
18-33375

23/10/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

in protecting civilians, fostering inter-institutional
cooperation and training the Central African Armed
Forces, among other achievements.
My delegation commends the work of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which fosters dialogue and addresses
the root causes of instability and armed violence in
the country. We call on all armed groups to join the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
We also highlight the need for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), together
with the Government, to establish lasting strategic and
operational partnerships with all relevant international
and regional stakeholders. The new mandate must
foster unity among international and regional partners
on the importance of finding political solutions and
inclusive national efforts, as well as strengthening the
role of the International Support Group of the Central
African Republic in bringing together all international
actors in support of the peace process. The mandate
must continue to underscore the importance of national
ownership and take all population groups into account,
including women and young people. It should also
highlight the need for ongoing international support
to the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and
the Government authorities in order to accelerate
the Plan’s implementation and the coordination of
peace efforts, particularly with regard to the African
Initiative, the need to implement a national security
policy and national security-sector reform strategy and
the importance of strengthening justice institutions to
combat impunity.

S/PV. 8378

the participation of the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the African
Initiative’s panel of facilitators, whose political
efforts to foster peace and cooperation are key to the
reconciliation process. All efforts must be conducted
with full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Central African Republic. It is
the people of the Central African Republic themselves
who are primarily responsible for achieving peace and
stability in their country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): Since I am taking the floor for the first time
during your presidency, Sir, on behalf of my delegation
I would like to sincerely congratulate you on your
thoughtful stewardship of the Council’s work for the
month of October.

We commend the Mission on its efforts to identify
the regions in which additional capacity is required to
protect civilians and support the Government, to be
provided through peace and reconciliation initiatives
that can serve as frameworks for reducing violence,
building trust among communities and facilitating
the return of displaced persons. We urge MINUSCA
to continue its efforts to advocate for the participation
of women in the African Initiative and its work on
community violence-reduction programmes, which
have been effective in implementing local peace
agreements and encouraging the voluntary disarming
of a large number of young people involved in militia
and armed-group activities.

As described in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/922), the situation in the Central African
Republic remains a source of serious concern in the
light of the clashes and attacks on civilians in the
past few weeks. The briefings by Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special
Representative of the African Union to the Central
African Republic, and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service, included information that makes us realize that
there are still many obstacles on the road ahead, despite
the commendable progress that has been made in the
quest for ways and means to achieve peace. The violent
atmosphere created by the clashes between armed
groups vying for control of land and access to natural
resources shows that much remains to be done. As the
report suggests, the continuing climate of instability
created by the armed groups means that the risk of a
relapse into crisis is still serious. However, thanks to
the efforts under way in many different areas, we can
hope for a future free of this fear.

In conclusion, we commend the active and ongoing
support of regional and subregional organizations and

I strongly support all of the report’s recommendations
and observations as well as other proposals such as

18-3337525/26

S/PV.8378

The situation in the Central African Republic

those of the Peacebuilding Commission. We feel we
can legitimately hope that if these recommendations
are implemented in drafting the resolution renewing
MINUSCA’s mandate, we have a real chance to make
progress towards a sustainable settlement of the crisis
in the Central African Republic. The briefings by the
two Special Representatives highlighted every aspect
of the crisis. What is important is ensuring that we
faithfully heed the proposed recommendations and
comments with a view to giving MINUSCA a more
robust new mandate.
The Secretary-General’s report clearly shows that
my country is still a long way from regaining peace
and stability, despite enormous efforts on the part of the
international community, including the Member States
represented here and the United Nations itself, through
MINUSCA. I want to note that the Government has
worked closely in every way with its partners and with
MINUSCA in implementing political and security
strategies aimed at defusing the crisis, without success.
The report highlights shortcomings on the part of the
Government, MINUSCA and partners in the provision
of resources for implementing the policies and strategies
we have devised.
MINUSCA alone cannot provide sustainable
protection for civilians across the entire country.
Training and equipping our national defence and security
forces should be a top priority for our partners, given
that the national authorities’ resources are practically
non-existent. In that regard, I would like to quote the
Secretary-General in paragraph 66 of his report:

26/26

23/10/2018

“The peace process in the Central African
Republic is contingent on security conditions
conducive for dialogue. The effective negotiation
and implementation of any outcome will need to be
backed by credible, adequate and sustained military
pressure to prevent any further strengthening or
expansion of the armed groups.”
That recommendation, together with the commitment
of our partners to respecting my country’s priorities
in terms of peacebuilding, and to providing adequate
resources to the United Nations system so that it can
deliver on its agenda, can create the conditions we need
to restore the peace and stability in the Central African
Republic that we so desire.
Finally, I would like to thank all the members of
the Security Council for their encouraging statements.
We are particularly grateful to the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic for
his leadership in managing the sanctions regime. My
delegation looks forward eagerly to the important work
of the French delegation in presenting us with a draft
resolution adapted to the new tasks to be entrusted to
MINUSCA and its Head of Mission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are
no more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I
now invite the members of the Council to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

18-33375
