A /69/PV.67

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

67th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 9 December 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kogda (Burkina
Faso), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/69/71 and
A/69/71/Add.1)
Report on the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole (A/69/77)
Report on the work of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process (A/69/90)
Letter from the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Openended Informal Working Group to the President
of the General Assembly (A/69/177)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.29)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Draft resolution (A/69/L.30)
Mr. De Vega (Philippines): At the outset, my
delegation would like to thank Ambassador Eden

Charles of Trinidad and Tobago and Ms. Alice Revell
of New Zealand for their hard work, commitment and
dedication in coordinating our annual draft resolutions
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/69/L.29) and on
sustainable fisheries (A/69/L.30), respectively. Water
coveFrs two-thirds of our planet’s surface, and one half
of that surface is high seas beyond the jurisdiction of any
State. It is not surprising therefore that, taken together,
our two draft resolutions today probably represent the
most comprehensive subject that the General Assembly
considers on an annual basis.
This year, on the eve of the twentieth anniversary
of the opening for signature of the 1995 Fish Stocks
Agreement, the Philippines became the eighty-second
State party to the Agreement. That demonstrates
our commitment to the conservation and optimum
utilization of straddling and highly migratory fish
stocks, both within and beyond the exclusive economic
zone, and to the management of those stocks based
on the precautionary approach and the best available
scientific information.
The Philippines is very pleased to co-sponsor
the draft resolution on sustainable fisheries, which
reaffirms our common, global commitments, as set
out in the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20),
entitled “The future we want” (resolution 66/288,
annex), to eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing; to eliminate subsidies that contribute to such
fishing and overcapacity; and to enhance actions to
protect vulnerable marine ecosystems from significant

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-68215 (E)

*1468215*

A/69/PV.67

09/12/2014

adverse impacts, including through the effective use of
impact assessments.

cited in paragraph 190 of the draft resolution, is very
instructive in this regard.

In addition, the draft resolution deals with many
other critical issues, such as ensuring that the decisions
taken by regional fisheries management organizations
are based on the best available scientific information, the
implementation of plans of action for the conservation
and management of sharks, and the impact of industrial
fishing on species low down on the food chain, given
their important role as food for other species in the
marine ecosystem.

Next year will be another important year, as we are
poised to pursue our Sustainable Development Goals.
We also look forward to the meeting next month of the
ad hoc open-ended informal working group to study
issues relating to the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of
national jurisdiction, co-chaired by Sri Lanka and the
Netherlands. We have to come to a decision on whether
or not we should launch negotiations on that overriding
topic. The Philippines believes that, yes, we should.

Sustained global cooperation on ocean matters
is paramount. We understand that the omnibus draft
resolution on oceans and the law of the sea has been
referred to the Fifth Committee because of programme
and budget implications, but we would like to articulate
our support for the draft. The Philippines also reaffirms
its commitments articulated at Rio+20. Rio recognized
that oceans, seas and coastal areas form an integrated
and essential component of the planet’s ecosystem and
are thus critical to sustaining it.
Most importantly for coastal developing countries
and small island developing States, the draft resolution
also recognizes the importance of improving our
understanding of the impact of climate change on
oceans and seas. Science has begun to provide us proof
of the linkage. A painful and tragic reminder for my
country, the Philippines, was Typhoon Haiyan last
year. I wish, in this regard, to reiterate our deepest
gratitude to the United Nations and to all Member
States and international civil society for their support
and assistance following that very dark moment.
The draft resolution builds on previous years’
resolutions and contributes to a rules-based
international regime. It articulates our deepening
concern over the continued threat of human activity to
marine environments and biodiversity. The Philippines
agrees that now, more than ever, we must take action to
arrest marine pollution, including marine debris, which
compromises the health of the oceans and of marine
biodiversity. We need to neutralize — if not reverse — the
adverse economic, social and environmental impacts
of the physical alteration and destruction of marine
habitats that might result from land-based and coastal
development activities. The Manila Declaration
on Furthering the Implementation of the Global
Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine
Environment from Land-based Activities, which is

2/19

The Philippines is fully committed to maritime
safety and security and to the fight against piracy.
The 2010 Manila amendments to the International
Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping for Seafarers are consistent with that
commitment. We also support the acceleration of the
work of the three bodies created by the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), namely,
the Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf, the International Seabed Authority, which
commemorated its twentieth session in Kingston in
July, and the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea, to which we elected new, highly qualified judges
at our States parties meeting in June 2014.
The rules-based approach of UNCLOS is the way
forward in addressing maritime disputes. We renew
our call on those involved to avail themselves of the
dispute-settlement mechanism in UNCLOS, even as we
ask them to sustain dialogue and continue to explore
opportunities for cooperation to fulfil our shared
aspirations. It is for that reason that, as our friends are
aware, the Philippines has been calling for the use of
settlement mechanisms anchored in international law,
such as arbitration, to bring disputes to a final and
enduring resolution. We are confident that those true
to the ideals of the United Nations will understand
and support this advocacy by the Philippines. We also
reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s call
on States parties to UNCLOS to clearly define and
publicize the limits of their respective maritime zones,
so that other States parties will have greater certainty
regarding their maritime spaces and thus avoid disputes.
In closing, we reiterate the call for all States that
have not yet done so to ratify UNCLOS and contribute
to its universality. UNCLOS has stood the test of time,
anchoring the rule of law governing the rights and

14-68215

09/12/2014

responsibilities of nations in their use of the world’s
oceans. UNCLOS allows for an environment of peace
and security to flourish in our maritime spaces.
Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): I would like at the outset
to thank the Secretariat, including the able staff of
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea, for the valuable assistance provided to Member
States through the preparation of reports and all
other activities. I would also like to thank the two
coordinators, Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad
and Tobago and Ms. Alice Revell of New Zealand, for
conducting the informal consultations on the two draft
resolutions before us, on oceans and the law of the sea
(A/69/L.29) and sustainable fisheries (A/69/L.30).
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea is a fundamental pillar of Iceland’s oceans policy.
The Convention, the first and only comprehensive
treaty in this field, provides the legal framework for all
uses of the oceans and their superjacent air space and
subjacent seabed and subsoil. It is imperative that the
Convention be fully implemented and that its integrity
be preserved, and we call on those States that have not
yet done so to ratify the Convention in order to fully
achieve the goal of universal participation.
The three institutions established by the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea play a
very important role in the implementation of the
Convention, and we note with satisfaction that they are
all functioning well and are more active in their work
than ever before.
I would like to mention in particular the Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, which has already
received 75 submissions from coastal States, including
Iceland, regarding the establishment of the outer limits
of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles. The
Commission has issued 21 recommendations to coastal
States thus far. The Commission thus has a considerable
workload, and it is imperative that everything be done
to ensure that its working conditions are satisfactory.
Accordingly, Iceland calls on States to work together
to improve the conditions of service of the members
of the Commission. It should be recalled that the
recommendations of the Commission carry particular
weight, as they form the basis for the establishment of
final and binding outer limits for the continental shelf
by coastal States.
We are pleased to note the decision contained in
the draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea to

A/69/PV.67

authorize the Secretary-General, as an interim measure
and subject to conditions, to reimburse members
of the Commission from developing States for the
costs of medical travel insurance from the trust fund
established pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose
of facilitating the participation of members of the
Commission from developing States in the meetings of
the Commission. We also welcome the request to the
Secretary-General to provide written information on
options for mechanisms to provide medical insurance
coverage to members of the Commission, including
costs.
Iceland furthermore welcomes the request that
the Secretary-General provide, in consultation with
the Commission and before the end of April 2015,
written information on options for providing additional
working space to the Division for Ocean Affairs and the
Law of the Sea in order to ensure that the members of
the Commission have sufficient working space during
their work at the sessions of the Commission and its
subcommissions.
A key issue that we are currently dealing with
within the field of oceans and the law of the sea is the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. That
issue, as such, is extremely broad in scope, as it includes
basically all marine life in the water column beyond the
exclusive economic zone and on the seabed beyond the
continental shelf.
Therefore, before a decision is taken to develop a
possible implementing agreement under the Convention,
it is imperative to define the scope of a possible
agreement in order to ensure predictability and success.
We welcome the constructive exchange of views at the
first and second meetings of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, but at
the same time emphasize the need to make progress on
the definition of the scope of a possible agreement.
In the view of Iceland, if the development of an
agreement will indeed be considered feasible, focus
should be placed on the issue of the sharing of benefits
from the exploitation of marine genetic resources in
areas beyond national jurisdiction. Since the negotiation
of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, there has
been a huge development in the knowledge of the deep
seabed and the value of marine genetic resources. It is,

14-682153/19

A/69/PV.67

therefore, natural that the Working Group focus on this
issue.
In contrast, care should be taken not to reopen issues
that are already subject to a sufficient international
legal regime. A good example of such an issue is high
seas fisheries, which are subject to the legal regime
of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, which was
complemented by the 1995 Fish Stocks Agreement.
That Agreement provides the legal framework for the
work of regional fisheries management organizations
and for high seas fisheries. The scope of a possible new
instrument should, therefore, not include fisheries.
The sustainable use of living marine resources is
at the core of Iceland’s oceans policy, and we strongly
advocate the same principle in all international
forums. Iceland, being an island State located in the
middle of the North Atlantic Ocean, cannot sustain
its people’s livelihood without healthy oceans, marine
ecosystems and resources. We emphasize that texts on
any controversial issues must be balanced to take into
account different views of States and be in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
Iceland endorses the reaffirmation, contained in
the draft resolution on sustainable fisheries, of the
importance of the long-term conservation, management
and sustainable use of the living marine resources of the
world’s oceans and seas and the obligations of States to
cooperate to this end, in accordance with international
law, in particular the Convention on the Law of the Sea
and, where applicable, the 1995 Fish Stocks Agreement.
We look forward to commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the 1995 Fish Stocks
Agreement next year and welcome its recent ratification
by the Philippines, bringing the total number of States
parties to the Agreement to 82. We strongly encourage
those States that have not yet done so to use the occasion
of the commemoration next year to ratify this important
treaty.
Mr. Shihab (Maldives): My delegation is grateful
for this annual opportunity to express our thoughts
on oceans, fisheries and the law of the sea. At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank Ambassador
Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago and Ms. Alice
Revell of New Zealand for ably guiding us through
the respective informal consultations on the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/69/L.29)
and sustainable fisheries (A/69/L.30).

4/19

09/12/2014

Maldives is an archipelago of 1,200 small islands.
The ocean is intrinsically linked with our daily
livelihoods and forms the basis of our economy. Our
traditional pole and line fisheries contribute crucially
to our economy, providing jobs, healthy food and our
cultural identity. Our oceans have been and continue to be
an important transport corridor connecting my country
to the global market. Oceans and the biodiversity they
harbour also fuel our tourism industry. The beauty and
the richness of our oceans draw visitors from all over the
world. In fact, the success of our tourism industry was
a key contributing factor in our graduation to the status
of middle-income country in 2011. Maldives’ example
shows clearly that integrated oceans management is
key to the successful development path of small island
developing States (SIDS).
The Maldives is committed to the negotiations
on oceans and the law of the sea and fisheries. We
believe outcomes related to the oceans are inherently
multilateral and must be deliberated among the
international community. Ocean currents carry water
masses and anything in them across borders. Fish
stocks and other marine organisms migrate over them.
Therefore, the conservation and sustainable use of
oceans, fish stocks and other resources also need to be
discussed at an international level, providing the legal
framework, such as the legal regime reflected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
My delegation is pleased to see the vital debate
happening more frequently. Oceans and fisheries were
strongly reflected in “The future we want” (resolution
66/288, annex). Together with others we raised a loud
and clear voice for a stand-alone goal on oceans in the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals. Just a year ago the question still was, will there
be a sustainable development goal on the oceans and
seas? Now we are delighted to see the goal is settled
firmly at the core of the proposal.
The sustainable use of oceans entails different
methods for different species, taking into account
that, due to their biology and characteristics, they
require special caution. Recognizing this principle, the
Maldives says, “ban the fish of certain species groups,
such as sharks”, because we are convinced that this is
the best way of ensuring their continued survival and
their vital contributions to the health of our ecosystems
and economy.
We, as an international community, can build on
the common understanding that conservation and the
14-68215

09/12/2014

A/69/PV.67

sustainable use of our marine resources will enable
the largest and long-lasting development gain for all of
us. We need to eliminate destructive fishing practices
which throw fish stocks to their maximum sustainable
yield and reverse biodiversity loss in the oceans. The
Maldives calls upon all Member States to renew their
political commitment to finding an urgent solution for
biodiversity loss.

international law. It enjoys widespread acceptance,
with 166 States being parties to it at present. The
Convention provides the legal framework for the use
of oceans and seas and their resources by establishing
a delicate balance between the need for economic and
social development and the need to protect and preserve
the marine environment and conserve and manage its
resources.

The Maldives believes there is a need for further
commitment by States in enforcing regional agreements
on the management of the oceans’ resources. This
could provide more capacity to regional fisheries
management organizations and make them better
equipped in ensuring the sustainable management of our
oceans. We also need to abolish subsidies to maintain
large long-distance fishing fleets, contributing to the
problem of overcapacity, overfishing and illegal and
unreported and unregulated fishing. These subsidies
are not only environmentally unsustainable and morally
questionable, they are also economically unprofitable.

The oceans cover almost three quarters of the Earth.
As States look to ocean resources as a means to economic
growth and social advancement, the development of
an ocean-based economy is attracting more attention.
Over the past 20 years, the Convention has contributed
pre-eminently to the sustainable development of the
oceans and seas and to the promotion of the economic
and social advancement of all peoples of the world.
This proves that, as reflected in the document “The
future we want” (resolution 66/288, annex), oceans
and seas have a critical role to play in the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals and the post2015 development agenda. However, we must bear in
mind that to realize the full potential of oceans and
seas, ocean-based activities must be carried out in a
sustainable manner, in accordance with internationally
agreed principles, in particular the principles contained
in the Convention.

The protection and sustainable use of marine
resources for SIDS like the Maldives represents a key
part of our sustainable development. The protection and
sustainable use of marine resources requires scientific
expertise, the collection of data and good monitoring
systems. Small island developing States have been the
custodians of oceans and could fulfil this role even
better with improved capacity and technology transfer
in this regard. Oceans are the centre and the source of
life for all of us — life that we all need to protect.
Mr. Rao (India): At the outset, I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting, and I also thank the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago and
the representative of New Zealand for coordinating
the informal meetings and consultations on the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/69/L.29)
and on sustainable fisheries (A/69/L.30).
The agenda item “Oceans and the Law of the
sea” is a subject of importance and interest for the
whole international community. This year marked the
twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
concluded in 1982, which is the constitution for the
Oceans, and I take this opportunity to congratulate all
for that.
The Convention, together with the related
Agreements, represents a major achievement in
the codification and progressive development of

Our oceans face huge challenges, including the
deterioration of the marine environment, the loss of
biodiversity, climate change, illegal fishing practices
and others relating to maritime safety and security,
including acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea. Acts
of piracy and armed robbery at sea, committed in any
part of the world, pose a grave threat to maritime trade
and the security of shipping. Piracy endangers the lives
of seafarers, affects national security and territorial
integrity, and hampers the economic development of
nations. We appreciate the work of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia in containing piracy
through international cooperation and coordination.
India has actively participated in international efforts
to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea. We are
gratified that these efforts are yielding results.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/69/71) and the addendum thereto (A/69/71/Add.1)
on issues concerning oceans and the law of the sea.
We welcome the report (A/69/90) of the co-Chairs of
the fifteenth meeting of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and
the Law of the Sea, in which deliberations focused on

14-682155/19

A/69/PV.67

the topic “The role of seafood in global food security”.
As fisheries are the principal source of seafood, the
participants recognized their importance for global
food security and their nutritional value for human
beings.
The increasing levels of pollution in the marine
environment and illegal and disruptive fishing practices
are serious concerns, as they pose threats to healthy
fisheries and their management. We stress the need to
devise improved methods of harvesting living marine
resources to help combat illegal and disruptive fishing
and to ensure the healthy, safe and sustainable fisheries
required to enhance global food security.
We welcome the report (A/69/77) of the co-Chairs
of the meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole on the Regular Process for Global Reporting
and Assessment of the State of Marine Environment,
including socioeconomic aspects. We commend the
efforts made towards materializing the first global
integrated assessment of the state of the marine
environment. We are pleased to inform the Assembly
in this regard that the Government of India hosted a
workshop in support of the Regular Process under the
auspices of the United Nations in the city of Chennai
in the last week of January 2014, which was duly taken
note of by draft resolution A/69/L.29, which we hope
will be adopted today.
Another area in which the international community
is engaged relates to the study of issues concerning the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction. The
Working Group established by the General Assembly
held two meetings, in the months of April and
June this year, wherein discussion focused on the
scope, parametres and feasibility of an international
instrument under the Convention on the Law of the
Sea Convention, of 1982, on the issues of conservation
and the sustainable use of marine biological diversity
beyond areas of national jurisdiction. As differences of
opinion surfaced due to the complexity of the issues
and interests involved, in our view it is appropriate to
follow the principles contained in the Convention and
to take a cautious approach by avoiding hasty decisions
without full scientific knowledge regarding relevant
factors.
The smooth functioning of the institutions
established under the Convention — namely the
International Seabed Authority, the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the Commission
6/19

09/12/2014

on the Limits of the Continental Shelf — hold the
key to the proper implementation of the provisions of
the Convention and to the realization of the desired
benefits of the uses of the sea. We therefore support
all efforts towards ensuring their smooth functioning,
and note with satisfaction the progress made by these
institutions in their respective areas. As a country
with a vast coastline and numerous islands, India has a
traditional and abiding interest in maritime and ocean
affairs and assures its full cooperation in efforts towards
ensuring the proper management and sustainable use
of the oceans and seas as a responsible partner of the
international community.
Finally, we thank both the coordinators for
having successfully conducted the consultations
on the draft resolutions on “Oceans and the law of
the sea” and “Sustainable fisheries”. We appreciate
the value addition of various paragraphs of draft
resolution A/69/L.29, in particular those relating to
medical insurance for the members of Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf belonging to
developing countries. We support the adoption of the
draft resolutions. We thank the staff of the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Secretariat
for their professionalism.
Ms. Tan (Singapore): My delegation is pleased
to address the General Assembly on agenda item
74, “Oceans and the law of the sea”. We thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive reports on
this agenda item (A/69/71). We would also like to thank
Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago and
Ms. Alice Revell of New Zealand for their excellent
work in coordinating the informal consultations on the
draft omnibus resolution on oceans and the law of the
sea (A/69/L.29) and the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries (A/69/L.30), respectively. We also wish to
record our appreciation to the Director and the staff of
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
for their assistance and support on these drafts.
On 16 November this year, the international
community commemorated the twentieth anniversary
of the entry into force of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Singapore is grateful
that one of our very own, Ambassador Tommy Koh,
was accorded the honour and privilege of presiding
over the third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea, from 1980 to 1982 — the process which
gave birth to this constitution of the oceans, which
has stood the test of time. Over the past 20 years, the

14-68215

09/12/2014

vital contribution of UNCLOS to the maintenance
and strengthening of peace, security, cooperation and
friendly relations among all nations has been widely
and repeatedly recognized. This achievement is owing
to and reflective of, among other things, the careful
balance that was struck in UNCLOS of the competing
uses of the oceans and seas. My delegation is firmly
of the view that the contributions and the importance
of UNCLOS will only continue to grow in the years to
come.
In this regard, we echo the call in the draft omnibus
resolution for States that have not done so to become
parties to UNCLOS in order to fully achieve the goal
of universal participation. As it stands, UNCLOS, with
its 166 States parties, enjoys near universal acceptance.
Furthermore, even States that have yet to become
parties also recognize much of UNCLOS as reflecting
customary international law. Indeed, UNCLOS has
been recognized as setting out the legal framework
within which all activities in the oceans and seas must
be carried out and it remains the overarching framework
for the governance of the world’s oceans and seas.
This year also marks the twentieth anniversary
of the establishment of the International Seabed
Authority (ISA), one of the three institutions created
by UNCLOS. Singapore commends the work that the
ISA has done in establishing a deep seabed mining
regime. As a newly elected member of the ISA Council,
Singapore firmly believes that we will be able to
contribute constructively to the Council as it works to
establish policies to safeguard the common heritage
of humankind. Singapore values the contributions
of all the ISA member States and therefore urge that
all members continue to participate actively in the
meetings organized by the ISA secretariat.
On the issue of sustainable development, my
delegation notes that the oceans and seas form an
essential component of the Earth’s ecosystem and are
critical to sustainable development. The sustainable
use of oceans and seas, and of their resources, is
particularly pertinent in the light of its contribution to
poverty eradication, sustained economic growth and
food security, at the same time as protecting marine
biodiversity and addressing the impacts of climate
change. We are also mindful that the full development
potential of the oceans and seas can be realized only
when ocean-based activities are carried out in a
sustainable manner. In this regard, we are heartened
to note that the Open Working Group on Sustainable

A/69/PV.67

Development Goals established by the General
Assembly considered the issue of oceans and seas
and proposed a goal to conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development. Accordingly, we are very supportive of,
and look forward to contributing constructively to, the
development of the post-2015 development agenda on
this issue.
On a related note, my delegation followed with great
interest the exchange of views that took place at the
first and second meetings of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Informal Working Group on issues concerning marine
biodiversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, which
were convened in April and June. We look forward to
the next meeting, to be held in January 2015. In this
regard, my delegation affirms the view that UNCLOS
must remain the overarching framework for discussions
on this issue. The principles, rights and duties enshrined
within UNCLOS continue to be relevant, and any future
work in this area should not contradict or undermine
UNCLOS. In addition, the principles and provisions in
UNCLOS should not be applied selectively, but viewed
in a holistic manner.
Singapore’s long-standing commitment to the
law of the sea is well known. We are a small island
developing State with significant maritime interests.
We are also one of the three littoral States bordering
the Straits of Malacca and Singapore. These Straits are
a major international shipping route of long-standing
importance. Today, approximately 90 per cent of global
trade is carried by sea, about half of which passes
through these Straits. It is therefore in our common
interest that adherence to the principles, rights and
duties under UNCLOS, which include those relating to
navigation and passage, continue.
At the time UNCLOS entered into force, it
represented, in many ways, a new global order for the
oceans and seas. Beyond the achievements marked
by its inception, we have, over the past 20 years,
also witnessed first-hand the continued successes of
UNCLOS in maintaining and strengthening a peaceful
order in the world’s oceans and seas. Singapore is
committed to ensuring the continued maintenance of
this peaceful order, and it is our firm belief that this can
only be achieved by continuing to respect and maintain
the integrity of UNCLOS.
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): At the
outset, I thank the President of the General Assembly
for having convened this very important debate on

14-682157/19

A/69/PV.67

agenda item 74, concerning the oceans and the law
of the sea and sustainable fisheries. In this context,
the importance of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea as the multilevel framework to
which the vast majority of States subscribes cannot be
overemphasized. Issues such as global warming, the
pollution of oceans and seas, rising sea levels, ocean
acidification and fish stock depletion threaten not only
the lives of millions, but also the existence of many
low-lying States. Pakistan therefore attaches great
importance to United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and its effective implementation. We fully agree
that the human, institutional and systemic capacity for
the sustainable management of the marine environment
and marine resources hold the key to unlocking the
benefits of seafood for global food security.
My delegation would like to thank the co-Chairs of
the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea for providing
a summary of its fifteenth meeting to the General
Assembly, contained in document A/69/90, of 6 June
2014. Pakistan takes note of the report submitted by
the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 68/70
(A/69/71). We also note with concern that the backlog
of cases before the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf has continued to increase. In this
regard, we support the measures aimed at providing
the requisite professional and technical support to
the Commission and its members in fulfilling their
important responsibilities.
Ensuring maritime security is also vital to the
international shipping industry. Since almost 90 per
cent of global trade takes place through international
shipping, secure and tranquil shipping routes are
essential to our progress and development. With this
in view, Pakistan plays an active role in the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and greatly
appreciates its role in containing piracy through
international cooperation and coordination. As the
Secretary-General reports, the reduction of 12 per cent
in armed robbery and piracy at sea in 2013, primarily
owing to a reduction in piracy off the coast of Somalia,
gives us all reason to be optimistic.
Pakistan believes in the need effectively to address
the gaps in the implementation of the provisions of the
Convention relating to the transfer of technology and
capacity-building. It is crucial to enable developing
countries to access and benefit from the sustainable
use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national

8/19

09/12/2014

jurisdiction, including genetic resources. Pakistan
firmly believes that the genetic resources of the
seabed and ocean floor beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction are a common heritage of humankind to be
explored and exploited for the benefit of all of humanity.
Pakistan looks forward to the January meeting of the
Open-ended Working Group to make further progress
on the issue.
Before I conclude, my delegation would like to
thank the coordinators for their tireless efforts in
undertaking extensive consultations on the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/69/L.29)
and sustainable fisheries (A/69/L.30). Let me reaffirm
Pakistan’s continued support for and cooperation with
the International Seabed Authority, the Commission on
the Limits of the Continental Shelf and the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, the three institutions
established under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
year we have solemnly commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of the entry into force of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and taken
stock of the achievements made in the past 20 years
since the Convention came into force. The Convention
provides an important guarantee for maintaining the
just and reasonable international maritime order. China
will work with other countries to push forward the
building of harmonious seas and oceans, promote the
peace, security and openness of the oceans, balance the
scientific preservation and rational utilization of the
oceans on the basis of international law, including the
Convention, so as to realize the common development,
mutual benefit and win-win interaction of all members
of the international community.
The Chinese delegation actively participated in the
consultations regarding the draft resolutions on oceans
and the law of sea (A/69/L.29) and sustainable fisheries
(A/69/L.30). Here, I wish to thank Ambassador Eden
Charles of Trinidad and Tobago and Ms. Alice Revell of
New Zealand for their contributions as the facilitators
of the consultations on the two draft resolutions.
I wish to take this opportunity to elaborate on the
position and propositions of the Chinese delegation on
the relevant issues concerning oceans and the law of
the sea.
First, the Chinese Government attaches great
importance to the work of the Commission on the Limits

14-68215

09/12/2014

of the Continental Shelf and positively evaluates the
diligent efforts and results of the work of the members
of the Commission. China supports the Commission
fulfilling its mandate strictly in accordance with
the Convention and its own rules of procedure in
order to ensure the quality and professionalism of its
consideration of submissions and appreciates the positive
contributions made by the Commission to a balanced
handling of the legitimate rights and interests of coastal
States as well as the overall interests of the international
community. In view of the increasingly heavy workload
of the Commission, the Chinese delegation calls on all
parties to continue to promote the improvement of the
working conditions of the Commission and address
issues such as that concerning medical insurance for
Commission members so as to help the Commission
to smoothly fulfil its responsibilities. This year, China
once again contributed $20,000 to the relevant trust
fund to help members of developing countries attend
the meetings of the Commission.
Secondly, the Chinese delegation congratulates the
International Seabed Authority on its achievements
over the past year. Among them, in particular, are the
holding of a commemorative meeting on the twentieth
anniversary of the Authority and the approval of seven
applications for mining areas on the international
seabed, which reflects the dynamic activities taking
place on the international seabed. China supports
the secretariat of the Authority in its continued
effort to use questionnaires and seminars to seek the
views of as many stakeholders as possible, including
contractors, during the process of preparing the draft
regulatory regime for the exploitation of resources
on the international seabed. As a developing country,
China attaches great importance to the effective and
comprehensive participation of developing countries
in affairs concerning the international seabed and has
provided help within our capacity. This year China
made another contribution of $20,000 to the Voluntary
Trust Fund of the Authority to finance the participation
of members from developing countries in meetings of
the legal and technical committee and the financial
committee of the Authority.
Thirdly, the Chinese delegation takes note of the
increasing caseload of the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea and the ever-wider fields the cases cover.
China values and supports the important role that the
Tribunal continues to play in the peaceful settlement
of maritime disputes, the maintenance of international

A/69/PV.67

maritime order and the dissemination of the law of the
sea. China appreciates the Tribunal’s positive role in
helping developing countries with capacity-building.
China is concerned about the first-ever case of a request
for an advisory opinion of the full bench of the Tribunal
and has submitted its written statement in this context.
China is of the view that neither the Convention nor the
Statute of the Tribunal endows the Tribunal with fullbench advice jurisdiction, and hopes that the Tribunal
will give full consideration to the concerns of all parties
and approach the relevant case with caution.
Fourthly, the international community attaches
great importance to the preservation and sustainable
use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction. The Chinese delegation believes that as
high seas and international areas of the seabed involve
the common interests of the international community as
a whole, a proper approach to marine biodiversity in the
above areas is of great significance to the maintenance
of a just and reasonable international maritime order.
Relevant activities should proceed in an orderly and
progressive manner so as to fully accommodate the
need of all countries, in particular developing countries,
for reasonable use of marine resources.
Fifthly, the Chinese delegation is pleased to note
that the institutional framework of the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of
the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects, has been established and that the draft
version of the first integrated assessment report will
soon be completed. China nominated an expert to the
drafting group, who actively participated in its work.
China stands ready to make further efforts in this
regard. China attaches great importance to the smooth
proceeding of the work of the Regular Process, and
plays its due role therein. China supports enhancing the
capacity-building of the Division for Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea as the secretariat of the Process.
Lastly, as a responsible fishing nation, China takes
an active part in the work of various international fishery
organizations and commits itself to the strengthening of
the conservation and management of fishery resources.
The Chinese Government will continue to work with
the countries concerned to promote the development
and refinement of the international fisheries regime,
regulate fishing activities, and make active efforts
to achieve the sustainable use of marine biological
resources, conserve the marine ecobalance, and ensure
the sharing of fishery benefits by all countries.

14-682159/19

A/69/PV.67

China staunchly defends and promotes the
international maritime rule of law and the peaceful
settlement of maritime disputes. The Chinese
Government consistently follows an independent foreign
policy of peace. We maintain that maritime disputes
should be resolved peacefully in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of the Convention and that
the lawful rights of countries to independently choose
means to peaceful settlement should be respected.
Before the relevant issues are completely resolved,
the parties concerned should engage in dialogue and
seek cooperation so as to jointly safeguard the peace
and stability of marine areas involved. China looks
forward to further strengthening cooperation with all
countries so as to address challenges together, share the
opportunities and wealth provided by the oceans and
seas and jointly seek sustainable maritime development.
We will work for the building of harmonious oceans
and seas so that they will forever benefit humankind.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 51/204,
of 17 December 1996, I now call on Mr. Vladimir
Golitsyn, President of the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea.
Mr. Golitsyn (International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea): On behalf of the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea, I wish to express my appreciation
for the opportunity given to me to address this sixtyninth session of the General Assembly on the occasion
of its annual examination of the agenda item entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”.
I will first make a few remarks relating to the
organization of the Tribunal then take this opportunity
to elaborate on the role the Tribunal plays under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
With regard to organizational matters, I would note
that on 11 June the Meeting of States Parties elected
seven judges to the Tribunal for a term of nine years.
Five judges of the Tribunal have been re-elected:
Albert Hoffmann, of South Africa; James Kateka, of
the United Republic of Tanzania; Jin-Hyun Paik, of
the Republic of Korea; Stanislaw Pawlak, of Poland;
and Shunji Yanai, of Japan. The newly elected judges
are Alonso Gómez-Robledo Verduzco, of Mexico,
and Tomas Heidar, of Iceland. I would also note that,
on 30 September 2014, my predecessor, Judge Shunji
Yanai, completed his three-year term as President of the

10/19

09/12/2014

Tribunal. On 1 October 2014, I was elected President
of the Tribunal for a three-year term, and the Tribunal
elected Judge Boualem Bouguetaia Vice-President and
Judge José Luis Jesus President of the Seabed Disputes
Chamber.
I now wish to make a few remarks on the Tribunal’s
role under the Convention. First, it should be underlined
that the Tribunal has an important role in the disputesettlement system established by the Convention.
I wish to express my appreciation for the continued
efforts made by the General Assembly to encourage
States parties to the Convention that have not yet done
so to consider making a written declaration, choosing
from the means set out in Article 287 of the Convention.
Let me emphasize that, regardless of whether the
parties to a dispute have made a declaration under
article 287 or what choice they may have expressed
in any such declaration, they may at any time agree to
submit the dispute to their preferred dispute settlement
body, including the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea. The latest case decided by the Tribunal,
a dispute between the Republic of Panama and the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau concerning the oil tanker
M/V Virginia G, was submitted pursuant to such a
special agreement concluded between the parties, in
which they agreed to bring the case before the Tribunal
after Panama had instituted arbitration proceedings.
This procedure is perfectly in line with Article 280
of the Convention, which safeguards the parties’ right
to agree at any time to settle a dispute between them
concerning the interpretation or application of this
Convention by any peaceful means of their own choice.
In the M/V Virginia G case, Panama claimed
compensation for what it claimed to be the illegal
arrest by the Guinea-Bissau authorities of the vessel
M/V Virginia G, flying the flag of Panama. The arrest
took place in the exclusive economic zone of GuineaBissau on the alleged ground that the vessel, without
proper authorization and therefore in contravention
of Guinea-Bissau’s laws, was conducting refuelling
operations for foreign fishing vessels. In the parlance
of commercial shipping, this is commonly referred to
as “bunkering”. The vessel, together with the gas-oil
it carried, was later confiscated by the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau.
The Tribunal was faced with a number of questions
in this complex case. Given the time constraints, I will
confine myself to two issues: first, the question of the

14-68215

09/12/2014

existence of a genuine link; and secondly, the question
of the legal characterization of bunkering of foreign
vessels in the exclusive economic zone of a third State.
As regards the existence of a genuine link between
a flag State and a ship flying its flag, it may be observed
that such a link is required under Article 91, paragraph
1, of the Convention. In its judgment, the Tribunal stated
that the genuine-link requirement should not be read as
establishing prerequisites or conditions to be satisfied
for the exercise of the right of the flag State to grant
its nationality to ships. The Tribunal added that, under
article 94 of the Convention, the flag State is required
to exercise effective jurisdiction and control over that
ship in order to ensure that it operates in accordance
with generally accepted international regulations,
procedures and practices. This is the meaning of the
genuine-link concept.
In the M/V Virginia G case, the key legal issue was
that of bunkering in the exclusive economic zone and
its regulation. This question had not yet been decided
upon in international adjudication. Moreover, the
Convention contains no provision dealing explicitly
with bunkering. In fact, the practice of bunkering
emerged subsequent to the adoption of the Convention
and was therefore not explicitly addressed therein. As a
consequence, the Tribunal was required to interpret the
Convention on this question.
The Tribunal analysed the Convention articles on
the sovereign rights of coastal States in their exclusive
economic zones and reviewed relevant State practice. It
came to the view that the regulation by a coastal State
of bunkering of foreign vessels fishing in its exclusive
economic zone is among those measures which the
coastal State may take in its exclusive economic zone to
conserve and manage its living resources under article
56 of the Convention read together with paragraph 4
of article 62 of the Convention. It further noted that
this view was also confirmed by State practice that had
developed since the adoption of the Convention. The
Tribunal thus concluded that the bunkering of foreign
vessels engaged in fishing in the exclusive economic
zone is an activity which may be regulated by the
coastal State concerned. The coastal State, however,
does not have such competence with regard to other
bunkering activities, unless otherwise determined in
accordance with the Convention.
While the Tribunal found, on this basis, that the
bunkering operations conducted by the M/V Virginia
G were in violation of rules of the coastal State, it also

A/69/PV.67

held that the sanction imposed by Guinea-Bissau for
this violation — the confiscation of the vessel and its
cargo — was not reasonable in the light of the particular
circumstances of the case. The Tribunal thus found the
confiscation of the M/V Virginia G to be in violation
of paragraph 1 of article 73 of the Convention, which
requires that any enforcement measures taken must
be necessary to ensure compliance with the laws and
regulations adopted by the coastal State. Ultimately,
this finding led to a holding that Panama was entitled
to reparation for damage suffered by it as a result of the
confiscation of the vessel and its cargo. The Tribunal did
however not uphold all claims for damages submitted
by Panama in this regard.
In making the above brief remarks on the
M/V Virginia G case, I intended to show that it is the role
of the Tribunal in exercising its contentious jurisdiction
and adjudicating cases to contribute to the development
of international law and, in particular, the international
law of the sea. Other examples of important contributions
made by the Tribunal can be found in previous cases.
I will confine myself to enumerating a few of these. I
will refer first to the Tribunal’s definition of the term
“vessel” or “ship” in the M/V Saiga (No. 2) Case, and
in particular to the jurisprudence originating in it,
according to which a ship has to be considered a “unit”,
including everything on it and every person involved
or interested in its operations, regardless of their
nationality. This jurisprudence has found widespread
acceptance in the law-of-the-sea community.
I will also briefly mention some of the important
findings the Tribunal made in its first delimitation
case, the case between Bangladesh and Myanmar
concerning delimitation of the maritime boundary in
the Bay of Bengal. In this case, the Tribunal, for the
first time in international adjudication, ruled on the
delimitation between two parties of their continental
shelf beyond 200 nautical miles. In this context, the
Tribunal provided clarification of the notion of natural
prolongation in article 76 of the Convention. The
Tribunal found that a State’s entitlement to a continental
shelf beyond 200 nautical miles should be determined
by reference to the outer edge of the continental margin
and that natural prolongation should not constitute a
separate and independent criterion a coastal State must
satisfy.
The case between Bangladesh and Myanmar is also
noteworthy in that it is the first case in international
adjudication in which a decision has been adopted on

14-6821511/19

A/69/PV.67

the issue of a “grey zone”. Such a zone occurs when
a delimitation line which is not an equidistance line
reaches the outer limit of one State’s exclusive economic
zone and continues beyond it in the same direction, until
it reaches the outer limit of the other State’s exclusive
economic zone. The immediate consequence is that,
in a grey zone, one State has sovereign rights over
the continental shelf and the other State has sovereign
rights over the exclusive economic zone. The Tribunal
held that each coastal State must exercise its rights
and perform its duties with due regard to the rights
and duties of the other and that there are many ways
in which the parties may ensure the discharge of their
obligations in this respect, including the conclusion of
specific agreements or the establishment of appropriate
cooperative arrangements.
The Tribunal’s contributions to the development of
international law and the law of the sea are not limited
to its judgments on the merits in contentious cases. As
the Assembly is well aware, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
encompasses a number of other procedures, such as
requests for the prescription of provisional measures,
for the prompt release of vessels and crews, and for
advisory opinions. In cases submitted under these
procedures the Tribunal has had occasion to make
important pronouncements on a number of legal issues.
The Tribunal, when seized of a case on the merits,
may prescribe provisional measures pending a final
decision in the case. The Tribunal may also be requested
to prescribe provisional measures when a case on the
merits is submitted to arbitration under annex VII to
the Convention. In these circumstances, the Tribunal
may prescribe provisional measures pending the
constitution of the arbitral tribunal if it considers that
prima facie the arbitral tribunal would have jurisdiction
and that the urgency of the situation so requires.
The procedure for the prescription of provisional
measures under the Convention has already been
invoked in several cases before the Tribunal, the
majority of which dealt with protecting the marine
environment. In those cases, the Tribunal emphasized
that States are under a duty to cooperate, and it declared
this duty to be a fundamental principle in the prevention
of pollution of the marine environment under the
Convention and in general international law. Equally,
the Tribunal consistently highlighted the obligation of
States to act with prudence and caution in situations in
which the protection of the marine environment is at

12/19

09/12/2014

stake, which, in fact, is equivalent to acting by applying
a precautionary approach.
Another procedure available before the Tribunal is
that in what are referred to as prompt-release proceedings.
Pursuant to several provisions of the Convention,
a State which has detained a ship flying the flag of
another State for certain categories of offences — in
respect of fishery or pollution offences — is obliged to
release the vessel and/or its crew upon the posting of a
reasonable bond or other financial security. Whenever
it is alleged that the detaining State has not complied
with these provisions, the flag State of the vessel or
a person acting on its behalf is entitled, under article
292 of the Convention, to submit an application to the
Tribunal for the release of the vessel and its crew.
The Tribunal’s jurisdiction is certainly not limited
to contentious cases. As the Assembly is aware, the
Tribunal can also exercise advisory functions, pursuant
to article 21 of its Statute. Under this provision,
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction comprises all matters
specifically provided for in any other agreement which
confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal. For a request for
an advisory opinion to be validly submitted to the
Tribunal, the procedural requisites stipulated in article
138 of its rules need to be fulfilled. The Tribunal’s
Seabed Disputes Chamber, which is an integral part
of the Tribunal, can give advisory opinions. It can do
so at the request of the Assembly or the Council of
the International Seabed Authority on legal questions
arising within the scope of their activities and on the
conformity with the Convention of a proposal before
the Assembly on any matter.
The Seabed Disputes Chamber delivered its first
advisory opinion in 2011 in response to a request from
the Council of the Authority. The opinion deals with
the responsibilities and obligations of States sponsoring
persons and entities with respect to activities in the
Area. The advisory opinion provided the opportunity
for the Chamber to explain in more detail the meaning
of a number of key legal terms. The Chamber clarified
the notion of “obligation to ensure”, defining it as
“an obligation to deploy adequate means, to exercise
best possible efforts, to do the utmost” and as an
obligation “of conduct” and not “of result”. Similarly,
the Chamber clarified the content of an “obligation of
due diligence”. In this respect, it observed that “due
diligence” is a variable concept, which may change over
time, as measures considered sufficiently diligent at a
certain moment may become not diligent enough in the

14-68215

09/12/2014

light, for instance, of new scientific or technological
knowledge. It may also change in relation to the risks
involved in the activity.
The Chamber also addressed a long-debated
international legal issue, the status of the precautionary
approach. The Chamber observed that the precautionary
approach had been incorporated into a growing number
of international treaties and other instruments, many of
which reflected the formulation of Principle 15 of the
Rio Declaration. This observation led the Chamber to
the view that this had initiated a trend towards making
this approach part of customary international law.
Another request for an advisory opinion is now
pending before the Tribunal. It concerns questions
relating to illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing activities and was submitted in March
2013 by the Subregional Fisheries Commission, an
intergovernmental organization comprised of seven
West African States. The issue of illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing is of great concern to the
international community. Therefore, it is no surprise
that the proceedings in this case have attracted
considerable interest. A large number of States and
intergovernmental organizations submitted statements
to the Tribunal during the course of the written and
oral proceedings. It is expected that the Tribunal will
deliver its advisory opinion in the spring of 2015.
I have highlighted some of the contributions the
Tribunal has made since its inception to the development
and advancement of international law and the peaceful
settlement of disputes through the exercise of its
contentious and advisory functions. I wish to emphasize
that the Tribunal is also firmly committed to advancing
the idea of peaceful dispute settlement through other
means, in particular by disseminating information
and conducting capacity-building programmes. The
Tribunal therefore continues its series of regional
workshops intended to provide national experts
with practical information on the dispute-settlement
procedures available before the Tribunal. The tenth
workshop in this series, in which representatives
from seven African countries participated, was held
by the Tribunal in Nairobi in cooperation with the
Government of Kenya and the Korea Maritime Institute
in August 2014. I would like to take this opportunity to
extend my sincere thanks to the Government of Kenya
and the Korea Maritime Institute for their support in
organizing this event.

A/69/PV.67

The Tribunal also runs capacity-building
programmes on its premises in Hamburg. Each year,
the internship programme provides interns with the
opportunity to work at the Tribunal for three months
and to gain deeper insight into the role and functioning
of the Tribunal. Interns from developing States receive
financial assistance from special trust funds established
with generous support from the China Institute of
International Studies and the Korea Maritime Institute.
I wish to express my sincere gratitude to both institutes
for this.
A second programme offered by the Tribunal is the
capacity-building and nine-month training programme
on dispute settlement under the Convention, which
has been organized in cooperation with the Nippon
Foundation since 2007. Again, I wish to extend my
gratitude to the Nippon Foundation for its continued
generosity. The seven participants in the 2014-2015
session hail from Albania, Cambodia, the Republic
of the Congo, Madagascar, Mexico, Ukraine and Viet
Nam.
Finally, this year the Tribunal also hosted the eighth
Summer Academy of the International Foundation for
the Law of the Sea. A record 41 participants from 33
countries took part.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General, the Legal
Counsel and the Division for Ocean Affairs and the
Law of the Sea for their continued support for and
cooperation with the Tribunal.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 51/6, of 24 October 1996,
I now call on Mr. Nii Allotey Odunton, SecretaryGeneral of the International Seabed Authority, to take
the floor.
Mr. Odunton (International Seabed Authority):
As this is the first time that the International Seabed
Authority has taken the floor before the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, I express my
warmest congratulations to the President of the General
Assembly on his election. I assure him of the Authority’s
support and cooperation.
I wish to refer to the two draft resolutions before
the General Assembly and express my appreciation to
Member States for their positive references to the work
of the International Seabed Authority. I also wish to
convey our appreciation for the very comprehensive

14-6821513/19

A/69/PV.67

09/12/2014

report of the Secretary-General (A/69/71), which, as
always, provides detailed background material for
our consideration, and to the Director and staff of the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for
their exceptional work.

of these countries to the concept of the common
heritage of humankind, and has further strengthened
their longstanding cooperative relationship with the
Authority. I wish to express my thanks and appreciation
to them.

As acknowledged in paragraph 59 of draft
resolution A/69/L.29, this year, 2014, has marked the
twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and the establishment of the Authority. A special
commemorative one-day session was held in Kingston,
Jamaica, during the twentieth session of the Authority
to mark this significant milestone. The occasion offered
an opportunity to reflect on the innovative regime set
up by the Convention and the 1994 Agreement, the
forward-looking work of the Authority and the quest
for sustainable development.

At the same time, a number of the original contracts
signed by the Authority in 2001 for exploration for
polymetallic nodules in the Area are due to expire
in 2016. In its decision at the twentieth session of
the Authority, the Council requested the Legal and
Technical Commission, as a matter of urgency and
as its first priority, to formulate draft procedures and
criteria for applications for extensions of contracts for
exploration. In this regard, it was pointed out that, among
other things, the Commission should have sufficient
information supplied by contractors as set out in the
standard clauses for exploration contracts; there was no
automatic extension of a contract; and efforts by the
contractors over the past decade should be recognized.
It was further pointed out that the extension of contracts
did not imply that contractors must have completed
their preparatory work to proceed to the exploitation
phase. The Council added that the draft procedures and
criteria for applications for extensions of contracts for
exploration for polymetallic nodules should be made
available in advance of the 2015 session. This matter
will be taken up by the Commission at its first meeting
in 2015.

The concept of the common heritage of humankind
represented by the legal regime for the seabed beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction remains one of the major
innovations in modern international law. It replaced
uncertainties concerning the future of the seabed with
a regime of shared benefits and responsibilities for
all States, including landlocked and geographically
disadvantaged States. The far-reaching implications
as well as the benefits of this regime will for the next
20 years be understood and appreciated even more, now
that we are standing at a juncture where ocean-based
economic development is at the top of the agenda for
many Governments.
In paragraph 48 of draft resolution A/69/L.29,
the Assembly would note the increase in the number
of contracts for exploration for seabed minerals that
have been entered into between the Authority and its
contractors and would take due note of the priority that
has been given by the Council of the Authority to the
drafting of the mining code. As of today, the Authority
has signed a total of 18 contracts for exploration
for mineral resources in the Area. Twelve of these
contracts are for exploration for polymetallic nodules,
four for exploration for pollymetanic sulphides and two
for exploration for cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts.
During 2014, the Authority signed contracts with the
Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation, the
China Ocean and Mineral Resources Research and
Development Association, the Government of the
Republic of Korea and the Institut Français de Recherche
pour l’Exploitation de la Mer, of France. The signing of
these contracts has reinforced the strong commitment

14/19

Also at the twentieth session, the Council requested
the Commission, as a matter of priority, to continue the
work that it started in 2014 on the regulations governing
exploitation and to make available to all members of
the Authority and all stakeholders a draft framework
exploitation code as soon as possible after its February
2015 meeting. I am pleased to report that work on the
exploitation code is progressing and the expectations of
the Council will be met.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
again reiterates the importance of the ongoing work
by the Authority to develop a standardized taxonomy
and nomenclature for the fauna associated with
polymetallic nodules, pursuant to article 145 of the
Convention, to ensure the effective protection of the
marine environment and for the prevention of damage
to the flora and fauna of the marine environment from
harmful effects that may arise from activities in the
Area.
As part of our continuing efforts towards this
end, I am pleased to convey that the second workshop
14-68215

09/12/2014

dealing with the standardization of the taxonomy of
macrofauna associated with polymetallic nodules
has just been completed. The workshop was attended
by representatives of all contractors for polymetallic
nodules as well as expert taxonomists from the
International Network for Scientific Investigations of
Deep-Sea Ecosystems. Contractor representatives were
requested to bring samples and/or images of the fauna
they had collected in their exploration areas. During
the workshop, much was accomplished with regard to
taxonomic identification; indeed, 10 of the samples
brought to the workshop were new to science: it was the
very first time that any of the taxonomists had come
across them. Additionally, further efforts required by
contractors to complete their work in this taxonomic
identification were noted. I wish to convey a special
note of thanks and gratitude to the Government of the
Republic of Korea, in particular to the Korean Institute
of Ocean Science and Technology, for hosting this
workshop at the East Sea Research Institute, Uljin-gun,
South Korea.
In October this year, a workshop on resource
classification was jointly organized by the Authority
and the Ministry of Earth Sciences of the Government
of India, in Goa, India. The workshop addressed the
work currently being undertaken by contractors for
polymetallic nodule exploration in fulfilment of the
resource data that are to be provided to the Authority
under section 11 of the standard clauses of exploration
contracts, and current practice in land-based mineral
development, in particular, national reporting standards
for exploration results and resource classification.
Representatives of exploration contractors for
polymetallic nodules made presentations on the work
that they had accomplished to date.
In this regard, experts on land-based mineral
resource classification from the Committee for Mineral
Reserves International Reporting Standards, which
was granted observer status by the International
Seabed Authority, and the United Nations International
Framework Classification for Mineral Reserves
and Resources also participated in the workshop.
Participants in the workshop recognized the need for
an international seabed mineral resource framework
in view of the increasing commercial interest in the
resources of the Area. Based on the classification system
for land-based mineral resources, it was concluded
that, at present, no reserves of the metals of interest in
polymetallic nodules had been identified, in particular
in the light of the fact that no tests of the collector

A/69/PV.67

device for mining the nodules had been conducted at
the depths of the deposits. It was recommended that
the Authority support collaboration among contractors
to test their collector devices, conduct pilot mining
tests and conduct environmental impact assessments.
It was noted that this would help to reduce costs and
risks to each contractor and help move polymetallic
nodule resources from inferred resources to reserves
of the metals of interest. The Authority will take the
necessary steps to encourage such collaboration.
I also wish to express our sincere thanks to the
Government of India for its cooperation and support in
the advancement of the work of the Authority on this
important issue.
Paragraphs 50 and 51 of the draft resolution
emphasize the importance of the role entrusted to the
Authority by articles 143 and 145 of the Convention and
recall the invitation issued by the General Assembly
to the Authority in 2013 for the Authority to consider
developing environmental management plans for
regions and areas where there are currently exploration
contracts. In this regard, member States have shown
a clear commitment to building on the work done by
the Authority in connection with the environmental
management plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone.
I am pleased to inform the Assembly in this regard
that discussions are already under way with regard
to commencing work on a strategic environmental
assessment for the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, taking into
account data availability and standardization, and in
cooperation with other sponsoring Governments and
organizations.
At the twentieth session of the Authority, the
Assembly adopted a budget of $15,743,143 for the
Authority’s operations for the 2015-2016 financial
period. Support was voiced for the idea of establishing
an International Seabed Authority museum, and I was
requested to prepare a report for consideration by the
Council outlining the objectives of establishing such
a museum and how they would be achieved. As at
31 May 2014, eight contractors had agreed to amend
their existing contracts to include the new standard
clauses on overhead charges. I continue to consult
with the remainder to amend their existing contracts to
incorporate the new standard clauses.
At the twentieth session, the Assembly elected
17 new members of the Council for a four-year period
commencing 1 January 2015. The new members are: for
Group A, Italy and the Russian Federation; for Group B,

14-6821515/19

A/69/PV.67

France, Germany and the Republic of Korea; for Group
C, Australia and Chile; for Group D, Fiji, Jamaica and
Lesotho; and for Group E, Cameroon, Ghana, Indonesia,
Mexico, Nigeria, Singapore and Tonga.
I wish to lend my voice in support of
paragraph 52 of the draft resolution by expressing
the Authority’s appreciation to those who have made
contributions to the Authority’s Endowment Fund and
its Voluntary Trust Fund. As of 1 December 2014, a
total of 66 scientists and Government officials from
more than 30 countries had benefited from financial
support from the International Seabed Authority
Endowment Fund. The recipients have been from
Argentina, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Brazil, Cameroon,
China, Colombia, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Egypt,
Fiji, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Namibia, Micronesia, Nigeria, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, the Russian Federation,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia and
Viet Nam.
I shall conclude by reiterating a sentiment that I
have echoed here previously. The decisions that will be
made in the next few years are likely to be critical to
the realization of the common heritage of humankind.
As a consequence, it is more important than ever
that all members of the Authority attend meetings
and participate fully in all aspects of the work of the
Authority. I therefore look forward to the broadest
possible participation by all members in the twentyfirst session of the Authority, in July 2015.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 74
and its sub-items (a) and (b).
The Assembly will take action on draft resolution
A/69/L.29 at a later date to be announced.
The Assembly will now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/69/L.30.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Elliot (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft resolution A/69/L.30, entitled “Sustainable
fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December

16/19

09/12/2014

1982, relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”, I wish to put on record
the following statement on the financial implications
on behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
In operative paragraphs 40, 41, 45, 163 and 164 of
draft resolution A/69/L.30, the General Assembly would
take note of the report on the tenth round of informal
consultations of States parties to the Agreement, recall
that the resumed Review Conference agreed to keep
the Agreement under review until the resumption of the
Review Conference at a date no earlier than 2015, and
request the Secretary-General to resume the Review
Conference, convened pursuant to article 36 of the
Agreement, in New York for one week in the first part
of 2016, with a view to assessing the effectiveness
of the Agreement in securing the conservation and
management of straddling fish stocks and highly
migratory fish stocks, and to render the necessary
assistance and provide such services as may be required
for the resumption of the Review Conference.
It would request the Secretary-General to submit
to the resumed Review Conference an updated report,
prepared in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, and with the
assistance of an environment expert consultant to
be hired by the Division to provide information and
analysis on relevant technical and scientific issues to
be covered in the report, to assist the Conference in
discharging its mandate under article 36, paragraph 2,
of the Agreement, and also in this regard request the
Secretary-General to develop and circulate to States
and to regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements a voluntary questionnaire regarding the
recommendations made by the Review Conference in
2006 and 2010, in a timely manner, taking into account
the specific guidance proposed at the tenth round of
informal consultations.
It would also request the Secretary-General in
that regard to develop and circulate to States and to
regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements a voluntary questionnaire regarding the
recommendations of the Review Conference in 2006
and 2010 in a timely manner, taking into account
the specific guidance proposed by the tenth round
of informal consultations; and to prepare a draft
provisional agenda and draft organization of work for

14-68215

09/12/2014

the resumed Review Conference and to circulate them at
the same time as the provisional agenda of the eleventh
round of informal consultations of States parties to the
Agreement, 60 days in advance of those consultations.
It would request the Secretary-General to convene
with full conference services, without prejudice to
future arrangements, a two-day workshop in the second
half of 2016 in order to discuss the implementation
of paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution
64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to
134 of resolution 66/68; and invite States, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and other relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes, subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, other
fishery bodies, other relevant intergovernmental bodies
and non-governmental organizations and relevant
stakeholders, in accordance with United Nations
practice, to attend the workshop.
It would also request the Secretary-General to
prepare a report similar in scope, length and detail as
his report to the sixty-sixth session, in cooperation with
the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations, and with the assistance of an expert consultant
to be hired by the Division to provide information
analysis on relevant technical and scientific issues
to be covered in the report for consideration by the
General Assembly at its seventy-first session with
regard to actions taken by States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in
response to paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of
resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130
and 132 to 134 of resolution 66/68; and invite States
and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements to consider making such information
publicly available.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 40 of the draft
resolution, the resumed Review Conference would be
held for five days in the first half of 2016. It is anticipated
that the Conference will require 10 meetings, one in
the morning and one in the afternoon of each day, with
interpretation in all six languages. The 10 meetings
would constitute an addition to the workload of the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management for 2016 that would entail additional
requirements in the amount of $111,400.
In accordance with operative paragraph 163 of the
draft resolution, meeting services would be required
for the two-day workshop in the second half of 2016.

A/69/PV.67

It is envisaged that the workshop would comprise four
meetings, one in the morning and one in the afternoon
of each day, with interpretation in all six languages.
The four meetings would constitute an addition to the
workload of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management for 2016 and entail additional
requirements in the amount of $44,800.
The requests for documentation contained in
paragraphs 41 and 45 of the draft resolution would
constitute an addition to the documentation workload of
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management of seven pre-session documents of 44,000
words, three in-session documents of 2,100 words,
and one post-session document of 21,000 words to be
issued in all six languages in 2016. That would entail
additional requirements in the amount of $398,100
for documentation services in 2016. The request for
documentation contained in operative paragraphs 41
and 164 of the draft resolution would entail the hiring
of additional consultancy services for the Office of
Legal Affairs in 2016. That would entail additional
requirements in the amount of $33,800 for consultancy
services in 2016 under the Office of Legal Affairs.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.30, additional requirements
of $554,300 under section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
Management”, and additional requirements of $3,800
under section 8, “Legal Affairs”, would be included in
the proposed budget for the biennium 2016-2017.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution
A/69/L.30, entitled “Sustainable fisheries, including
through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Elliot (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the draft
document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/69/L.30: Australia, Belize, Costa Rica,
Cyprus, Denmark, Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Monaco,

14-6821517/19

A/69/PV.67

Nauru, the Philippines, Portugal, Samoa, Spain, Tonga,
Ukraine and the United States of America.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/69/L.30?
Draft resolution A/69/L.30 was adopted (resolution
69/109).
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor to delegations that wish to explain
their position on the resolution just adopted, I remind
Assembly members that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to speak in explanation of position on resolution
69/109, on sustainable fisheries, which was just adopted.
Argentina joined the consensus on the resolution.
However, we wish to inform the Assembly once again
that none of the recommendations in the resolution can
be interpreted to mean that the provisions of the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks can be considered mandatory
for States that have not expressed their consent or
commitment through the Agreement.
The resolution that we have just adopted contains
paragraphs concerning the implementation of the
recommendations of the Review Conference on
the Agreement. Argentina reiterates that those
recommendations must be considered not as enforceable,
but merely recommendatory to States that are not
parties to the Agreement. That is particularly important
for those States that have disassociated themselves from
the recommendations, such as Argentina. Therefore,
as in previous sessions, Argentina disassociates itself
from the consensus of the Assembly with respect
to the paragraphs of the resolution that refer to the
recommendations of the 1995 Review Conference in
New York.
In addition, Argentina notes that current
international law does not authorize regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements or
Member States to take any measure with respect to
vessels whose flag State is not a member of such an
organization or arrangement, or that have not explicitly

18/19

09/12/2014

consented to the application of such measures to vessels
flying their flags. Nothing in the General Assembly’s
resolutions, including that which we just approved, can
be interpreted contrary to that conclusion.
Moreover, I would like to recall once again
that in applying conservation measures, conducting
scientific research or undertaking any other activity
recommended in resolutions of the General Assembly,
in particular resolution 61/105 and related instruments,
the legal framework provided by the international law
of the sea in force — as reflected in the Convention,
including in its article 77 and Part XIII — must
be strictly respected. The implementation of these
resolutions cannot therefore be used as a pretext for
neglecting or violating the rights established in the
Convention, and nothing in resolution 61/105 or in
other resolutions of the General Assembly affects the
sovereign rights of coastal States over their continental
shelves or the exercise of jurisdiction by coastal States
with respect to their continental shelves, in conformity
with international law. Paragraph 157 of the resolution
we have just adopted contains a pertinent reminder of
this concept, which is already reflected in resolution
64/72 and subsequent resolutions.
In the same vein, and as at previous sessions,
paragraph 156 recognizes the adoption by coastal
States, including Argentina, of measures addressing
the impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine
ecosystems throughout their continental shelves, as
well as efforts to ensure their implementation.
Finally, I should like to alert the Assembly once
again that the growing differences of opinion regarding
the content of the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries seriously jeopardize the likelihood of such
texts being adopted by consensus at future sessions.
Mrs. Özkan (Turkey): Regarding resolution 69/109,
on sustainable fisheries, which was adopted under
agenda item 74 (b), I would like to state that Turkey
is fully committed to the conservation, management
and sustainable use of marine living resources and
attaches great importance to regional cooperation to
that end. In this context, Turkey supported the adoption
of resolution 69/109. However, Turkey disassociates
itself from references made in that resolution to
international instruments to which it is not a party.
Those references should therefore not be interpreted as
a change in the legal position of Turkey with regard to
those instruments.

14-68215

09/12/2014

Ms. Engelbrecht Schadtler (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We express our
thanks to the representative of New Zealand, Ms. Alice
Revell, for having facilitated the negotiating process
on the text of resolution 69/109, entitled “Sustainable
fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”.
Our country underscores its commitment to
sustainable fisheries in applying the principles of the
Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and Chapter 17 of Agenda 21, adopted at the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development
in 1992. Venezuela is a contracting party to various
international instruments for the preservation and
management of fisheries.
In the interests of consensus, our delegation did
not block the adoption of the resolution. However,
Venezuela expresses explicit reservations with regard

A/69/PV.67

to the content of the resolution because it is not a party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea or to the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. As such, the
norms of international instruments under customary
international law are not applicable, except where the
Republic has explicitly recognized or will explicitly
recognize them by incorporating them into its national
legislation.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 74?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 74 and of
agenda item 74 as a whole.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

14-6821519/19
