V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

cialized agencies and other bodies of the United Nations system in the implementation of the Programme
of Action and to report to the Economic and Social
Council;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
undertake an appraisal of the activities of the organizations of the United Nations system in the light of the
Programme of Action, taking into account, in particular, the relevant discussions and decisions of the
Governing Body of the International Labour Office,
as well as the reports referred to in paragraphs 2 and
3 above, and to report to the General Assembly at
its thirty-second session.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/177.

4. Appeals to all international organizations and
financial institutions, as well as potential donor countries, to provide the necessary financial resources in
order to make the Fund operational during the interim
period;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
pledging conference as envisaged in article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute;
6. Calls upon Member States and the entire international community to contribute generously to the
Fund.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
ANNEX
Statute of the United Nations Special Fund
for Land-locked Developing Countries

Statute of the United Nations Special
Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries

The General Assembly,
RecaUing its resolution 3311 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit to it at its special session devoted to
development and international economic co-operation
a comprehensive study on the transit problems of the
land-locked developing countries and a complete study
on the establishment of a fund in favour of the landlocked developing countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1755 (LIV) of 16 May 1973 in which the Council defined the scope of a complete study on the
establishment of a fund,
Recalling further the decision taken at its seventh
special session 100 and its resolution 3504 (XXX) of 15
December 1975, in which it decided to establish immediately a special fund for the land-locked developing countries to compensate for their additional transport and transit costs,
Reaffirming that the land-locked developing countries, as a result of their geographical limitations, are
doubly disadvantaged, especially with regard to their
additional transport, transit and transshipment costs,
Having considered the draft statute of the United
Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing
Countries contained in the note by the SecretaryGeneral prepared in pursuance of General Assembly
resolution 3504 (XXX),101
l. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development for the preparation of proposals on the
organizational arrangements of the United Nations
Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries,
including the draft statute;
2. Approves the statute of the Fund, annexed to
the present resolution;
3. Requests the United Nations Development Programme, in close collaboration with the secretariat of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to manage the Fund during the interim period
and report on its activities to the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session;
100 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Special
Session, Supplement No. I (A/10301). p. 10. item 7. subpara. (a).
101 A/3 l /260, annex.

79

INTRODUCTION

The United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries (hereinafter referred to as the Fund) shall
operate as an organ of the General Assembly in accordance
with the provisions set forth below.
Article I

Pmu>oss
In order to compensate the land-locked developing countries
for their additional transport and transit costs, the Fund shall:
(a) Provide resources to offset the disadvantages created
by the additional transport and transit costs facing the landlocked developing countries;
(b) Provide financial and technical assistance for projects
aimed at reducing the transit and related transport costs incurred by the land-locked developing countries, and at other
improvements in the transit and related transport facilities
and arrangements for these countries;
(c) Provide financial support for studies, to be carried out
by appropriate United Nations organs, of existing transit and
related transport facilities and arrangements for land-locked
developing countries, and of ways of improving them;
(d) Co-ordinate its activities with:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

The programme of studies and technical assistance
concerning the transit and related transport needs of
land-locked developing countries being carried out
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and the regional commissions;
Related programmes in the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat
and other United Nations bodies;
Programmes of technical and financial assistance on
behalf of land-locked developing countries in the
United Nations Development Programme and other
multilateral and bilateral assistance agencies.
Article 2
GUIDING PRINCIPLES

1. The provision of assistance shall be in conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
2. Assistance from the Fund shall not serve as a means
for economic and political interference in the internal affairs
of recipient countries and shall not be influenced by considerations relating to the nature of their economic, social and
political systems.
Article 3
RESOURCES

1. The resources of the Fund shall consist of voluntary
contributions in cash or in kind by Governments. The Fund

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

80

shall also be empowered to receive contributions from international organizations, both governmental and non-governmental,
and from other private sources.
2. Contributions to the Fund may also be made by means
of pledging conferences convened by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, the first pledging conference to be convened
not later than twelve months after the adoption of the statute
of the Fund. Contributions as pledged to the Fund shall be
payable within the twelve months following the pledge.
3. Cash contributions shall be made in convertible currenc\es or in currency readily usable by the Fund.
4. Contributions shall be made without limitation to a
specific recipient country.

Article 4
ORGANIZATION AND SUPERVISION

1. The policies and procedures of the Fund shall be formulated by a Board of Governors, composed of representatives
of thirty-six States Members of the United Nations or members of specialized agencies or of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, elected by the General Assembly keeping in
view inter alia, the need for balance among the representation
of the beneficiary land-locked developing countries and their
transit neighbours, on the one hand, and potential donor
countries, both developed and developing, on the other. States
elected to the Board of Governors shall do their utmost to
ensure that their representatives possess the expertise required
for the efficient operation of the Fund.
2. The members of the Board of Governors shall be
elected for a term of three years, provided, however, that,
of the members elected at the first election, the terms of one
third of the members shall expire at the end of one year and
the terms of a further one third of the members at the end
of two years. Retiring members shall be eligible for re-election.
3. The Board of Governors shall report annually to the
General Assembly through the Economic and Social Council.
The comments of the Council on the report shall also be
transmitted to the Assembly.
4. The Board of Governors shall meet at least once a year
and as often as may be necessary for the conduct of the work
of the Fund.

5. The Board of Governors may, in the light of requirements, establish an Executive Committee which shall supervise
the operations of the Fund on a continuous basis and report
to the Board on its activities at regular intervals. Beneficiary
land-locked developing countries and their transit neighbours,
on the one hand, and potential donor countries, on the other,
shall be represented on the Executive Committee in proportions
similar to such representation on the Board of Governors.
Article 5
QUORUM AND VOTING

and the Executive Committee, if established, in whose deliberations he will participate without the right to vote. He shall
exercise over-all responsibility for the day-to-day operations of
the Fund and shall report directly, on a regular basis, to the
Board of Governors, or through the Executive Committee, if
established, on the operations of the Fund.
3. The Executive Director shall be assisted by a small
secretariat within the framework of the United Nations Secretariat. The Fund may enter into management contracts with
the competent international organizations, including the regional development banks, to conduct its operations. The
contracts shall ensure the full and effective control, at all
times, of the Fund over the operations. The Executive Director
shall make effective use of the existing facilities of the United
Nations Secretariat, including those of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the regional commissions
and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
as well as those of the United Nations Development Programme. Where appropriate, the Fund may also use the
facilities of the specialized agencies.

Article 7
MODES OF OPERATION

1.

To carry out its purposes as specified in article 1, the
Fund is empowered to make grants and Joans, including loans
on concessionary terms, and, as appropriate, to participate in
investments and to allocate assistance in kind under its control
and direction.
2. The Fund shall ensure an equitable distribution of its
resources, taking into account the needs of each of the landlocked developing countries as well as relevant problems at
the regional and subregional levels.

Article 8
RESPONSIBILITIES OF GOVERNMENTS OF RECIPIENT COUNTRIES

Governments of recipient countries shall ensure the effective
utilization of the resources provided by the Fund, shall maintain the records required by the Fund in connexion with the
administration of its financial and technical assistance and
shall report fully on the utilization of such assistance.

Article 9
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION

1. The financial regulations for the Fund shall be drafted
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in consultation
with the Executive Director of the Fund, for approval by the
General Assembly on the recommendation of the Board of
Governors. In the preparation of these regulations, account
shall be taken of the special requirements of the operations of
the Fund.
2. Pending the approval by the General Assembly of
financial regulations for the Fund, the Financial Regulations
and Rules of the United Nations102 shall apply.

1. A majority of the members of the Board of Governors
or of the Executive Committee shall constitute a quorum.
2. Each member of the Board of Governors and each
member of the Executive Committee shall have one vote.
3. Decisions on all questions shall as far as possible be
made on the basis of consensus. In the absence of consensus,
decisions shall be made by a majority of the members present
and voting. For the purpose of the present article, the phrase
"members present and voting" means members present and
casting an affirmative or negative vote. Members which abstain
from voting are considered as not voting.

Article 6

Article 10
FUTURE INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

The General Assembly shall review, in the light of experience, the effectiveness and further evolution of these institutional arrangements with a view to deciding upon such changes
and improvements as may be necessary in order to meet fully
the purposes of the Fund.

31/178.

Implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 2626 (XXV), 3202 (S-VI),
3281 (XXIX) and 3362 (S-VII)

MANAGEMENT

1. The chief executive officer of the Fund, who shall be
appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
subject to confirmation by the General Assembly, shall be the
Executive Director of the Fund.
2. The Executive Director shall discharge his functions
under the guidance and supervision of the Board of Governors

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
10 2 ST/SOB/Financial Rules/1/Rev.1

and Amend.1-5.
