S/PRST/2000/17

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2000
English
Original: English and Russian

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4141st meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 May 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border”, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Tajikistan of 5 May 2000 (S/2000/387).
“The Security Council welcomes the success achieved in the peace
process in Tajikistan with the completion of implementation of the main
provisions of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan signed in Moscow on 27 June 1997 under the
auspices of the United Nations (S/1997/510). It expresses its appreciation for
the sequential and persistent efforts of the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan and the leadership of the Commission on National Reconciliation in
this regard. The Council acknowledges the significant achievement of the Tajik
parties which have managed to overcome many obstacles and to put their
country on the path to peace, national reconciliation and democracy. It joins
the Secretary-General in hoping that these achievements will be consolidated
in the further strengthening of the institutions in the country with a view to the
democratic, economic and social development of Tajik society.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction that the United Nations has
played a successful and important role in the peace process. It highly
appreciates the efforts of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT), supported by the Contact Group of Guarantor States and
International Organizations (the Contact Group), the Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(the CIS Peacekeeping Forces), in assisting the parties in the implementation
of the General Agreement.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Russian
Federation, the Islamic Republic of Iran and other interested Member States
for their sustained political support for the peace efforts of the United Nations
in Tajikistan, for assisting the parties to maintain political dialogue and to
overcome the crises in the peace process. It encourages the Members of the
former Contact Group to continue to support Tajikistan in its further efforts to
consolidate peace, stability and democracy in the country.

00-42933 (E) 120500
`````````

S/PRST/2000/17

“The Security Council notes with satisfaction that UNMOT maintained
excellent relations with the CIS Peacekeeping Forces and the Russian border
forces, which contributed to the success of the Mission and helped to support
the political process on the ground.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the intention of the
Secretary-General to withdraw UNMOT when its mandate expires on 15 May
2000. It pays tribute to all those who served in UNMOT for the sake of peace
in Tajikistan, and especially to those members of UNMOT who gave their lives
in the cause of peace.
“The Security Council emphasizes that the continued support of the
international community in the post-conflict phase will be crucial in allowing
Tajikistan to sustain and build on the achievements of the peace process, and in
helping it to lay a durable foundation for a better life for its people.
“In this regard, the Security Council expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his intention to inform the Council about modalities of
the establishment and functioning of a post-conflict peace-building office of
the United Nations in Tajikistan in order to consolidate peace and promote
democracy. It encourages close cooperation between this office and the
Mission of the OSCE and other international agencies in Tajikistan. The
Council also encourages Member States and others concerned to make
voluntary contributions to support projects aimed at social and economic
rehabilitation of this country.”

2
