27

ResolutioW1 adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Commit.tee

1. Requests Members submitting their observations
on the qualifications of the candidates, in accordance
with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 845
(IX) of 22 November 1954, and Members which offer
facilities, to consider the applications with all possible
speed;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible and as may be sought by the
Members concerned and by the applicants ;
3. Invites the offering States to inform the Secretary-General of the use made of the scholarships
offered by them;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
annual reports to the General Assembly, prepared in
accordance with resolution 931 (X) of 8 November
1955, information on the action taken as a result of
the present resolution.
722nd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1182 (XII) The future of Togoland under French
administration

Having heard, during the hearings granted by the
Fourth Committee, the points of view expressed by the
petitioners,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on Togoland under French Administration
for its valuable report and draws the attention of the
Administering Authority and the Togoland Government to the observations and suggestions contained
therein;

2. Notes the statement of the Administering Authority that the Legislative Assembly to be elected by
universal adult suffrage in 1958 and the Togoland
Government will be asked to formulate, in consultation
with the Administering Authority, proposals for the
early attainment of the final objective of the Trusteeship System ;
3. Accepts, having regard to the responsibilities of
the new Legislative Assembly mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the invitation of the Government of
Togoland, transmitted by the Administering Authority,
to make the necessary arrangements, in consultation
with the Administering Authority, for supervision of
the elections by the United Nations;

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the International
Trusteeship System as set forth in Article 76 of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 1046 (XI) of 23 January
1957 concerning the future of Togoland under French
administration,
Having received- from the Trusteeship Council, in
accordance with the above-mentioned resolution, a
special report 20 transmitting the report of the United
Nations Commission on Togoland under French Administration21 and the proceedings of the Council on
the subject,22
Taking note of Trusteeship Council resolution 1785
(S-VII) of 19 September 1957, in which the Council
considers that the report, as well as the statements
made before the Council at its seventh special session
by the representative of the Government of France
and the representative of the Government of Togoland,
provides a useful and constructive basis for consideration and action by the C'n!neral Assembly with a view
to reaching a mutually satisfactory solution in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the
Trusteeship Agreement, and decides to transmit to the
General Assembly the report of the Commission, together with the proceedings of the Council, in order
to set in motion an appropriate procedure for the early
attainment of the final objective of the Trusteeship
System,
Taking note of the further statements made in the
Fourth Committee on behalf of the Administering Authority and the Government of Togoland concerning,
in particular, their proposals for the further political
development of the Territory, including the transfer of
all powers to the Togoland Government except defence,
diplomacy and currency, and the renewal in 1958 by
universal adult suffrage of the Legislative Assembly,

4. Decides to elect a Commissioner who shall supervise the elections to the Legislative Assembly and who
shall be assisted by observers and staff to be appointed
by the Secretary-General in consultation with him;

"'Ibid., agenda item 37, document A/3676.
11
Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Seventh Special
Session, Supplement No. 2 ( T /1343), documents T /1336 and
Add.1 and 2.
12
Ibid., Seventh Special Session, 841st to 847th meetings.

The General Assembly, at its 730th plenary meeting on 14
December 1957, elected by secret ballot Mr. Max Dorsinville
(Haiti) to the office of United Nations Commissioner for the
elections in the Trust Territory of Togo/and under French
administration.

5. Requests the Administering Authority and tlie
Government of Togoland to make, in consultation with
the United Nations Commissioner, the arrangements
for the organization and conduct of the elections to the
Legislative Assembly;
6. Requests the Commissioner to submit to the
Trusteeship Council, for its consideration, and for
transmission to the General Assembly at its thirteenth
session, a report on the organization, conduct and
results of the elections ;
7. Invites the Administering Authority to inform
the Trusteeship Council concerning the carrying out
of the above-mentioned transfer of powers, the results
of the elections, the convening of the new Togoland
Legislative Assembly, and regarding any wishes which
may have been expressed by the Legislative Assembly
concerning the new Statute and the termination of
the Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of Togoland under French Administration;
8. Requests the Trusteeship Council to consider
these matters and report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirteenth session, so as to enable it, if so
requested by the new Togoland Legislative Assembly
and the Administering Authority, to reach a decision, in
the light of the circumstances then prevailing, concerning the termination of the Trusteeship Agreement in
accordance with Article 76 b of the Charter of the
United Nations.

724th plenary meeting,
29 November 1957.
*
*

•
