A /67/PV.97

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

97th plenary meeting

Thursday, 29 August 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly (A/67/936)
Draft resolution (A/67/936, para.79)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda item
115 and agenda item 116 at its 23rd plenary meeting, on
11 October 2012.
We have gathered this afternoon to review the
deliberations and endorse the findings of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly. During the sixty-seventh session of
the General Assembly, the Ad Hoc Working Group has
been ably chaired by my good friend, His Excellency
Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil, Permanent
Representative of Egypt, one of the most skilful
diplomats with whom I have ever had the privilege of
working. At the outset of my remarks, I would like to
express my heartfelt gratitude to him and his colleagues
for their dedication in the endeavour to enhance the
role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the
General Assembly.
The report (A/67/936) of the Working Group
summarizes the results of the six sessions that were
held over the past few months. Substantive discussions
were divided into two parts, namely, a general debate

and exchange of views, followed by a series of meetings
that addressed a number of specific issues, organized
around four thematic clusters defined by the Chair.
The first focused on the role and authority of
the General Assembly and its relationship with the
other principal organs of the United Nations, as well
as other groups and organizations outside the United
Nations system. Particular emphasis was placed on the
importance of making better use of the Assembly’s vast
prerogatives under the Charter of the United Nations,
especially as they relate to establishing greater
complementarity with the Security Council on matters
related to peacekeeping, and with the Economic and
Social Council on advancing the post-2015 sustainable
development agenda.
The Working Group also underscored the
importance of deepening the relationship with informal
intergovernmental groupings, in part based on the
provisions contained in landmark resolution 67/289,
adopted by consensus on 9 July and entitled “The
United Nations in global economic governance”. By
establishing the General Assembly as the pre-eminent
venue for regularized interaction among the Group of
20 and other States Members of the United Nations, the
foundation has been laid upon which coordination on
global economic, financial and trade issues can be built
up in the time ahead.
The second cluster of topics that was taken up by
the Working Group related to significant technical
matters, such as working methods, the implementation
of resolutions and agenda streamlining, in addition to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-46090 (E)

*1346090*

A/67/PV.97

the consideration of options for more time-conscious
and secure balloting in the plenary and in the Main
Committees, including the selection of committee
chairs. Attention was also paid to the question of
thematic debates. I welcome the fact that paragraph 7
of the draft resolution on revitalization contained in
paragraph 79 of document A/67/936
“Recognizes the value of holding interactive
inclusive thematic debates on current issues of
critical importance to the international community,
and invites the President of the General Assembly
to continue this practice”.
I take this opportunity to express my heartfelt
gratitude to Member States for having participated in
such high numbers in such events during the sixtyseventh session. I believe each of them has helped
to advance the process of revitalization, thereby
demonstrating the singular convening power of the
General Assembly. Key subjects included, among
others, the role of international criminal tribunals in
reconciliation; the United Nations in global economic
governance; the peaceful resolution of conflicts in
Africa; sustainable development and climate change,
culture and development; entrepreneurship for
development; education for youth; and inequality.
In less than a fortnight, I will convene the final
thematic debate of the sixty-seventh session, on the role
of credit-rating agencies in the international financial
system. The occasion will provide the General
Assembly with an unprecedented opportunity to
engage with leading international experts, academics,
senior executives of the agencies themselves, as well
as other financial entities. We will be able to take stock
of the reform measures already undertaken and discuss
additional ones it may be necessary to implement in
order to establish a more objective and reliable rating
system that can benefit the international community as
a whole.
The third cluster of issues that fell under the purview
of the Working Group revolved around a consideration
of the role and responsibility of the General Assembly
in the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral and other executive heads in the United Nations
system. As the Group’s report underscores, a more
inclusive and transparent process involving the General
Assembly at earlier stages, mindful of the terms set out
in Article 97 of the Charter of the United Nations and
respecting resolution 11 (I) as well as other relevant

2

documents, would enable the entire membership to be
apprised of the views of perspective candidates for the
position of Secretary-General, thus helping them to
make informed choices and provide timely feedback to
the other principal organs of the United Nations.
The fourth cluster included an examination of
the functions of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly. That included how to strengthen its
institutional memory, conduct a more effective transition
between term-holders, enhance its relationship with
the Secretariat, develop options on how to increase
the number of permanent staff assigned to the Office
and address the manifest inadequacy of the budgetary
apportionment, which has not increased since 1998.
Allow me to express my sincere gratitude to the
Member States that have contributed to the Trust Fund
in support of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly since its establishment, in March 2010. That,
however, should not be seen as an optimal solution to
the chronic underfunding of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly. I would therefore like to
extend an appeal to the General Assembly to consider
raising the allotment for the Office, in the context of
the forthcoming deliberations on the Organization’s
regular budget.
I strongly believe that, in deciding whether to
contend for the post of the President of the General
Assembly, no country should be constrained by
the possible financial implications of a successful
candidacy, and respectfully urge the Assembly to
take appropriate action to level the fiscal playing field
among Member States.
We have taken a number of steps in revitalizing
the world’s sole universal body that operates on the
basis of sovereign equality. I believe we should invest
additional efforts in that endeavour with all deliberate
speed. We should aim to further empower the General
Assembly by ensuring that the best possible use is made
of its broad prerogatives, as provided by the Charter of
the United Nations. We must strive to reform the way
the Assembly conducts its work so that it may come
to play a leading role in twenty-first century global
governance, one in which the advantages of effective
multilateralism, framed by adherence to the accepted
principles and norms in the conduct of international
relations, are respected by all.
In 1945, the General Assembly was created to serve
as the moral conscience of the international community.

13-46090

A/67/PV.97

It was established as the democratic repository of the
rights of all nations — large and small, developing and
developed — to live in peace, security and prosperity.
For decades, the great promise made by the United
Nations founders has now been fulfilled in its entirety.
A growing number of countries are coming together
in their belief that a more effective, transparent and
inclusive Assembly is an imperative for the twentyfirst century. Revitalization, in my view, holds the
key to enabling this institution to set the agenda for
a world that is in the midst of a profound, strategic
and environmental transformation, as the complex
challenges that we now face cannot be solved in
isolation from one another.
A little over a year ago, world leaders tasked the
General Assembly with the primary responsibility for
conceptualizing a universal transition to sustainability.
Whether it succeeds or fails will represent, in my view, a
strategic litmus test of whether or not the revitalization
of the General Assembly can be completed with the
requisite boldness and foresight necessary for it to
assume its rightful place at the helm of world affairs.
In September 1963, one of the greatest statesmen
of the twentieth century, United States President John
F. Kennedy, stepped up to the podium of the General
Assembly for the second and final time, a mere two
months before he was tragically assassinated in Dallas.
He said,
“My fellow inhabitants of this planet ...”
(A/PV.1209, p. 7);
“The effort to improve the conditions of man ...
is not a task for the few. It is the task of all nations ...
[f]or plague and pestilence, plunder and pollution,
the hazards of nature and the hunger of children are
the foes of every nation. The Earth, the sea and the
air are the concern of every nation. And science,
technology and education can be the allies of every
nation” (ibid., p. 6)
“Never before has man had such capacity to
control his own environment: to end thirst and
hunger; to conquer poverty and disease; to banish
illiteracy and massive human misery”.
He concluded,
“Let us complete what we have started...”
(ibid., p. 7);

“[for] I believe the problems of human destiny
are not beyond the reach of human beings.” (supra)
I believe we should draw inspiration from those
words and the vision they have come to embody. As
we look ahead to the many steps that still need to be
taken — on revitalization and so much else — let us
remember that the Organization was founded not
simply to prevent a slide backwards into unconscionable
warfare, but also to strengthen the bonds of trust among
States and peoples.
As we come to a point at which such a welcoming
horizon of possibility comes into view, let us be moved
to action, as President Kennedy was, by the belief in
the ingenuity of humankind to overcome the obstacles
they themselves have set on the path to the creation
of a better world, one in which scarcity, hardship and
privation are seen not as a fate that we must accept,
but as a challenge that this determined generation can
overcome by truly coming together in a common cause.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 79 of the report of
the Ad Hoc Working Group.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
entitled “Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly”, contained in paragraph 79 of the report of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
The draft resolution contained in paragraph 79
of document A/67/936 was adopted (resolution
67/297).
The President: I should like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil, Chair
of the Ad Hoc Working Group, who so ably conducted
the discussions and complex negotiations of the Working
Group. That is an official note of recognition, as I
myself thanked him earlier. I really think that he did a
tremendous job. I want to thank him wholeheartedly for
his hard work and the endeavour by him and his team.
I very much hope that this is going to be continued and
built upon in his work during the sixty-eighth session of
the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
116?

13-460903

A/67/PV.97

It was so decided.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and related matters
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on this item at its thirty-eighth
and thirty-ninth plenary meetings, on 15 November
2012. Members will also recall that, pursuant to
decision 66/566, of 13 September 2012, the Assembly
continued intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform in informal plenary meetings during
the current session.
In a letter dated 14 August 2013, I circulated for
consideration by Member States language for an oral
decision on this important issue.
May I now take it that the General Assembly
decides:
“To reaffirm the central role of the General
Assembly on the question of equitable representation
on and an increase in the membership of the
Security Council and other matters related to the
Security Council;
“To immediately continue intergovernmental
negotiations and Security Council reform and in
an informal plenary of the General Assembly at
its sixty-eighth session, as mandated by General
Assembly decisions 62/557 of 15 September
2008, 63/565 of 14 September 2009, 64/568 of
13 September 2010, 65/554 of 12 September 2011
and 66/566 of 13 September 2012, building on the
informal meetings held during its sixty-seventh

4

session, as well as the positions of and proposals
made by Member States; while welcoming the
active engagement, initiatives and intensive efforts
of the President of the General Assembly, and taking
note of the previous proposals of the Chair of the
intergovernmental negotiations, and noting with
appreciation his active role and concrete efforts,
including the preparation of the text reflecting the
positions of and proposals submitted by Member
States, with a view towards an early comprehensive
reform of the Security Council;
“To convene the Open-ended Working Group
on the Question of Equitable Representation on and
Increase in the Membership of the Security Council
and Other Matters Related to the Security Council
during the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, if Member States so decide; and
“To include in the agenda of the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly an item entitled
‘Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council’”?
It was so decided.
The President: I should like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for
chairing the negotiations on my behalf, and for doing
so impartially as to the positions and yet in a manner
partial to progress.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

13-46090
