A /ES-11/PV.15

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Eleventh Emergency Special session

15th plenary meeting

Monday, 14 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Wallace
(Jamaica), Vice-President, took the Chair.

Assembly and the past practices of its emergency
special sessions.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine
to introduce draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6.

Agenda item 5 (continued)
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
Draft resolution (A/ES-11/L.6)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
in paragraph 8 of its resolution ES-11/4 of 12 October
2022, the Assembly decided
“to adjourn the eleventh emergency special session
of the General Assembly temporarily and to
authorize the President of the General Assembly
to resume its meetings upon request from
Member States”.
In that regard, I should like to draw the attention of
delegations to document A/ES-11/10, which contains
a letter dated 7 November 2022 from the Permanent
Representatives of Canada, Guatemala, the Netherlands
and Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the General Assembly, requesting the
resumption of the eleventh emergency special session
of the General Assembly.
I intend to conduct the proceedings of this meeting
in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): “What has been, will be
again, what has been done will be done again; there is
nothing new under the sun” (The Holy Bible, Ecclesiastes,
1:9), is written in one ancient script. It is true, is it not,
that we have seen all this before? A country choosing
to invade another, bringing death and destruction,
impacting millions of people and undermining the very
core of international security, and the world fighting
back and holding the perpetrators accountable.
We have indeed seen this before. Let me quote
one official:
“A large part of our country’s territory was
occupied by the enemy, which destroyed entire
cities and villages, turned enterprises, power plants
and railways into ruins. That is why we believe
it to be a moral right of countries that have been
subjected to occupation to receive compensation.”
That quote does not belong to an Ukrainian
official; neither is it recent. The statement belongs to
comrade Vyacheslav Molotov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Soviet Union. It is striking how closely
the statement describes what Ukraine is facing today:
a large part of the territory of a sovereign State under
enemy occupation; entire cities and villages destroyed;
enterprises turned into ruins; power plants destroyed.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-68882 (E)

*2268882*

A/ES-11/PV.15

Of course, no material loss compares to the death and
suffering of the people of Ukraine.
Seventy-seven years ago, the Soviet Union
demanded and received reparations, calling it the moral
right of a country that has suffered war and occupation.
Today Russia, which claims to be the successor of
twentieth-century tyranny, is doing everything it can
to avoid paying the price for its own war and occupation
and trying to escape accountability for the crimes it
is committing. Russia will fail, however, just as it is
failing on the battlefield. We have indeed seen all this
before. There is nothing new under the sun.
Thirty-two years ago, the Russians once again
clearly stated their position on reparations when one
State invaded and occupied another. Responding
to the consequences of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait,
the Security Council adopted a series of resolutions,
including resolution 687 (1991), establishing a
commission and a fund mandated to deal with any
damage, loss or injury arising out of Iraq’s unlawful
invasion and occupation of Kuwait. Following his
vote in favour of the resolution, Soviet Ambassador
Vorontsov stated:
“The requirements of the resolution adopted are
aimed not only at restoring justice but at issuing a
serious warning to all those who might be inclined
to embark on the path of aggression, occupation
and annexation.” (S/PV.2981, p. 101).
That is exactly what Russia is doing today. The Soviet
Ambassador added:
“The adoption of this resolution provides the
necessary conditions to restore normal economic
relations in the region, the speedy elimination
of the consequences of the ecological crisis, and
compensation for the damage which has been
caused to Kuwait and its people.” (ibid., p. 103)
Thus, with 14 votes in favour and 1 measly
abstention, the United Nations Compensation
Commission (UNCC) was born. A true success story,
the UNCC completed its mandate in February this year,
having paid out over $52 billion in reparations to the
victims of that war.
Russia has tried its best to destroy Ukraine, in a very
literal sense. From day one of the full-scale invasion,
Russia has been throwing bombs, missiles and shells of
every kind at Ukrainian cities and villages, targeting
everything from plants and factories to residential
2/30

14/11/2022

buildings, schools, hospitals and kindergartens. We
have all seen images from Bucha, Irpin, Borodyanka,
Mariupol and Izyum. Russia has been destroying
Ukrainian roads, bridges and railways. Russia has
demolished almost half of Ukraine’s power grid and
utilities in the past month alone, leaving millions of
Ukrainians without power, running water and heating
on the eve of winter.
Accounts of atrocities committed by Russians
in the occupied territories — murder, rape, torture,
forced deportation, looting — all speak for themselves.
Millions of Ukrainians have been forced to leave their
homes and seek shelter elsewhere. Ukraine will have the
daunting task of rebuilding the country and recovering
from this war. But that recovery will never be complete
without a sense of justice for the victims of the Russian
war. It is time to hold Russia accountable. We have seen
all this in this very Hall. What has been done, we ask
to be done again.
We have seen the General Assembly adopt, by
consensus, resolution 60/147, adopting the Basic
Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy
and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of
International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law. Let me quote:
“Adequate, effective and prompt reparation is
intended to promote justice by redressing gross
violations of international human rights law or
serious violations of international humanitarian
law.” (resolution 60/147, annex, para. 15)
We have seen the General Assembly adopt, by
consensus, resolution 56/83, commending the draft
articles on responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts, which stipulate that,
“The responsible State is under an obligation
to make full reparation for the injury caused by the
internationally wrongful act” (resolution 56/83,
annex, article 31).
We have indeed seen it all. We are not asking for
something we’ve not seen before. We are meeting here
today, in the setting of the eleventh emergency special
session of the General Assembly, within the Uniting for
Peace framework designed for instances just like this,
when a country like Russia abuses its veto power — a
veto power that came with the seat of the Soviet Union
in the Security Council, which it is occupying illegally.
22-68882

14/11/2022

Russia prefers impunity to accountability, and
when it comes to the process in the Security Council,
it only knows two things — lies and the veto. And yet,
we will hear from Russia very soon that the General
Assembly is not competent to address a matter like
this. It will be yet another lie; yet another attempt to
diminish and subvert this organ of the United Nations;
yet another attempt to tell Assembly members that they
do not matter. And that, yet again, will be nothing new.
I have recently recalled the words of King Hussein
of Jordan, pronounced from this very rostrum in 1960.
Let me quote him again:
“It is needless to affirm that the United Nations
presents the only hope of peace and freedom to
humanity. This is of major significance to all
the small nations of the world; yet, almost from
birth, the Soviet Union has sought to destroy
the United Nations, to hamper its deliberations,
to block its decisions and, by rowdy tactics and
petulant walk-outs, to damage the reputation of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.”
(A/PV.882, para. 75)
That is exactly what Russia is doing now. Having
blocked the Security Council, the Soviets’ successors
are trying to muzzle the General Assembly. The
United Nations should no longer tolerate this. Right now
there is yet another opportunity to send a clear signal
to Russia and anyone else who may ever consider using
force to redraw internationally recognized borders. The
Russians and their cohorts will try to make us believe
that by this vote we are dividing the world into blocs
and returning it to the times of the Cold War. They will
claim that we are asking Member States to take sides in
the conflict.
We in no way ask members to pick sides today. We
are confident that they are all on the side of the Charter
of the United Nations, its purposes and principles,
and on the side of international law. Instead, it is the
Russian Federation itself that, since its very appearance
in the United Nations 31 years ago, has been perpetually
committing acts of aggression against sovereign States.
It is the Russian Federation that is threatening the
mechanism of international security and undermining
the fragile stability achieved after the Second World
War. In fact, it is Russia that is to be blamed for dividing
the world.
The proposal before the Assembly today is a
proclamation that Russia must be held accountable for

A/ES-11/PV.15

its violations of international law in Ukraine. It is a
reaffirmation of the need for a concrete mechanism for
reparations that will breathe life into this proclamation.
It is a call for Member States to come together and
build a legitimate international infrastructure to deal
with the consequences of Russian aggression against
Ukraine, record evidence of atrocities and preserve
hope for justice for millions of those whose lives have
been changed forever by the imperial, neocolonial
ambitions of a small ruler of a large country.
The proposal is not about Russia alone. It will work
for the benefit of all those who are being threatened
now or might be threatened later with the use of force.
Our response should be appropriate and should avert
any aggressor from the temptation of starting a war.
That is the issue we are resolving today.
The proposal is built on the principles of
multilateralism, as we call on all States that share the
values of the United Nations Charter to participate in
further steps to establish the mechanism. Ukraine is
committed to a transparent, impartial and objective
process that will be managed and overseen by the
international community in order to avoid even the
slightest perception of bias. We have every intention of
continuing to cooperate with the United Nations and its
bodies in this process. We greatly value and appreciate
the invaluable work of the Secretary-General and the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine appointed by the Human Rights Council. We
hope for cooperation with UNESCO and the United
Nations Environment Programme to help assess the
damage to the historical and cultural heritage of
Ukraine and its environment.
A vote against the proposal will be a vote in favour
of impunity and lawlessness. A “yes” vote will mean
that there is faith in international law, that the global
architecture so painstakingly built after the Second
World War will remain, and that the United Nations can
stand to watch over international peace and security. It
is a signal of hope for justice and an important first step
towards accountability — a step towards ensuring that
such wars never happen again.
Ukraine is seeking peace. The preconditions for
any negotiations outlined by President Zelenskyy are
clear: restoration of Ukraine’s territorial integrity,
compensation for damage caused by the war, and the
prosecution of war criminals. Draft resolution A/ES11/L.6 will bring us closer to that goal, And we must

22-688823/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

take this leap forward without delay. This session is an
opportunity to reflect on that and decide in which kind
of world we want to live.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala.
Mr. Búcaro Flores (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for convening us and resuming this
eleventh emergency special session, in follow-up to
the impact of the aggression of the Russian Federation
against Ukraine. Once again, we meet to address
one of the biggest crises worldwide, whose impact
is unprecedented.
Guatemala did not hesitate to join as co-facilitator
and co-sponsor, together with the delegations of
Ukraine, Canada and the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
to submit draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6, entitled
“Furtherance of remedy and reparation for aggression
against Ukraine”. We have supported and presented
the draft resolution based on our convictions not only
as a country with a deep vocation for peace, but also
as a State that recognizes that, through dialogue,
negotiation, reparations and the peaceful means granted
to us under international law, differences among States
can be resolved. We are a country whose history is
marked by a lengthy internal conflict, and that is why
we recognize the importance of peace and respect for
human rights.
Likewise, we have submitted the draft resolution for
the consideration of the General Assembly in the solid
belief that this initiative is a step towards conciliation
between the parties. Considering that the resolution
of civil claims is an important step towards achieving
peace and post-conflict recovery, the recommendation
for the establishment of a mechanism to register damage
and eventual reparations is essential. As a country that
firmly believes in multilateralism, we are convinced
that the General Assembly has the mandate and
authority to approve the draft resolution, as established
in Chapter IV of the Charter of the United Nations.
The language of the draft resolution is carefully
drafted so as not to overstep the purview of the
General Assembly. The language is based on previous
determinations of the General Assembly that the
Russian Federation has committed an act of aggression
against Ukraine, in violation of Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, we respectfully
ask all Member States to support this initiative, which
4/30

14/11/2022

is the right thing to do, and to vote in favour of the draft
resolution for the sake of peace in the world.
Standing at this rostrum today as a co-sponsor of the
draft resolution, I cannot fail to mention the importance
of prompt reform of the Security Council, in keeping
with current times. Today we are considering this
draft resolution because the General Assembly cannot
replicate the same paralysis or idleness of the Security
Council on this issue and other crises that affect
international peace and security. It must consequently
recognize that humankind needs all of us united.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): When speaking at this rostrum earlier today,
the Permanent Representative of Ukraine cited many
quotes, yet he failed to say the most important thing
about draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6. Let us now bridge
that gap.
The draft resolution that has been submitted to the
eleventh emergency special session is a classic example
of the “rules-based order”, whereby a small group of
States defies international law and seeks to consecrate
lawlessness while using the authority of the General
Assembly and positioning the Assembly as a judicial
body, which by definition it is not. It is obvious that
the initiative is flawed. From the legal perspective, the
provisions of the draft resolution cannot stand up to
any criticism. They are legally null and void — nothing
more than an attempt to legalize what cannot be
legalized in terms of effective international law. The
sponsors cannot fail to realize that the adoption of
such a draft resolution would trigger consequences
that could boomerang against themselves. Those States
boast of their commitment to legality, while at the same
time flouting the very appearance of legality.
The draft resolution envisages establishing some
sort of an “international mechanism for reparation
for damage”. And then, apparently, it is as good as
settled. The mechanism is to be created by a certain
group of States, and these States will be the ones that
will decide how it should work. In other words, the
General Assembly is being asked to give carte blanche
to the establishment of a body whose functionality
most of those present here will not have even the
remotest idea about. Those countries will, at their own
discretion, determine or rather appoint the perpetrators
and establish the amount of damage, the means of its
reparations and so on. The United Nations will play no
role in that process, because the mechanism is intended
22-68882

14/11/2022

to be created outside the United Nations framework and
no one has any plan to report to the General Assembly
on its activities. We emphasize that the vast majority of
Member States will have absolutely no voice or control
in the establishment of the mechanism or during
its operation.
We have no doubt as to where the funding for this
so-called reparation for damage will be coming from.
The West is doing its best to add at least some semblance
of legitimacy to its actions, in order to start spending
hundreds of billions of dollars of frozen sovereign
assets that have in fact been stolen from the Russian
Federation. They have long wanted to unfreeze those
assets, not in order to return the funds to their rightful
owner or spend them on helping Ukraine, but rather to
finance their own ever-growing arms supplies to Kyiv
and pay off the debts incurred for the weapons that have
already been supplied.
In that way, the West wants to prolong and further
aggravate the conflict, and plans to use Russian
money to that end. A corresponding decision of the
General Assembly is only needed to cover up for this
barefaced robbery, but that will only increase tensions
and instability throughout the world, to the benefit of
Western military corporations that have already made
billions of dollars on arms deliveries to Ukraine.
We underscore that neither the General Assembly
nor any mechanism can annul the sovereign immunity
of State assets that is granted by international law.
The States that support this decision of the General
Assembly will become complicit in the lawless
expropriation of a third country’s sovereign assets and
another act of abuse of the Assembly’s powers in the
interests of the West.
Do the States of the developing world even want
anything to do with that initiative? We believe that most
of them think it is not only preposterous but actually
insulting that Western countries have come to demand
rather reparations than pay them out. The scenario
of first stealing and then spending sovereign State
assets has been conceived by exactly the same States
that have a lengthy track record of robbing the rest
of the world. I would point to the centuries of slavery
and oppression, colonialism, neocolonial domination,
military aggression and interventions, blockades,
unilateral sanctions and the shameless extraction of
the natural resources of the occupied and subjugated
countries. The authors of the initiative are trying to

A/ES-11/PV.15

make everyone forget that, while propagating the
Ukrainian story alone.
Western States have never considered reparations
as a way of atoning for their own sins. Moreover, they
have blocked any relevant discussion of that issue in
the Sixth Committee for two decades and impeded the
development of any kind of multilateral tool to ensure
the accountability of States for internationally wrongful
acts. They have recalled this concept only now that they
have set their sights on reparations as a handy tool to
rob yet another State.
If the draft resolution comes to be adopted, it will
have systemic consequences for the United Nations
activities. We call on Member States to understand
that and to cast their vote against the draft resolution
before us.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
Member States.
The candidate countries Montenegro, Albania,
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, as well
Georgia, Liechtenstein, Monaco and San Marino align
themselves with this statement.
The General Assembly is called today to take
action on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6, entitled
“Furtherance of remedy and reparation for aggression
against Ukraine”. While the title of the draft resolution
explains its purpose and what it intends to achieve,
some more background may be useful. I will explain
why we believe the draft resolution is necessary, what
it does and what it does not, in order to dispel any
misconstructions, including some that we have just
heard from this rostrum.
First, why do we support this draft resolution?
The answer is straightforward. Aggression has
occurred. On 2 March, the General Assembly, by an
overwhelming majority, confirmed that the Russian
Federation committed an aggression against Ukraine
in violation of Article 2.4 of the Charter — an
internationally wrongful act that hits at the core of the
United Nations system. People around the world are
watching helplessly as innocent civilians are killed
as a result of deliberate targeting and infrastructure,
hospitals, schools and homes are destroyed every day.

22-688825/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

The destruction is overwhelming. The damage inflicted
on Ukraine is huge, and it is only growing bigger with
every day the war rages on.
Under international law, the responsible State is
under an obligation to make full reparation for the injury
caused by its internationally wrongful act. In order to
prepare an orderly process, such damage needs to be
properly registered in the first place. Accountability
means that such costs move from the victims to the
aggressor. The question is not whether Russia should
pay, but rather when it will pay and what amount.
Secondly, what does the draft resolution do? The
draft resolution merely recommends the creation by
Member States and Ukraine of a register of damage.
That register will serve as a repository of evidence of
all types of damage. There are precedents for this, as
we all know. The draft also recognizes the need for
the establishment, in cooperation with Ukraine, of
an international claims mechanism for reparation for
damage as a second step. Rather than charging the
domestic legal system of Ukraine and other States with
a potentially very high number of individual litigations,
a centralized and specialized system would be more
appropriate. In our view, an international claims
mechanism would provide for legal certainty and
procedural fairness. Russia must be held to account for
its wrongful acts and wanton destruction. That is key if
we are to uphold a rules-based international order. This
is not about the West against the rest, but about respect
for international rules.
Thirdly, what does the draft resolution not do?
The draft resolution does not establish the register of
damage, nor does it create the reparation mechanism.
Those instruments will be created at a later stage by
Member States, in cooperation with Ukraine. There
are no costs for the United Nations system arising from
the draft resolution and no costs for anyone else, apart
from Russia itself, which must bear responsibility for
its wrongful acts.
We must stay the course in order to shape history.
Russia’s refusal to take responsibility for destruction
and damage adds insult to injury.
Let me conclude by saying that every country,
regardless of its size, might or location on the globe,
enjoys the right to document crimes committed against
its population, territory, environment or cultural
property in order to secure their proper investigation.
Each State can also work together with other States
6/30

14/11/2022

or the international community to set up an efficient
international mechanism to deal with reparation claims
arising of such crimes. Accordingly, the draft resolution
essentially supports the path to justice.
Today it is Ukraine; tomorrow, it could be someone
else. We therefore call on everyone to vote in favour of
the draft resolution.
Ms. Tesfamariam (Eritrea): I have the honour to
take the floor on behalf of the delegations of Angola,
Belarus, Bolivia, Cambodia, China, Cuba, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Iran, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Nicaragua, the State of Palestine, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Syria, Venezuela,
Zimbabwe and other likeminded countries.
Allow us to stress from the very beginning that the
General Assembly is not a judicial body and that its
resolutions shall be initiated, as stipulated in Article 13
of the Charter of the United Nations, for the purpose of
“promoting international cooperation in the political
field and encouraging the progressive development
of international law and its codification [and
of] promoting international cooperation in the
economic, social, cultural, educational, and health
fields, and assisting in the realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion”.
The resolutions adopted by the General Assembly,
therefore, represent the political will of States and
can in no way serve as the legal basis for defining
internationally wrongful acts, mindful of the fact
that such an action would go beyond its mandate
and responsibilities.
The draft resolution before us, contained in
document A/ES-11/L.6, on the one hand has neither
sufficient legal basis, nor is it in line with the established
practice of the General Assembly, while, on the other
hand, it would only promote a divisive agenda within
this organ. In addition, should it be adopted, the draft
resolution would set a dangerous precedent that would
allow for the blessing of the General Assembly of the
establishment of a remedy and reparation mechanism
that is neither managed by nor accountable to the very
same organ that would be creating it.
In that context, we should not forget that colonial
Powers caused enormous damage and suffering to the
peoples of present-day developing States. We also recall
22-68882

14/11/2022

detrimental external interference in the internal affairs
of sovereign States, including foreign interventions
and invasions in Asia, Africa, Latin America and
the Caribbean. Those States, having suffered from
foreign interference, colonialism, slavery, oppression,
unilateral coercive measures, illegal blockades and
other internationally wrongful acts, also deserve the
right to remedy, reparation and justice, which should be
addressed through sound legal processes.
Sovereign States shall not be forced in any way to
take specific sides with regards to the ongoing conflict
in Ukraine. Their decision respective national positions,
including those that may decide to remain impartial,
should be respected. We seize this opportunity to stress
once again that the conflict around Ukraine must be
resolved through diplomatic means and efforts. The
General Assembly shall play a positive role towards that
end and should spare no effort in favour of its peaceful
resolution, while avoiding any initiative that may risk
further aggravating the situation on the ground and
further escalating tensions around the conflict.
In that context, we cannot overemphasize that
any attempt to entrench a Cold War era mentality and
bloc politics based on confrontation, the deepening of
divisions and the imposition of disparate visions and
agendas should be rejected by all responsible members
of the international community, as it contributes in
no way to addressing, through peaceful means and
cooperation, the complex, emerging and common
challenges faced nowadays by humankind.

A/ES-11/PV.15

deliberately violated the fundamental right of all States
to independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Moreover, that aggression has caused immense
suffering to the people of Ukraine. It has triggered the
largest humanitarian catastrophe in Europe since the
Second World War. More than 17 million people have
been displaced. Ukraine has lost more than 40 per cent
of its gross domestic product. Today more than 3 million
Ukrainians must get by without water, electricity,
sanitation and heating. Russia’s armed forces have
deliberately attacked critical civilian infrastructure,
including energy grids, power interconnectors and
water stations.
Like other countries, the Nordic-Baltic countries
have been delivering considerable financial,
humanitarian and military assistance to the people
of Ukraine. We strongly believe that all Member
States must seek ways to support Ukraine. Draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.6, “Furtherance of remedy and
reparation for aggression against Ukraine”, gives us the
possibility to further extend our support for Ukraine
and the Ukrainian people. With this draft resolution,
the General Assembly recognizes the need to establish
an international mechanism to compensate Ukraine for
the damage caused by Russia’s aggression. The draft
resolution recommends the creation of a registry of
damages to serve as a record of evidence and claims
of damage, loss and injury caused by the aggression
of Russia.

Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the eight Nordic-Baltic countries:
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Lithuania,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Latvia.

We believe that it is important to collect and
preserve evidence of Russia’s brutal aggression against
Ukraine, because Russia must be held accountable for
its internationally wrongful acts against Ukraine and
Ukrainians. Just a few hours ago, Ukrainian President
Volodymyr Zelenskyy told journalists that investigators
have uncovered more than 400 war crimes in areas
of Kherson abandoned by Russian forces as they
retreated. There must be no impunity for those crimes
or damages caused, and the perpetrators must be held
to account. In order to achieve that goal, evidence must
be properly stored; otherwise, it could potentially be
lost or damaged. Thus, we support the collection and
storage of all evidence in accordance with relevant
international norms and standards.

On 24 February, Russia launched its brutal fullscale invasion of Ukraine, in blatant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
By that war of aggression, aided by Belarus, Russia has

The Nordic-Baltic countries reiterate our firm
support for Ukraine. We are convinced that respect for
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the international rules-based order is fundamental to

To conclude, we would like to stress that all
efforts should be made to facilitate and promote
friendly relations, dialogue and cooperation among
States, in line with the principles, purposes and values
enshrined in both the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, approved by the General Assembly in its
resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970.

22-688827/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

our common security and multilateral cooperation. We
urge Russia to abide by international law and uphold its
international commitments. We call on the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations to continue efforts to
restore respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence of Ukraine.
United Nations Member States must support all
mechanisms to restore justice to the victims of Russia’s
aggression. We therefore call all Member States to vote
in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): The Russian aggression
against Ukraine requires an unambiguous and
comprehensive response from the international
community as a whole and from each of its individual
members. Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6, “Furtherance
of remedy and reparation for aggression against
Ukraine”, gives us an opportunity to respond to the
numerous horrific and devastating effects of the
ongoing war.
For almost nine months, Russia has been attacking
Ukraine’s civilian population and non-military
infrastructure, including those protected by binding
provisions of international humanitarian law. The scale
of material damages perpetrated by Russia in Ukraine
is horrendous and has not been seen in Europe since
the Second World War. It is obvious that Russia has
flagrantly and manifestly violated a multitude of its
international obligations, first and foremost its obligation
to respect the prohibition of aggression. Its disrespect
for international law is highlighted by non-compliance
with the binding decision of the International Court of
Justice of 16 March on provisional measures.
Therefore, accountability for the violations
of international law committed in Ukraine by the
Russian Federation must remain our priority as the war
continues to rage. Russia must bear the consequences
of all of its violations, including by making reparation
for the injury and damage caused by such a glaring and
large-scale violation of its international obligations.
It is a fundamental principle of international law
that the breach of an obligation involves a duty to
redress, in an adequate form, all wrongs, material and
non-material, inflicted upon a State and its citizens.
Reparation, therefore, is the indispensable complement
of a failure to apply international legal rules. The
draft resolution before us today recapitulates what
is obvious — Russia is under obligation to make
full reparation.
8/30

14/11/2022

Poland strongly supports the creation of an
international register of damages caused by the Russian
Federation’s aggression against Ukraine. We strongly
believe that all damages always need to be appropriately
compensated, no matter when and no matter where
they are inflicted. That is a universal guiding principle.
It is not enough for the perpetrators merely to admit
their wrongdoings; it is not enough if they express
remorse — and in this case, we are far away even from
that. Moral gestures are welcome but never enough.
It is material compensation that is needed to rebuild
damages caused by wars. We need to create the registry
because it is fundamental for the future of Ukraine.
Poland knows only too well from its own history what
it means when such actions are forsaken.
The proposed future register, the operation and
modalities of which will be decided among interested
States, will not only assist Ukraine in rebuilding itself
after the devastating war, but more importantly, it will
bring justice to the victims of Russia’s barbaric acts,
such as mass killings of men, women and children,
torture, sexual violence or forced deportation. It should
also not be forgotten, as Poland stressed in the Security
Council in May, that apart from the human casualties,
the Russian aggression keeps causing destruction
to cultural sites in Ukraine. Religious sites, historic
buildings, monuments, Holocaust memorials and other
artefacts are still being damaged and looted on a daily
basis. Addressing the General Assembly in September,
President Andrzej Duda stressed Poland’s commitment
to all accountability efforts by stating:
“From this rostrum, I would like to pledge our
support for all existing and new initiatives so that
those who deprive millions of people of their right
to food and destroy the environment will no longer
go unpunished ... In the face of Russia’s unlawful
actions, we should all learn a lesson for the future.”
(A/77/PV.5, p. 29)
As the international community was unable to
prevent the ongoing Russian aggression, it is our duty
to advocate for ensuring accountability for atrocities
committed against Ukraine. It is therefore imperative
to support today’s draft resolution, as it will constitute
the first step towards reparations for injury and damage
caused by Russian aggression and lead us towards
achieving peace and post-conflict recovery.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): I thank you, Sir, for
granting me the floor to express a few concerns with
22-68882

14/11/2022

regard to the caution we should exercise in acting on a
draft resolution that would border on misadventure if
we were to act upon it in the way we are being called
on to do.
Sri Lanka remains deeply concerned regarding the
deteriorating situation in Ukraine resulting from the
ongoing hostilities. As a country that suffered a 30-year
internal conflict, Sri Lanka affirms the truism that wars
no longer end with winners or losers. Wars, as someone
has said, are easier to start than to stop. Let us take
a look around us. How are wars won in contemporary
times? Have they not ended indecisively? Every one of
them has ended indecisively. It has today become much
more difficult to relate military success to political
stability, which is an indispensable ingredient for peace.
Since the eruption of hostilities in Ukraine in
February, we have seen hostile rhetoric, strategic
manoeuvring and the repeated closure of doors to any
possible settlement of the conflict, thereby relegating
the humanitarian crisis and resulting suffering to the
back burner. We are suicidal in our tendencies, quite
frankly. We like to play with fire, to our detriment. The
consequences are evident to the whole world, which was
already beset by the devastating effects of a pandemic
and is now facing a severe energy and food crisis that
has devastated economies and livelihoods around the
world. Those in the developing world, like Sri Lanka,
with vulnerable economies dependent on services such
as tourism, have been especially hard-hit. All this is
happening amidst multiple other challenges, referred
to by the Secretary-General himself as a “five-alarm
global fire”.
The vast majority of countries represented in the
Assembly have not invaded other countries or colonized
them, nor have they engaged in proxy wars in countries
far away from their own. However, we in Sri Lanka have
been forced to suffer the consequences of an Easter
bombing and an unknown pandemic, followed by a war
in Ukraine, the cumulative effects of which have dealt
our economies, and those of countries similar to us,
a body blow, causing our economies to haemorrhage.
That is the plight in which we find ourselves
Sri Lanka is of the view that the most urgent
step, therefore, is to continue to engage in talks for a
ceasefire, end the conflict and alleviate the humanitarian
suffering. That is of paramount importance. The
attempt to provide justification through a General
Assembly draft resolution for the seizure of sovereign

A/ES-11/PV.15

assets of one party at this juncture is, in our respectful
view, misconceived and misplaced and would amount
to an overreach of the application of the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and an engagement
in what I would describe as jurisprudential gymnastics,
choreographed intrinsically by a misplaced composition
of misunderstood sequences — a misadventure that
could go terribly wrong. A simple reading of the
Charter provisions makes it abundantly clear that such
a mechanism was never, ever contemplated by the
drafters of the Charter. It could also result in setting a
precedent, as observed by the Ambassador of Eritrea,
upon which the General Assembly does not have the
competency to pronounce itself. What, we ask, are the
outer parametres of such a mechanism? Would it also
apply to conflicts in other parts of the world that have
been lingering for much longer? We must ask ourselves
that question. Have those conflicts ended? Have we
exhausted our best efforts to bring the conflict to an end
by a pacific settlement of the dispute, as envisaged by
the provisions of the Charter? Let us think about that.
Moreover, the General Assembly by its very nature
is a political body for deliberation and entrusted to
make political recommendations to its membership
through consensus or otherwise. The General
Assembly cannot determine State responsibility or
usurp the sovereign immunity of State property under
international law. It cannot arrogate to itself the role of
an adjudicatory tribunal. This move therefore creates a
dangerous precedent that leaves room for any group of
countries, based on existing power dynamics, to lay the
groundwork to seize sovereign assets without any basis
in international law, further aggravating the already
existing mistrust and suspicion.
Reparations by their very nature include five key
components: cessation/assurance of non-repetition,
restitution and repatriation, compensation, satisfaction
and rehabilitation. Let us ask ourselves the question:
Why do countries pay reparations? War reparations are
compensation payments made after a war by one side to
the other. They are a levy on a defeated country, forcing
it to pay some of the war costs of the winning country.
That’s what they are for. Is it the case that the war has
conclusively ended? Is that not that far from the case?
We sincerely wish it were, even indecisively.
We are therefore of the considered view that this
initiative will not only exacerbate the conflict but could
well result in compelling the parties to resort to a more
lethal and sophisticated method of prosecuting the

22-688829/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

conflict that none of us would wish to see. We must take
every care that we do not reach that point — the point of
no return. We must continue our efforts of diplomatic
engagement at the highest level and desist from any
activity or support to either party of whatever nature
that would enable them to sustain military operations
further. However, sadly, there seems to be no forward
movement in that regard and steps being contemplated,
such as today’s, would only widen existing fissures that
would entail a multiplier effect globally that would have
to be borne by all of us, including those Member States
that are not even remotely connected to the conflict,
and by generations to come.
The greatest glory in living, someone once said,
lies not in never falling but in rising every time we
fall. It is time that we got together and put an end to
the conflict by using our diplomatic means. For those
reasons, Sri Lanka respectfully requests that the
Assembly not exacerbate the conflict or engage in any
activities that are not in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of the States
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC),
namely, the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Sultanate of Oman, the State of Qatar, the
State of Kuwait and my own country, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.
The GCC States are following with great concern
the situation in the Republic of Ukraine, the ongoing
crisis and its resulting humanitarian, economic and
political repercussions. The GCC States stress that
their positions are consistent with their fundamental
principles of respect for international law and the
Charter of the United Nations that govern relations
among States, and are based on respect for the
sovereignty and integrity of States. The GCC States
affirm the friendly relations they enjoy with all parties
to the crisis.
The GCC States call on all parties to abide by their
obligations under international law and are convinced
that the best way to avoid the negative repercussions
is to settle the crisis through dialogue and diplomatic
means in a way that meets the interests of all parties.
The GCC States therefore urge all parties to exercise
restraint, avoid any further escalation and commit
themselves to peaceful means to settle the conflict.
10/30

14/11/2022

The draft resolution before us today in document
A/ES-11/L.6 is based on the Basic Principles and
Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation
for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human
Rights Law and Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law, adopted by the General Assembly
in resolution 60/147 of 2005. However, the GCC States
believe that any mechanism established must be based
on procedures and criteria that are internationally
agreed, broadly accepted and under United Nations
supervision in an effort to provide remedy and reparation
in a fair manner that guarantees the achievement of the
desired objectives.
In conclusion, the GCC States express their hope
that efforts will continue to reach a solution satisfactory
to all parties. The GCC States continue to support all
humanitarian and political initiatives in order to achieve
the desired purpose of bringing peace to the region and
sparing the world the negative repercussions of the crisis
at the humanitarian, political and economic levels.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Russia’s unprovoked and illegal invasion of Ukraine,
including its attacks on civilians, schools, hospitals
and power supplies, has caused and continues to cause
immense damage and loss to Ukraine and its people.
In contrast, the scenes of relief and joy we have seen
as Ukrainian civilians in Kherson greet the liberating
armed forces of Ukraine should leave us in no doubt
about the cruel and destructive nature of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine.
It will take a broad international effort to support
Ukraine’s recovery and reconstruction in order to build
a safe and prosperous future for the Ukrainian people.
But only one country, Russia, is responsible for the
damage to Ukraine and it is absolutely right, as draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.6 sets out, that Russia pay for that
damage. Russia must be held to account for actions that
are in clear violation of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations.
The United Kingdom supports Ukraine’s ambition
to establish a register of damage to ensure that the
evidence of the destruction caused by Russia is
documented and preserved. That is an important first
step in Ukrainian efforts to seek justice in accordance
with international law. It is right that we begin that
process now.
Putin must end his war of choice, end the lies
and distortion, end the global devastation in its wake
22-68882

14/11/2022

and withdraw his troops from Ukraine. We remain
steadfast in our support for Ukraine and for justice and
compensation for the damage that Russia has done.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): More than eight months
after the onset of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine,
the situation is still extremely dire. We again condemn
Russia’s aggression. Russia has inflicted tremendous
damage on Ukraine, including the killing of innocent
civilians and the destruction of civil infrastructure and
facilities, such as schools, museums and commercial
establishments. Japan has already resumed embassy
operations in Kyiv, and we are mindful of such damage
on the ground. We recall that indiscriminate attacks on
innocent civilian populations constitute a war crime,
and responsibility for those actions must be upheld.
Unilateral attempts to change the status quo by
force must not occur in any corner of the globe. Draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.6 should contribute to reparations
for the serious violations of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. Russia must immediately stop
its war of aggression, withdraw all of its troops and
military equipment from Ukraine and respect Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): Aotearoa New
Zealand welcomes the opportunity to speak on this
important matter.
Aotearoa New Zealand continues to be gravely
concerned by the loss of life, displacement, destruction
and economic calamity caused by the Russian
Federation’s blatant aggression against Ukraine over
the past nine months. Consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations and as members of the General
Assembly, it is our responsibility to do all we can to avoid
the deadly consequences of war. We see accountability
and reparation processes as an important element in
avoiding and forestalling the further perpetuation of
grave atrocities.
Aotearoa New Zealand is strongly committed
to supporting international mechanisms that seek
accountability for Russia’s clear breaches of international
law. We continue those efforts through New Zealand’s
intervention in Ukraine’s case against Russia in the
International Court of Justice, as well as through the
making of significant financial contributions to the
International Criminal Court.

A/ES-11/PV.15

In addition to mechanisms that seek accountability,
we believe that future reparation processes can play a
critical role in the rebuilding of communities. Those
that are responsible for causing damage and injury by
breaching international law must make full reparations
for rebuilding and compensating Ukraine.
Aotearoa New Zealand strongly supports Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and unequivocally
condemns Russia’s aggression. The principles at stake
in Ukraine are deeply significant to New Zealand as a
small State acting in the world. We continue to call on
Russia to commit to dialogue, to act in the interests of
peace and the principles of the United Nations, and to
act consistently with its responsibilities as a permanent
member of the Security Council. We stand shoulder to
shoulder with Ukraine.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam continues
to closely follow the situation in Ukraine. We are
extremely concerned over recent developments, with
few prospects for an early resolution.
Our position has been clear and consistent. The
immediate priority now must be an immediate cessation
of hostilities, the restoration of peace and protecting the
safety and security of civilians and civilian facilities
in Ukraine. In that regard, Viet Nam welcomes the
efforts of the United Nations and the international
community and thanks them for their untiring efforts
in helping bring all parties together and for the
continued implementation of concluded agreements.
We cannot let cooperation and dialogue take the back
seat. We continue to call on the concerned parties to
resume dialogue and negotiation so as to achieve
long-term solutions that take into consideration the
interests and concerns of all parties, in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Nothing should be more desirable than the regional and
international peace, security and stability so awaited
by the people.
Wars and violent conflicts across continents
continue unabated, posing direct threats to millions
of lives. Underdevelopment and poverty are also
the consequences of the deep-rooted historical
ramifications of wars. After decades of war, struggling
for independence and defending our independence, with
untold losses, Viet Nam fully understands the utmost
importance of resolving war legacies for reconstruction
and the maintenance of peace, stability and prosperity,
as well as for the livelihoods of the people. At the

22-6888211/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

same time, we believe that in all conflicts, it is crucial
that the concerned parties and international partners
make the utmost efforts to contribute practically to
alleviating the destruction of war, in accordance with
international law.
Pending a final solution for the situation in
Ukraine, the immediate task is to respond adequately
to the urgent humanitarian needs of those impacted by
hostilities in the country. International assistance is
critical. To that end, we must continue joining hands
to create a conducive and people-centred environment
and refrain from actions that may drive the parties
further apart and delay the prospects of settlement.
Viet Nam commends operations by the United Nations,
international partners and regional countries to assist
people on the ground, including refugees. We stand
ready to constructively contribute to diplomatic efforts
and to the reconstruction and restoration in Ukraine.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): Let us remember that,
on 2 March, under the Uniting for Peace formula, the
international community stood together and adopted
resolution ES-11/1 by an overwhelming majority. In
doing so, we were united in deploring
“in the strongest terms the aggression by the
Russian Federation against Ukraine in violation of
Article 2 (4) of the Charter” (resolution ES-11/1,
para. 2).
It is now more than eight months on. Every day,
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine unleashes further
suffering, causing death, injury and destruction in
Ukraine. When this illegal and immoral war ends,
Ukraine will face the monumental task of rebuilding
all that has been destroyed by Russia in the context of
or during its invasion. The injuries suffered by Ukraine
as a result of Russia’s violations of international law
require full reparation by Russia, in accordance with
the international law of State responsibility.
Article 31 of the International Law Commission’s
articles on the responsibility of states for internationally
wrongful acts makes it abundantly clear that
“[t]he responsible State is under an obligation to
make full reparation for the injury caused by the
internationally wrongful act” (resolution 56/83,
annex, p.8).
That fundamental principle of international law is not
controversial; far from it. In fact, in a decision handed
down in February, the International Court of Justice
12/30

14/11/2022

once again explicitly reaffirmed that article 31 and that
principle represent customary international law.
So let us be clear. The international community
has overwhelmingly spoken to condemn Russia’s
illegal invasion of Ukraine as a violation of the Charter
of the United Nations. There is no doubt that Russia
has an obligation under international law to make full
reparation for the injury caused by that egregious and
legally wrongful act. Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6,
which we are debating today and which Australia is
proud to co-sponsor, recognizes those basic facts and
that Russia must be held to account for its illegal and
immoral invasion of Ukraine. We will not be fooled by
Russia’s misinformation and obfuscation.
The draft resolution does not overstep the powers
of the General Assembly in any way. It simply
recognizes fundamental principles of international law
by which Russia and all of us must abide. A register
of damage and a reparations mechanism, appropriately
constructed, would be important components of a fair,
impartial and just framework for reaching a view of the
reparations Russia must make to ensure lasting peace.
The international community must work together
to start laying the foundations now. We must first
accurately record the damage caused by Russia, with
a view to achieving peace and post-conflict recovery.
We urge all Member States to continue to support the
draft resolution and every effort to ensure that Russia
complies with its obligations under international law,
including to end its war of aggression against Ukraine
and make reparations for the injury and damage it has
already caused.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): For nine long months, the
unprovoked and unjustified military aggression of
Russia in Ukraine, an otherwise avoidable disaster
imposed by the Kremlin, has caused devastating
consequences. Thousands of innocent people have been
killed, millions have been displaced and vast parts of
the country have been destroyed. Nothing has been
spared. Russian bombs and missiles, lately with help
from Iran and North Korea, have, in blatant disregard
for international law, targeted Ukraine’s economy, its
infrastructure, its education and health care, and its
cultural, religious, historical and archaeological sites.
The Russian footprint of destruction is everywhere.
Every time Russia has been pushed back, and this has
been happening continuously for months now, we have
seen relentless punishing bombardments seeking to
22-68882

14/11/2022

A/ES-11/PV.15

wreck Ukraine’s infrastructure, provoke a power-grid
collapse, halt water and sewage services and make
life impossible in the hope of freezing the country
into submission.

downward-spiralling outlook. It is a self-inflicted
pain. That is why, it is time for Russia to silence the
guns, withdraw completely and unconditionally from
Ukraine and engage in negotiations.

This is appalling but it is not news in this war
of aggression. The news is that Russian cruelty has
not sapped Ukraine’s will to fight. The retreat from
Kherson is just the latest act of the Russian humiliation
saga in Ukraine. Yes, there is no electricity in Kherson;
there is no water, there is no light, there is no heating
and there is no internet there; but most importantly,
there is no Russia there anymore. Only its terrible
footprint remains.

Ukraine is the home of the Ukrainians. It does not
have to become the graveyard of Russian soldiers.

The United Nations and other organizations have
reported continuously on the significant and widespread
damage caused by this aggression. But there is need to
have a detailed map of what has happened and the full
picture of that man-made catastrophe. What we know
already is staggering. According to serious and credible
reports, over 7 per cent of Ukraine’s entire housing
stock has been destroyed. The damage inflicted on
transportation infrastructure, roads and railroads
amounts to close to one-third of the entire country. More
than 300 bridges have been deliberately destroyed by
Russia since February. Some 1,270 schools have been
damaged or destroyed, along with close to 1,000 healthcare facilities. Business and industrial properties have
sustained close to $10 billion in damage. But that is far
from the full picture.
Actions have consequences, and Russia must be
held accountable, including for reparations. It is one
of the core principles of international law that the
aggressor has an obligation to make full reparation
for the damage it has caused. That is why Albania
fully supports draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6, entitled
“Furtherance of remedy and reparation for aggression
against Ukraine”, and calls on all the members of
the General Assembly to vote in its favour as an act
of justice and dignity. It is very straightforward. An
aggression has happened; extensive damage has been
inflicted; it needs to be documented for the purpose
of reparation and accountability. That is all the text
is about.
This war, just like any other war, will stop one day.
It must stop now, since with every further day the toll
will be heavier for all, including for Russia, which, let
us not forget, has become the first Group of 20 economy
decoupled completely from Europe, with a very bleak,

Mr. Rae (Canada) (spoke in French): It is honour to
represent my country, Canada, and to clearly note that
some things have been said concerning draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.6 that, quite frankly, have nothing to do with
it. I therefore believe that it is important to insist on the
principles and words contained in the draft resolution,
because they are crystal clear and have nothing
whatsoever to do with what some representatives have
said in that regard.
(spoke in English)
I think it is important that we recall the words of
a wise philosopher who said that there is a difference
between saying something and proving something.
Thus, when someone says that the draft resolution is
about the forcible seizure of assets and the destruction
of the powers of sovereign States, it is not true. That
is not what the draft resolution says. That is not what
the draft resolution does. The draft resolution is very
brief. It is only a page and a half. Anyone can read it.
Everyone can read it for themselves and see that the
words “seizure of sovereign assets” occur nowhere
in its provisions. This is nothing about the seizure of
sovereign assets.
The country that is making those allegations is
making them because it does not want to admit what
the draft resolution actually says. It is very simple.
After all of the preambular parts referring to previous
resolutions and decisions that the Assembly has made,
the draft resolution simply says that we
“recognize the need for the establishment, in
cooperation with Ukraine, of an international
mechanism for reparation for damage loss or
injury” (A/ES-11/L.6, para.3)
and that we recommend
“the creation by Member States, in cooperation with
Ukraine, of an international register of damage to
serve as a record, in documentary form, of evidence
and claims information on damage, loss or injury
to all natural and legal persons concerned” (ibid.,
para. 4).

22-6888213/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

That is what it says. Those are two operative
paragraphs of the draft resolution. Some representatives
who have spoken have been talking about something
completely different. Some of what I hear today is a
cry, and the cry is “We are hurting. We are hurting
because of the cascade of crises and calamities that
have occurred in the world in the past several years.
And we do not want there to be any distractions from
our calamities.” I think that any caring, empathetic,
compassionate person who heard these words would
say, “I understand. I hear you.”
There have been pleas from many representatives
that we should be paying attention to the humanitarian
concerns and the humanitarian issues on the ground,
and that we should be striving for peace. Who can
disagree with that? Canada has been spending hundreds
of millions of dollars on the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine, and I say that not to claim that we are
better than anyone else, but because we are, of course,
responding to the humanitarian situation.
But let us not be distracted from what is actually
in the draft resolution. It is not in any way in excess of
the powers of the General Assembly. The only reason
the General Assembly is dealing with the situation in
Ukraine is because the Russian Federation has vetoed
each and every attempt in the Security Council to deal
with the crisis. The Russian Federation is the party
that is committing the aggression. We have said on
numerous occasions in the Assembly that there has been
an aggression and that it is an attack on the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. We have said that twice in clear
and emphatic resolutions, and we have gone further and
said that the annexations, too, were illegal.
Now, all we are asking is that the General Assembly
recommend that Ukraine be allowed to set up a registry
and that other countries can join in supporting the
registry, which is not about seizing assets or dealing
with State sovereignty in any way, shape or form. It is
about saying that there has to be a registry in order for
there to be an eventual reckoning for the damage and
destruction that have been caused.
Sometimes we are too gentle in describing this
situation. One of my colleagues today described from
this rostrum the events of 24 February as an eruption of
hostilities, as if a volcano had gone off. This was not a
volcano. This was an attack by one country on another
country, And under our rules here — they are in the
14/30

14/11/2022

Charter — when one country attacks another country,
it is a breach of the law. It is against the rules.
One would have thought that the Security Council
would have been able to say that, but it could not,
because the Russian Federation, which is the party
that perpetrated the attack, prevented the Security
Council from functioning and has tried to tie up the
Assembly and the Security Council in knots because
it cannot bring itself to admit that its so-called special
military operation is not a special military operation. It
is a systematic attack on Ukraine, the Ukrainian people
and Ukrainian infrastructure. Why did the Russian
Federation wait until the autumn to begin its massive
bombing of the civilian infrastructure of Ukraine? It
did so because winter follows the autumn. That is why.
It was an attempt to freeze and to starve the people
of Ukraine.
People talk anxiously here about the need to find
peace. Of course we need to find peace. The one
country that can create peace is the country that refuses
to allow the Security Council to do its job, refuses to
allow the Assembly to do its job, and refuses to accept
responsibility for its own act of aggression. This is a
permanent member of the Security Council that is
supposed to be acting as a steward and guardian of
the Charter.
There is nothing excessive in the draft resolution.
In fact, the draft resolution is modest in the extreme.
The Assembly is not being asked to perform a function
as a judge or jury. It is not being asked to exceed its
jurisdiction. It is not being asked to go too far. It is
simply saying that there should be a registry and that
Ukraine and other countries that are willing to support
it should be allowed to support a registry. Why and how
this is an excess of jurisdiction cannot be explained,
and all of the things that have been said in the letter
from the Russian Ambassador to all of us and all that
has been said today from this rostrum about how this
is some systematic Western plot to steal the assets
of sovereign States is just complete balderdash. It is
nonsense, and we have to have the courage to say so.
This is not some magical event that occurred out
of the air, that has no explanation and that has no
cause and no effect. It has a cause, and that cause is
called aggression. It has an effect, and that effect is the
destruction of life, liberty and property in a country
called Ukraine, which is a real place and a real country.
And like all countries and all members of the Assembly,
22-68882

14/11/2022

it deserves support. We are not doing this for Ukraine
alone. There are representatives here who have said that
this is all very far away and has nothing to do with us.
Well, I am sorry. The crimes that are committed against
the least of us are crimes that are committed against all
of us.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Slovakia fully aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the
European Union, and I wish to add just a few remarks
in my national capacity.
The context of today’s debate is indeed selfexplanatory. Slovakia considers draft resolution A/ES11/L.6 before us to be another important step towards
ensuring the accountability of Russia for its continuing,
unfortunate, unprovoked and unjustified military
aggression against Ukraine, in violation of all the
fundamental values and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law upon which the
Organization is built, upon which we work and which
we believe in.
Under customary international law, the State
responsible for an internationally wrongful act is
under obligation to cease that act, if continuing, and
to offer appropriate assurances and guarantees of
non-repetition if circumstances so require. Importantly,
the responsible State is further obliged to make full
reparation for the injury caused by the internationally
wrongful act. That is just a reminder to all of us of
the important international legal context. The General
Assembly has already confirmed in its resolution ES11/1 of 2 March that the Russian aggression against
Ukraine is indeed in violation of paragraph 4 of Article
2 of the Charter of the United Nations. That resolution
also demanded that Russia cease this internationally
wrongful act by
“immediately, completely and unconditionally
withdrawing all of its military forces from the
territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders” (resolution ES-11/1, para. 4).
Today we have an opportunity to address the
second obligation of Russia arising from its continuing
violations of international law. We have already
heard what the draft resolution before us seeks and
does not seek. I will therefore not repeat it, but rather
appeal to all delegations in the Hall with one simple
question. I would ask them to imagine that their
neighbour had launched and relentlessly continued
a brutal and illegitimate military aggression, acting

A/ES-11/PV.15

in contravention of their right to sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. What is more,
that neighbour has caused enormous — and I have to
underline “enormous” — and unbelievable material and
moral damage to their country and, what is more, to
their people. We see this taking place daily in Ukraine.
In such a situation, would the affected State not want
the international community to recognize that the
aggressor State must be held to account and that it has
the obligation to make full reparation?
I believe that the answer is clear, and Slovakia
strongly encourages all States to vote in line with not
only the legal, but also the moral imperative today. That
is indeed our collective responsibility. We will do so on
our end.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and wishes to add some remarks in its
national capacity.
Despite the many strong condemnations of Russia’s
war of aggression against Ukraine, overwhelmingly
voiced by the General Assembly, Russia’s violent
actions continue to cause suffering and destruction on
a large scale.
Russia must be held accountable for such suffering
and destruction. Since the beginning, Russia’s war
of aggression has deliberately targeted civilians and
civilian infrastructure in order to cause great harm to
the people of Ukraine. The picture that is emerging
after Russia’s recent withdrawal from Kherson is once
again one of destruction and pain inflicted on the
local population.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6 does not establish any
standing United Nations reparation or compensation
mechanism. It is instead aimed at providing global
legitimacy by recommending to Member States the
creation of an international register of damage. Such
a register of damages would coordinate and organize
evidence-gathering efforts, including those carried
out in the context of various investigations by United
Nations bodies. Such a register would make sure that
the collected evidence is properly organized, recorded
and properly used in legal proceedings.
Reparation for civil claims, as well as for Russia’s
internationally wrongful acts, is not only a fundamental
obligation under international law, but it is also an
essential step towards achieving peace and post-conflict

22-6888215/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

recovery, as well as for the future reintegration of the
aggressor State into the community of peace-loving
nations, as laid down in Article 4 of the Charter of the
United Nations. Reparations are meant to bring justice
to the victims for death, injury, torture, deportation and
forced displacement.
Italy is a proud co-sponsor and a strong supporter
of the draft resolution. I call on all Member States to
support justice, reconstruction and reconciliation by
voting in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
and makes the following additional remarks in its
national capacity.
Once again, Ireland strongly condemns the Russian
Federation’s unprovoked, unjustified and illegal further
invasion of Ukraine. It is in flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, as confirmed by the
General Assembly. Once again, the General Assembly
meets while civilians in Ukraine bear the consequences
of Russia’s actions. Those include attacks against
residential buildings and the deliberate destruction
of critical civilian infrastructure, including some
40 per cent of Ukraine’s electricity supply capacity. In
addition, incidents of enforced disappearances, torture
and conflict-related sexual violence committed by
Russian soldiers continue to be documented.
Ireland once again urges the Russian Federation
to comply with its obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We repeat our call on
Russia to immediately end its invasion of Ukraine, to
withdraw its forces from the entire territory of Ukraine
and to turn to the path of dialogue and diplomacy
before any more of Ukraine’s people are forced to pay
the terrible price of this appalling war.
Notwithstanding the previous resolutions of this
organ, and in complete disregard of the provisions of the
United Nations Charter, Russia persists in its unashamed
and unlawful aggression against Ukraine. There are
legal consequences for the Russian Federation arising
from its continued breaches of international law. Russia
is under obligation to cease its internationally wrongful
acts and to make reparations for the injury caused by
those acts. Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6, before us
today, recognizes and affirms those clear obligations.
16/30

14/11/2022

Ireland therefore supports the recommendation for
the establishment of an international register of damage.
Such a register of damage would preserve evidence of
the damage, loss and injury that have been inflicted on
Ukraine and its people by Russia, creating an essential
resource for future and ongoing accountability efforts.
A register is also important for the historical record,
to shed light on the atrocities, international crimes and
human rights violations committed against the people
of Ukraine.
The proposed register would be an important first
step towards accountability in order to provide justice
for victims and survivors. The establishment of a
register would represent the beginning of a process that
could ultimately lead to the payment of reparations, in
accordance with international law. Reparations would
alleviate some of the devastating long-term physical
and financial consequences of this horrific war.
We urge all members of the General Assembly to
vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted today.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea on behalf of the group
of like-minded States, and would like to make the
following remarks in its national capacity.
It has become clear that Western countries are
insisting on promoting the state of political polarization
within the United Nations and deepening the divide
among its Member States by repeatedly calling for
meetings like today’s, which are aimed only at serving
the hostile agenda of Western countries against the
Russian Federation.
The Syrian Arab Republic affirms that regional
and international disputes and crises cannot be resolved
through the practice of misinformation, through policies
of isolation, exclusion and imposition of sanctions, or
through the establishment of politicized mechanisms.
Rather, they must be resolved through diplomacy and
dialogue. We also stress that the General Assembly
should avoid any initiatives that may exacerbate the
conflict and prevent its peaceful resolution.
The conflict between Russia and Ukraine has
been escalated by Western countries stoking extreme
Ukrainian nationalism and continuing to incite neoNazis and supplying them with unlimited weapons and
22-68882

14/11/2022

various equipment, which has become a threat to the
security and safety of the countries of the region.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6, which is before the
General Assembly today, comes in the context of a
series of unbalanced, biased and provocative resolutions
pushed by the United States of America and its Western
allies to target the Russian Federation. It represents a
dangerous state of hostility with the intention of seizing
sovereign Russian funds and assets that they have
previously frozen, setting a precedent by establishing
an illegitimate compensation mechanism that clearly
exceeds the mandate of the General Assembly.
The failure of all previous attempts by those
countries to break the will of the Russian Federation
has prompted them to resort to yet another blackmailing
tactic against the Russian Federation by looting its
frozen funds within the framework of what they call the
reparation mechanism to redress damages, compensate
for the losses and help the Ukrainian people. However,
their real objective is to pay for Ukraine’s increasing
purchases of Western arms.
Exploiting the General Assembly and manipulating
the United Nations rules of procedure by imposing
new, illegal and unprecedented mechanisms through
pressure and blackmail have become a consistent
practice of Western countries to target Member States
that do not follow their political agenda.
The policy of double standards followed by Western
countries has led them to focus on certain issues that
serve their agendas, while at the same time they shirk
their responsibilities for the unlawful actions they have
committed in past decades against a number of Member
States in Asia, Africa and Latin America in an attempt
to avoid accountability for the grave damage they have
inflicted on those countries, including my own, the
Syrian Arab Republic. Therefore, the draft resolution
that those countries have put before us today for the
establishment of such a mechanism is yet further clear
evidence of the extent of their political hypocrisy.
I would like to ask: Who will compensate my
country for the destruction of Syrian infrastructure
by the so-called international coalition forces, led by
the United States and its Western allies? Who will
compensate the Syrian people for the theft of their
national wealth and the losses resulting from unilateral
sanctions, along with the unilateral, inhumane and
coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people for the
past decade? No one is asking those questions.

A/ES-11/PV.15

Proceeding from my country’s steadfast and
firm position in rejecting all attempts to politicize
and manipulate the work of the United Nations, my
delegation will vote against the draft resolution before
us and urges delegations of Member States to be aware
of the danger of being dragged into attempts to establish
illegal and illegitimate mechanisms that are inconsistent
with the prerogatives of the General Assembly and the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, which will
only create more chaos in international relations.
Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
We associate ourselves with the statement made by
the Ambassador of Eritrea on behalf of the group of
like-minded countries.
We find ourselves in the General Assembly once
again faced with the hypocrisy and double standards of
some countries, presenting initiatives that correspond
only to their selfish, exclusive agendas and do not
benefit or contribute to multilateralism or to the
inclusiveness of the United Nations membership.
Nicaragua
advocates
building
a
robust
multilateralism for the promotion of a culture of
peace and a new international order with profound
transformations in relations among countries and
new centres of development and hope that represent
the majority of humankind. It is important to take
the final step towards a multipolar world that
reinforces sovereignty, international law and the
right to independent development and puts an end to
double standards.
Nicaragua reiterates its commitment to respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of all
countries. Member States must emphatically comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The draft resolution contained in document A/ES11/L.6 shamelessly seeks to manipulate and politicize
our Organization by recommending the establishment
of an international reparation mechanism that would
not be administered by the body that would create it.
The submission of this selective draft resolution by
specific countries highlights the interests and double
standards that Western countries want to impose on
us, creating a reparation mechanism for a specific case
while totally ignoring the legacy of the painful history
of their imperialist, colonialist occupations, with
their crimes, conquest, extermination and looting of
hundreds of nations of indigenous peoples.

22-6888217/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

The slavery and genocide of our indigenous peoples
were and continue to be a crime against humanity
without comparison in the history of this world, while
the reparations to which the indigenous, African and
Afro-descendant victims of such barbarism have a full
right remain a pending debt that the European countries
and the United States refuse to make good. Western
countries do not recognize the greatest genocide
committed against our native peoples, destroying entire
cultures. We join and fully support the demands of our
sister Caribbean and African States for the reparations
they have demanded and that Westerners continue
to ignore.
The imposition of sanctions and unilateral coercive
measures are direct aggressions against peoples, and in
times of pandemic they become crimes against humanity
that, in this case too, must be the object of reparations
for all peoples who are victims of the damage caused
by those aggressions on the part of Western countries.
We cannot fail to recall one instance of the double
standards typical of Westerners. On 27 June 1986, an
historic ruling of the International Court of Justice in
The Hague condemned the United States for military
and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua,
and ordered it to indemnify Nicaragua to the tune of
$17 billion, a mandate that the United States has not
complied with, thereby obviating the United Nations
and the highest international court.
The twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP27)is currently taking place in Sharma
el-Sheikh. For decades, our developing countries have
demanded a reparation mechanism in compensation for
our losses and damages caused by the negative impacts
of climate change. What is happening at COP27 is
that once again the Western countries that apply and
expand destructive capitalist models of production and
consumption, destroying our Mother Earth, and those
who bear those historical responsibilities refuse to
establish a reparation mechanism for the climate crisis
that we have not caused, but that we suffer with greater
intensity and frequency every day .
In conclusion, draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6 is a
divisive action in the General Assembly. It does not
promote dialogue or create conditions for a diplomatic
solution; it is a dangerous precedent that would have
unimaginable repercussions for international peace and
security, since such a mechanism would not be under the
administration or jurisdiction of our General Assembly,
18/30

14/11/2022

which is incongruous and does not contribute at all to
peace or a solution to the conflict in Ukraine.
Therefore, Nicaragua will vote against draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.6.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and I would like to add a few comments in my
national capacity.
We are all well aware of the context of this new
debate under the eleventh emergency special session.
Despite the repeated calls of this United Nations
organ, the Russian Federation continues unabated its
unjustified and unprovoked illegal military aggression
against Ukraine.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6 before us is an
additional step towards ensuring accountability for
the blatant violations of international law committed
by the Russian Federation in Ukraine. Its provisions
seek to complement existing international efforts
related to individual criminal responsibility by adding
the missing dimension — the dimensions of a State’s
responsibility for its internationally wrongful acts. It
is well established that the legal consequences of an
internationally wrongful act entail the obligation of the
responsible State to cease the wrongful conduct and to
make full reparation for the injury caused. That is the
basic premise upon which the text before us is built.
The case for reparations for Ukraine should benefit
from the legitimacy of the most representative organ
of the United Nations, not only because it represents
a moral and legal imperative, but also because it
constitutes an important deterrent to the benefit of
the entire international community. We have said it
before and we will say it again — if the aggressor is left
unsanctioned, that could lead to an irreversible decay of
the international order many generations have strived
to build in the aftermath of the devastating world wars
to ensure the lasting reign of peace.
The Assembly knows from legitimate and credible
sources that the extent of damage and suffering
caused by the aggression against Ukraine is immense.
Recognizing that there is a need for an international
mechanism for reparation and recommending the
creation of an international register of damage is a
modest and principled step. The provisions of the draft
resolution do not establish any new entities.
22-68882

14/11/2022

In the full agreement that time is of the essence
and that evidence of the damage should be documented,
we have trust that the future steps of this process
will take into account the need for inclusivity
and transparency and that the future register of
damage and potential reparations mechanism will
be impartial and firmly rooted in the principles of
independence and non-discrimination and that they
will complement the existing national and international
evidence-gathering efforts.
Romania will vote in favour of the draft resolution
and hopes that the result will prove our collective
commitment to all international accountability efforts
in support of Ukraine.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): The root cause of the crisis in Ukraine totally
lies in the hegemonic policy of the United States and
the West, which have systematically undermined
the security environment in Europe by ignoring the
reasonable and just demand of the Russian Federation
for security guarantees and promoting the eastward
expansion of NATO.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6, entitled “Furtherance
of remedy and reparation for aggression against
Ukraine”, is nothing more than a politically motivated
document to shift all responsibilities for the crisis in
Ukraine onto the Russian Federation. Furthermore, the
draft resolution is inconsistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations for the
settlement of international disputes by peaceful means
and in accordance with the principles of justice and
international law.
The General Assembly is not a judicial organ and
thus has no mandate to judge internationally wrongful
acts and to provide the legal ground for remedy and
reparation for certain countries. The General Assembly
must play a constructive role in preventing the further
escalation of geopolitical confrontation and tensions
and addressing the security concerns of the parties to
the conflict in a reasonable and balanced manner.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
delegation expresses its deep concern over the
possibility that the draft resolution may be abused as
a legal basis to illegally seize property and assets of
a sovereign State. With regard to that issue, I would
refer to resolution 59/38, entitled “United Nation
Convention on Jurisdictional Immunity of States and

A/ES-11/PV.15

Their Property”, which was adopted at the fifty-ninth
session of the General Assembly in 2004.
Although that United Nations Convention has not
yet come into force due to the lack of sufficient deposit
of instrument of ratification, all United Nations Member
States share the consensus opinion that any State enjoys
immunity in respect of its property, removed from the
jurisdiction of the courts of other States. The text of
the Convention originated in the deliberations of the
International Law Commission and was elaborated by
the Ad Hoc Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities
of States and Their Property, reporting to the Sixth
Committee. Thar means that jurisdictional immunity of
States and their property is internationally recognized
customary law and that no one can violate that immunity.
From that point of view, the delegation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea opposes the
draft resolution submitted to the 15th plenary meeting
of the eleventh emergency special session as a product of
a unilateral and double standard practice that infringes
upon the interests of a sovereign State.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Eritrea on behalf of a group of
like-minded countries.
Remedy and reparation are important ways
to deliver justice, offer consolation and promote
reconstruction after wars and conflicts. Victimized
by numerous foreign aggressions in modern history,
China has endured immense losses. We empathize
with the heartbreak of war victims and sympathize
with their misery. China believes that all remedy and
reparation should be achieved through correct political
means and legal proceedings and embody international
will, fairness, justice and the humanitarian spirit.
The useful practices of the Security Council and
the General Assembly in that regard can provide
important reference points for similar actions by the
international community.
Regrettably,
draft
resolution
A/ES-11/L.6,
“Furtherance of remedy and reparation for aggression
against Ukraine”, submitted for action at this emergency
special session, has obvious flaws and loopholes and
does not conform to China’s position and proposition. I
wish to share the following three observations.
First, the draft resolution seeks to address the
issue of international legal responsibility directly

22-6888219/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

through the General Assembly, thereby overstepping
the Assembly’s authority. The Charter of the United
Nations clearly stipulates the mandates of the principal
organs of the United Nations. The General Assembly
is not an international judicial body and therefore
has no right to legally define or assign accountability
for internationally wrongful acts. The resolutions
previously adopted at the eleventh emergency special
session of the General Assembly do not constitute solid
legal basis for remedy and reparation.
Secondly, the draft resolution invokes the articles
on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful
acts to pursue accountability, thus lacking legal
basis. The articles are only a research product of the
International Law Commission, an expert body. They
are not an intergovernmental treaty and not legally
binding; neither do they set out legal norms to define
an internationally wrongful act or determine whether
such an act exists. It is therefore inappropriate to
cite the articles to make a legal determination or
pursue accountability.
Thirdly, the draft resolution is intended to bless
the creation by some countries of a mechanism for
reparation and a register of damage outside the United
Nations framework, which would be a deviation from
the normal practice. The mechanisms proposed by
some countries are not in the framework of the United
Nations or overseen by the United Nations and do not
report to the United Nations. Nevertheless, the General
Assembly is requested to adopt a draft resolution
specifically for their creation. That approach makes no
sense and has no precedent in practice.
It should also be pointed out that the issue of
remedy and reparation is of great importance and
has far-reaching implications. It concerns peace and
security, on the one hand, and justice and conscience
on the other. It concerns not only political correctness,
but also the international rule of law. It concerns both
the current situation and historical injustices. Countries
throughout the world that have been victimized by such
internationally wrongful acts as colonialism, external
interference, unilateral sanctions and economic
blockade have the right to seek remedy and reparation.
The action taken by the General Assembly today should
help to provide correct guidance for the settlement of
possible future claims by relevant countries for remedy
and reparation. It should help to maintain the impartial
image of the United Nations as treating all Member
States equally. It should help to ensure that various
20/30

14/11/2022

United Nations bodies can work according to their
respective mandates.
Such an important draft resolution should be
subject to full discussion and extensive consultation
by Member States so as to build consensus and bridge
differences as much as possible and ensure that it
can stand the test of history politically, legally and
procedurally. Regrettably, the sponsor States did not
organize consultations in earnest or substantively
respond to the concerns of Member States, and instead
insisted on pushing the General Assembly to take a
hasty action that is totally unconstructive.
Based on all this, in order to uphold the authority
of the United Nations Charter and the credibility of the
General Assembly, safeguard true multilateralism and
the spirit of solidarity and cooperation, and maintain
the international rule of law, fairness and justice, China
will vote against the draft resolution.
The Ukrainian crisis has lasted nearly nine months.
It has sent shockwaves throughout the world and
brought more uncertainty and instability to our already
turbulent world. If the conflict goes longer, gets bigger
and becomes more complicated than it is already, that
will serve no parties’ interests and developing countries
will bear the brunt. China once again calls on all parties
concerned to return to dialogue and negotiation as soon
as possible and restore the situation to the right track
of political settlement. The international community,
including the General Assembly, should work actively
to that end instead of intensifying tensions, provoking
confrontation and aggravating divides.
Finally, I wish to reiterate that China’s position
on the Ukraine issue is clear and consistent. We have
always maintained that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries must be respected, the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
fully observed, the legitimate security concerns of all
countries taken seriously, and all efforts conducive to
the peaceful settlement of the crisis supported. China
is willing to continue to work with the international
community and play a constructive role in promoting
the early realization of a ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities, the easing of the situation and the political
settlement of the crisis.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): France associates itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union, and wishes
to add the following points in its national capacity.
22-68882

14/11/2022

France is resolutely committed alongside Ukraine
and the Ukrainian people to ensure that justice is done for
all the victims of the illegal war being waged by Russia
against Ukraine. The dignity and rights of the victims
must be respected. It is in that spirit that France actively
supports the Ukrainian authorities in the context of the
legal actions they have undertaken. Alongside 43 other
States, we have seized the International Criminal Court
of the matter and support it financially and politically
in the context of its ongoing investigations in Ukraine.
France supports the collection of evidence
carried out by investigation mechanisms and national
and international courts. On 4 March, the Human
Rights Council created the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine to collect and
analyse evidence. On 23 September, the President of
the Commission submitted his report at the fifty-first
regular session of the Human Rights Council, which
concluded unambiguously that war crimes had been
committed in Ukraine. It is on that basis that France
supports and co-sponsors draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6,
recommending the establishment of a register to
inventory information and evidence so as to ensure that
claims concerning damages, losses or injuries suffered
by all Ukrainian victims of the war provoked by Russia
are taken into account.
Impunity is unacceptable anywhere, including
Ukraine. Russia will be held responsible and will have
to answer for all its crimes and flagrant violations of
international law and to bear the legal consequences of
all internationally wrongful acts committed in Ukraine.
We call on the members of the Assembly, in defence
of the Charter of the United Nations, to give their full
support to the draft resolution.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa continues
to express its deep regret that the war in Ukraine
persists despite its devastating impact and negative
humanitarian effects on the people of Ukraine,
including women and children.
This is a war whose impact is also felt in countries
all over the world, as it contributes to the current
debilitating global food, fuel and financial crises.
The war no doubt is contributing to slowing down the
momentum of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. South Africa therefore
reiterates its call for an immediate cessation of hostilities
and the establishment of a diplomatic process to end the
war. We further reiterate that the territorial integrity

A/ES-11/PV.15

of States, including that of Ukraine, must be respected
and we reject all actions that undermine the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
provides that the purpose of our Organization is to
“maintain international peace and security, and
to that end: to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the
peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression
or other breaches of the peace, and to bring
about by peaceful means, and in conformity with
the principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international disputes
or situations which might lead to a breach of
the peace”.
That is what we should be endeavouring to do. We
should be asking ourselves: Are our words and actions
focused on the maintenance of peace or on creating
further divisions that make the attainment of immediate
peace less likely?
South Africa believes that the Security Council
should play a constructive role in the resolution of
this conflict, in line with its Charter mandate for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We regret that, in the case of the war in Ukraine, the
Security Council continues to abdicate that mandated
responsibility. The Security Council has thus far failed
the people of Ukraine. However, it is not too late for the
Council to play a constructive role in the resolution of
the conflict.
Should the Council fail to act, the General Assembly
should focus on efforts to stop the war and consider
resolutions that contain concrete proposals towards that
end. The General Assembly should create conditions
conducive to dialogue, mediation and diplomacy as the
only path that will lead to a peaceful resolution of the
conflict. That is a role that the General Assembly has
played before and there is no reason it cannot do so now.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General should
directly engage the parties to the conflict towards an
immediate cessation of hostilities. This is a process
that should contain clear deliverables and timelines.
The Secretary-General has already illustrated the
constructive role that he can play by facilitating the
agreement on the Black Sea Grain Initiative. As we have
stated before, that important example could be the basis

22-6888221/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

for an agreement leading to a diplomatic resolution of
the conflict. Additionally, the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General could consider creating a group
of eminent persons to assist with mediation between
the parties to the conflict. Constructive actions such
as those are urgently required to ensure that we move
towards peace.
Today we meet to consider yet another divisive
resolution on the war in Ukraine. We reiterate our
question: Would draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6 assist in
supporting Article 1 of the Charter? Have the resolutions
we adopted in the past few months contributed to
achieving that? Clearly, they have not. We must therefore
find an alternative, constructive action that brings us
towards peace. Secretary-General Guterres reminded
us recently that more than 2 billion people — a quarter
of humankind — live in areas affected by conflict. It
is vital that the United Nations devote equal time to
the resolution of all conflict situations that threaten
international peace and security.
During the past seven decades, the Assembly
has heard clarion calls for reparations for slavery,
colonialism, apartheid and many other contemporary
conflicts. Regrettably, in all those instances we have
not been able to find agreement on reparations due to
the opposition of many that are co-sponsoring today’s
draft resolution. We are clearly sending a message of
exceptionalism and that reparations matter in some
cases and do not matter in others. The United Nations
loses its credibility when it is seen to be partisan
and exercising double standards in its work. As
Member States, we should refrain from perpetuating
such practices.
Beyond matters of principle, the draft resolution
we are considering today places the United Nations in
unchartered waters. The General Assembly is being
asked to grant its authority to a process that would
lead to the setting-up of a mechanism for reparations
by interested countries. There is no clarity on what the
eventual mechanism would look like, its functions or
how it would relate to the General Assembly. We also
do not know what its eventual legal status would be.
We are therefore uncomfortable that the sanctity of the
General Assembly will be used to give legitimacy to
an unknown process. Moreover, once that is done, it
will be deemed that the mechanism was created by the
General Assembly, undermining its crucial role and
negatively affecting its credibility, which will create a
problematic precedent.
22/30

14/11/2022

For all these reasons, South Africa is unable to vote
in favour of the draft resolution and will abstain.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): The Kingdom of the
Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union and would like
to offer some brief remarks in our national capacity.
It is an established principle of international law that
the aggressor has an obligation to cease its aggression
and to make full reparation for the injury and damages
it has caused. Today the sheer magnitude, extent and
nature of the damage caused by Russian attacks are
evident for all to see. But that evidence might over time
disappear or be lost in the fog of war. That is why we
need to register evidence of damages caused so that
later, when we eventually do move to conciliation, we
have a clear picture of what needs to be settled.
That is the essence of draft resolution A/ES11/L.6, before us today. It establishes that aggression
has occurred, that damages have resulted from this
aggression, that the aggressor is liable for those
damages and that, in order to allow compensation for
those damages, they must be documented in a register.
And yes, also in response to some of the previous
speakers, we do firmly believe that such a register
would be an essential element of any eventual peace and
conciliation initiatives. Since the General Assembly
has established a register of damages in the past, it
is certainly within its competence to recommend the
establishment of another.
We therefore call on all Member States to vote in
favour of the draft resolution, to vote to uphold the law of
State responsibility, and to vote for justice for all those
who have suffered damages in this unprovoked conflict.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): At
the outset, the Republic of Belarus fully supports the
statement delivered by the representative of Eritrea on
behalf of the group of like-minded States.
We categorically object to the procedure for
introducing draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6. The complete
lack of inclusiveness and transparency, without
consultations of any kind, once again convinces us
that the Western States have completely abandoned
the principles of multilateralism, good faith and
cooperation in the United Nations.
As we all know very well, the Republic of Belarus
was at the origins of both the Minsk agreements and
the package of measures for their implementation.
22-68882

14/11/2022

Throughout the conflict, Belarus has done everything
possible to organize negotiations between Russia and
Ukraine and ensured that they were held at the highest
levels, including within the framework of the Trilateral
Contact Group.
Did the Western States, the so-called guarantors
of the aforementioned Minsk agreements, really
want a settlement of the situation? The answer today,
unfortunately, is quite obvious. The approval of the coup
d’état in 2014, provoking the escalation of the conflict in
Donbas for eight long years, supporting Ukraine in its
refusal to comply with the Minsk agreements, making
Ukraine anti-Russian and flooding it with weapons in
fact created all the prerequisites for both countries to
begin to pose an existential threat to each other. The
collective West has never tried to convince Ukraine
to comply with the Minsk agreements. The Western
countries, the guarantors of the agreements, have not
fulfilled their obligations. If they had, we would not be
in this Hall today, discussing this problem. The main
task of the Western States has been to weaken Russia
as much as possible and to create conditions in which
Russia would no longer be able not to react.
The draft resolution does not hold up under any
criticism from the international legal perspective. It is
merely an attempt to legalize the theft of other people’s
assets. It is also a very good and clear object lesson
for all of us, for those who still believe that private
property is sacred in the West. The draft resolution
does not mention the crimes committed by the colonial
Powers over the centuries, the consequences of slavery
or the destruction of entire peoples living in occupied
territories. No one has ever paid or will ever pay
reparations or compensation to countries and peoples
for damage that, by the way, cannot be assessed and for
the suffering inflicted upon them. There is not a word in
the draft about the current economic terrorism — illegal
blockades and sanctions or attempts to economically
strangle entire countries and peoples.
As recently noted by the United Nations leadership,
the war in Ukraine is today only one of almost 30
armed conflicts in the world. The General Assembly
should not make an exception for one conflict, no
matter how thorny, or place it above the interests of
developing countries, which are bearing the most severe
consequences of wars, including those that continue
today, foreign intervention, slavery, colonialism and
genocide. The draft resolution before us will not bring
us one step closer to peace, but will only polarize us

A/ES-11/PV.15

even further. The Republic of Belarus will vote against
the draft resolution.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba defends the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all States and strict respect for
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law in all circumstances. We will always uphold peace
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts, and oppose
the use or threat of use of force. In that context, we
will continue to advocate for a serious, constructive
and realistic diplomatic solution to the current crisis
in Ukraine by peaceful means and with unrestricted
adherence to the norms of international law, which
guarantee the security and sovereignty of all, as well as
peace and regional and international security.
Our country is firmly committed to international
humanitarian law and calls on all parties to protect
civilians, their assets and civilian infrastructure in
Ukraine. We deeply regret the loss of innocent lives
in that country. We support efforts to alleviate the
humanitarian situation and minimize the suffering
of the population in conflict zones. In that context,
we acknowledge the contribution of the humanitarian
entities of the United Nations system. At the same time,
we reject the double standards, partiality, selectivity
and discriminatory and opportunistic approaches that
some seek to impose on the Assembly. Draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.6 before us is an example of that.
There are numerous cases at the global level of
legitimate demands for compensation for damages
and reparations presented over many years by Member
States, without any progress. It is at the very least
ironic to observe that some of those who are strongly
opposed to considering those cases are among the
main promoters of the draft resolution that we are
discussing today. Cuba defends the legitimate right
to fair compensation, but we should start by listing
and addressing claims that have accumulated and
been totally ignored throughout history. We firmly
support the just demand that the States members of
the Caribbean Community present year after year to
the Assembly to be financially compensated for the
damages and horrors of the trans-Atlantic slave trade
and the genocide of their native peoples, caused by the
former colonizers.
Seventy million indigenous persons were
massacred as a result of European conquest and
colonization, and tens of millions of Africans were sent

22-6888223/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

across the Atlantic to work as slaves. However, nothing
has been done. On the contrary, we are witnesses to
the opulent selfishness and impunity enjoyed by those
responsible for the crimes against humanity associated
with the historical development of capitalism. The same
silence and reluctance to act are evident with respect
to the legitimate demands of the brotherly African and
indigenous peoples for the historical errors caused by
colonialism over the course of 500 years of plunder and
ignominy to be corrected.
We demand compensation for the inhumane
exploitation of three continents that forces more
than 6.2 billion people to endure the challenges of
underdevelopment. Poverty is not divine punishment.
Its origins date from the beginning and growth of
colonization. The technical and financial resources
exist if there is a genuine will to start paying for
the damages.
It is ironic that several of the proponents of the draft
resolution under consideration today have prevented
the inclusion of an item on the negotiating agenda of
the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change for the discussion of a financial mechanism
for compensation for losses and damages caused by
climate change. We demand urgent attention to the
claim of developing countries for the creation of such a
compensation mechanism, mainly for the small island
developing States.
The General Assembly has never established
a mechanism for compensation of damages and
reparations to the Member States that suffer the terrible
consequences of unilateral coercive measures contrary
to the Charter and international law, including genocidal
economic, commercial and financial blockades. Would
Cuba be compensated for the damages accumulated
during six decades of application of the economic,
commercial and financial blockade that the United
States has imposed on us? Would the Government of
the United States meet the just demand of the people of
Cuba for compensation for the lives of the 3,478 Cubans
who have died and the 2,099 who have been disabled
as a result of terrorist acts? Or will the United States
compensate Cuba for the illegal occupation of part of
our national territory in the province of Guantánamo?
Would the General Assembly demand that the
United States compensate Mexico for the annexation
of half its territory? Would it support the United States
24/30

14/11/2022

compensating the Vietnamese people for the lives
lost, the diseases that still affect many today, and the
economic damage caused by the use of chemical Agent
Orange during the imperialist intervention in Vietnam?
Why do the just claims for compensation and
reparation of the Pacific Islands, victims of radiation
and contamination caused by many of the more than
2,000 nuclear weapons tests carried out since 1947,
continue to be ignored?
When will the families of the hundreds of
thousands of civilians murdered, joining the list of socalled collateral damage, and the millions of persons
displaced be compensated for the aggressions carried
out against Iraq, Libya or Afghanistan?
At what amount and how is compensation for the life
of a Palestinian child and the murder and imprisonment
of the Palestinian civilian population being considered?
Will Syria be compensated for the damage to its
heritage, economy and population as a result of the war
that has been imposed on that nation?
Limiting and speeding up the creation of a redress
mechanism in a given conflict, while continuing
to ignore many other legitimate, well-documented,
and historical claims, is not only unfair and morally
unacceptable, but does serious damage to the credibility
of the General Assembly.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I align myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Eritrea on behalf of the group of
like-minded countries, and I wish to add the following
in my national capacity.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has, on a number
of occasions, expressed its clear, consistent and
unwavering position with regard to the ongoing conflict
in Ukraine. As a founding Member of the United
Nations, the Islamic Republic of Iran strongly supports
the fundamental principles of international law and
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, as
enshrined in its Charter.
In the same vein, Iran has long advocated the
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and reaffirmed the basic principles contained
therein, particularly underlining that all States shall
refrain in their international relations from military,
22-68882

14/11/2022

A/ES-11/PV.15

political, economic or any other form of coercion
aimed against the political independence or territorial
integrity of any State.

as well as the provision of weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons, to brutal regimes like that
of Saddam Hussein.

Regrettably, the same countries that emphasize
the importance of maintaining and strengthening
international peace founded upon freedom, equality,
justice and respect for human rights, and of developing
friendly relations among nations irrespective of their
political, economic and social systems or the levels of
their development have been and continued to be at the
forefront of violating those very principles elsewhere.

The Islamic Republic of Iran emphasizes the
inviolability of the jurisdictional immunities of States
and their property, which are generally accepted as a
principle of customary international law. The Islamic
Republic of Iran hereby registers its strong objection
to any mechanism that could undermine that wellestablished principle of international law. We would
like to record that, any acts or decisions that may be
derived from the mechanism referred to in paragraphs
3 and 4 of the draft resolution will have no legal status
and will thus be null and void.

The Islamic Republic of Iran supports the United
Nations ongoing efforts to find a peaceful solution
to the Ukraine conflict. The United Nations should
maintain objectivity and impartiality in order to play
a responsible and constructive role in the political
settlement of this conflict.
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6 contains language
that fall outside the purview of the General Assembly,
as according to Article 39 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the General Assembly has no authority
to determine the existence of an act of aggression.
Furthermore, resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December
1974, based on the same Article of the Charter, calls on
the Security Council to determine the existence of an
act of aggression.
We must not tolerate abuse of the General
Assembly to further the narrow interests of a group of
States by shrinking the role of this organ to a rubber
stamp, as that would result in further undermining
multilateralism and the rule of law at the international
level. If agreed upon, the proposed mechanism would
make no actual contribution to the peaceful resolution
of the conflict; rather, it would serve only as a political
tool in the hand of a group of States. The problem here
is that the main sponsors of the draft resolution, in a
blatant use of double standards, apply different criteria
in other conflicts around the world, such as in Syria,
Palestine, Afghanistan, Yemen and so on.
We share this view that if an international
mechanism is to be established to investigate violations
of international law caused by State wrongdoing and
assess reparations, it should have a broad mandate
to address any instance of international wrongdoing
committed by any State and all incidents and
demands for reparations, including those arising from
international responsibility for military aggression,
looting, blockade, unilateral sanctions and occupations,

Mr. Mills (United States of America): Together
with more than 50 sponsors of draft resolution A/ES11/L.6, the United States reaffirms our commitment to
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, and to its principles on the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. We have heard a lot
during this debate, but I think it is clear what the issue
is before this organ.
The international community must hold Russia
to account for its violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and for the resulting damages
and abuses committed against the people of Ukraine.
The draft resolution represents a critical step towards
accountability. It highlights the importance of gathering
evidence to support eventual claims for compensation
from Russia on a non-criminal track for the injuries, the
deaths and the extensive damage to public and private
property caused by Russia’s internationally wrongful
acts in Ukraine.
The mounting costs, including the appalling human
toll, of Russia’s unprovoked and unlawful invasion of
its neighbour and fellow United Nations Member State
are tremendous. To date, there have been thousands
killed, millions more displaced and an untold number
disappeared. Reports are multiplying of atrocities
and other abuses, including of forced deportation, the
deliberate separation and kidnapping of children from
their families and forced adoptions in Russia, torture
and the bombing of maternity hospitals. Russia’s
devastating strikes have been hitting cities and towns
across Ukraine, with shells damaging or destroying
residential areas and medical facilities around the
country and causing significant major destruction to
critical energy infrastructure as winter fast approaches.

22-6888225/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

It is well within the authority of the General
Assembly to adopt the draft resolution. Chapter IV of
the Charter of the United Nations gives the General
Assembly broad recommendatory authority on a
vast array of issues. The recommendation to create a
damages register is an important initial step towards
the eventual establishment of a claims adjudication
mechanism to assess the full scope of the huge toll this
needless war is taking on Ukraine and its people.
My delegation wishes to reiterate that this is again
a matter of justice, not of geopolitical competition. The
adoption of the draft resolution would underscore the
United Nations strong message to would-be aggressors
around the world that breaching international law,
including the United Nations Charter, will have
consequences and that the international community — all
of us — will hold violators to account.
Compensation for the victims of aggression would
serve then as a deterrent — a deterrent against future
breaches of international peace and security. SecretaryGeneral Guterres was clear when he said that Russia’s
actions are “a violation of the principles of the United
Nations Charter and international law”. Today’s voting,
therefore, will be a vote for accountability and for the
defence of the Charter.
It is understandable and right for Ukraine to want
a cataloguing of the mounting consequences, including
the appalling human toll, of Russia’s unprovoked and
unlawful invasion. Ukraine will one day rebuild; that is
not at question here. The point is the imperative — the
imperative for us, the international community — to hold
the perpetrator to account for the needless devastation.
Accountability is an important component of any
eventual settlement of this war. The adoption of the
draft resolution would also serve as a deterrent against
future breaches of international peace and security, as
well as help reach reconciliation.
In conclusion, Member States cannot sit on
the sidelines when such fundamental principles of
international law undergirding the international
system are at stake. We all made a commitment to
uphold the Charter when we joined the United Nations.
Now, today’s voting is an opportunity to demonstrate
that commitment.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Institute for Democracy
and Electoral Assistance.
26/30

14/11/2022

Ms. Silva-Leander (International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance): The resilience of
its democracy has been a remarkable achievement of
Ukraine in the face of the war of aggression waged by
the Russian Federation since February. A key dimension
of Ukraine’s reaction, alongside its military response,
has been the impressive engagement of a wide range of
social actors from all segments of Ukrainian society in
the fight to defend democratic freedoms and rights at a
time when it has been attacked by overwhelming forces
of invasion.
The magnitude of the physical destruction is huge
as the human and social costs of the aggression grow
every day. Human rights abuses and violations are being
documented in the territories occupied by Russia and
recovered by Ukraine. The impact of Russian tactics
of systematic destruction of critical infrastructures in
Ukraine will have long-lasting consequences.
The responsibility of the Russian Federation should
be addressed with reference to resolution 60/147. For
its recovery and the reconstruction of its infrastructure
and economy, Ukraine will have to face exceptionally
difficult challenges. To cope with them, it will certainly
need the extensive and prolonged support of the
international community. It will also require assistance
in further strengthening its democratic institutions.
They will be essential for successfully countering
corruption and achieving the ambitious results of what
will likely be a multi-billion-dollar reconstruction
investment plan.
In fact, Russia has targeted not only strategic
military infrastructure, but also civilian targets, public
services, supply networks and centres. Among such
critical infrastructure, we should also include political
and civil society institutions and actors at the local
level whose past engagement in Ukrainian democracy
was seen as a threat to Russia’s strategic interests and
to its illegal and illegitimate claim to retain control of
captured areas, despite the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Let us never forget that this conflict is not
only about sovereignty, but also about democracy.
Russia’s war of aggression is an attack on a political
system — democracy — that securely places the destiny
of the country in the hands of Ukrainians and out of the
reach of Russia. The coming process of reconstitution
and recovery from the devastation wrought by the
22-68882

14/11/2022

invasion therefore needs to place democracy at
the centre.
In recent analyses, the International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance has stressed some
of the critical issues that the post-war economic, social
and political recovery in Ukraine should consider
regarding the future of its democracy. That daunting
task of addressing the consequences of the aggression,
rebuilding physical infrastructure and restoring basic
services should place such issues at the core of the
reconstruction effort. In that perspective, it will be vital
to allocate resources to support the reconstruction and
improvement of democratic institutions in Ukraine.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.6.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Smith (Bahamas): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) in explanation of
vote on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6.
CARICOM strongly condemns the unilateral
military incursion into Ukraine by the Russian
Federation. We maintain the view that the military
action of Russia in Ukraine is a flagrant violation of
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, both in word and in spirit. It undermines
the core principles of respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, non-interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States and the obligation to
refrain from the threat or use of force in international
relations. CARICOM considers those principles to be
non-negotiable obligations to which all of us, as States
Member of the United Nations, have freely consented
to be bound.
CARICOM subscribes to the principle that for
every wrong there is a remedy. That is a fundamental
principle of law and equity, and we believe it to be
an equally fundamental principle of international
law. Indeed, wherever there are wrongs committed,
the victim should be entitled to appropriate remedy,
including compensation for injury, loss and damage
caused by that wrong.

A/ES-11/PV.15

It is a fact that the nation of Ukraine has
experienced the injury, suffering and death of many of
its people — both military and civilian — as well as
damage to critical infrastructure. The world has seen
images of the destruction of homes, schools, hospitals
and other institutions and buildings, causing mass
displacement of individuals, businesses, families and
communities. We understand that the cost of repairing
that damage will be extensive and that, consistent
with principles of law and equity, the burden of such
compensation should be imposed upon the perpetrator.
CARICOM also gives due recognition to the global
community that views — correctly — the United
Nations as vital to resolving matters of international
consequence, including to promote peaceful coexistence
in cases where resolution proves elusive.
At the same time, while CARICOM supports, in
principle, Ukraine’s legitimate claim for reparations
for the wrongs committed against it by Russia, we
believe that such a process must be pursued through
an appropriate mechanism. What is being proposed
in the draft resolution contemplates that the General
Assembly should endorse a process over which it will
have no control, no oversight and, indeed, no role to
play whatsoever. The draft resolution, as drafted, asks
Member States, having thus given their approval, to
then trust that the process will be conducted fairly
and objectively, with integrity and transparency
and in accordance with the relevant principles of
international law.
CARICOM notes in paragraph 3 of the text,
“the need for the establishment, in cooperation
with Ukraine, of an international mechanism
for reparation for damage, loss or injury, and
arising from the internationally wrongful acts
of the Russian Federation in or against Ukraine”
(A/ES- 11/L.6, para. 3).
We also note the recommendation in paragraph 4 for
“the creation by Member States, in cooperation
with Ukraine, of an international register of
damage to serve as a record of evidence and claims
information on damage, loss or injury to all natural
and legal persons concerned” (ibid., para. 4).
In CARICOM’s analysis of that call to action by the
General Assembly, we offer the following observations
on certain aspects of the draft.

22-6888227/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

First, the draft resolution does not provide any
guiding principles on how the future mechanism would
operate or how the register of damage is to be created or
managed. In addition, Member States are being asked to
act on those initiatives in the context of an ongoing war
with no real ability to predict any future developments
or outcomes.
Secondly, noting that while there are ongoing
judicial processes addressing the situation in Ukraine,
there is as yet no established jurisdictional basis for
the proposed mechanism or the register of damage.
Neither are pursuant to a Security Council resolution
or an order of the International Court of Justice.
Furthermore, it is not within the power of the General
Assembly, under the Charter of the United Nations, to
create those initiatives.
For those reasons, Member States of CARICOM
will abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
Nevertheless, CARICOM recognizes that the Russian
Federation must bear the legal consequences of all its
wrongful acts for any violations of international law
and/or for any violations of international humanitarian
law in or against Ukraine. Indeed, CARICOM reiterates
its strong support for the principle that Member
States have a legitimate right to claim reparations and
compensation for injury, loss and damage caused by
the wrongful actions of other Member States. That
principle is to be applied in the present case, as well
as in other similar cases worldwide. We have sought to
make that broader point with regard to a range of issues
before the international community, including climate
action and, indeed, reparations in connection with the
transatlantic slave trade and native genocide.
Mass atrocity crimes and gross violations of
international law demand scrutiny and justice, without
exception for whenever in time they occurred, wherever
in the world they occurred, and by whomever they
were perpetrated. There will always exist a moral and/
or legal obligation to correct injustice, including the
legacy of past injustice.
In closing, CARICOM reaffirms its strong
opposition to any and all actions that instigate the
disruption of a peaceful multilateral order. We therefore
reiterate the call for an end to hostilities; the immediate,
complete and unconditional withdrawal of Russian
military forces from the territory of Ukraine; and the
return to dialogue and diplomacy in good faith to resolve
differences in a peaceful and constructive manner.
28/30

14/11/2022

Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico’s position has been clear and
consistent since the beginning of this terrible war.
Mexico defends the sovereignty, national unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
Without a doubt, any damage caused as a
consequence of the armed conflict must be repaired in
accordance with international law. Accountability is an
inescapable part of the rule of law. In that regard, we
note that there are judicial processes under way that
may lead to the establishment of mechanisms to repair
damages and, of course, to punish those responsible
for them.
Despite the fact that it is an active and changing
conflict, in which the reparations stage is still distant,
taking into account that draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6
under consideration is limited to recommending the
creation of a register of damage, my delegation will
vote in favour of it.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela endorses the statement made by the
representative of the State of Eritrea on behalf of the
group of like-minded countries.
Regarding the matter of procedure, allow us to
reiterate our grave concern at the attempts of a group
of States to impose on the General Assembly a practice
that is contrary to the spirit of transparency, inclusion
and good faith that should prevail within the framework
of a truly revitalized multilateralism so that we can
address together the great and pressing challenges,
many of them shared, that lie ahead for humankind.
We categorically reject the attempt to impose
on the membership of this organ a draft resolution
(A/ES-11/L.6) regarding which consultations were
never convened and efforts never made to take into
account the views of all States or to accommodate
their legitimate concerns concerning a text relating
to an issue that continues to polarize the international
community. We insist that this methodology of work
and the continued refusal to forge consensus will hardly
bring us closer to the objective that should summon us
all equally in the current international situation — that
of achieving peace.
In relation to the substance of the issue that brings
us together today, we regret that its promoters insist
22-68882

14/11/2022

A/ES-11/PV.15

on trying to instrumentalize the General Assembly
by consolidating a new Cold War mentality, with its
policy of clashing blocs, to advance their national
agendas and their interests of geostrategic domination,
to the detriment of the supreme interest of world peace,
security and stability.

America and the Caribbean, who demand appropriate
reparations for the crimes committed and the damages
caused by the colonial Powers, including in their
most recent military adventures, and which are now,
as their absence from the text before us confirms,
shamelessly ignored.

We must say it clearly. The potential adoption of this
draft resolution would only add to the already long list
of unfortunate events — and, unfortunately, endorsed
by this organ — that have only ended up generating
greater confrontation, greater tensions and greater
divisions, diverting us from a political horizon and,
instead, deliberately moving us ever closer to a point of
no return that has the serious potential to compromise
the survival of present and future generations.

That, however, is hardly surprising, since it also
goes hand-in-hand with the double standards to which
the entire West and its allies have already accustomed
us. It is inconceivable that, when it comes to reparations
to benefit European citizens, the so-called international
community not only reacts en masse, but also demands
and rapidly prepares novel solutions and pseudo-legal
mechanisms to respond to such claims. When it comes
to reparations for the peoples of our developing world,
however, that same international community, led by
those who present this draft resolution to us today
and whose Governments retain their colonialist and
supremacist mentality, openly ignores their fight for
truth, justice and reparation and finds itself stricken
with a grotesque moral amnesia.

The draft resolution is loaded with double standards
and great selectivity, through which what is really sought
is not to reach a peaceful solution through diplomacy,
dialogue or political negotiation, but to use the General
Assembly to confiscate the sovereign goods, assets
and resources of other States and to advance ends of
a dubious nature — all as a result of the application of
a series of unilateral coercive measures that violate all
norms of international law and the postulates enshrined
in the founding Charter of our Organization.
Venezuela knows first-hand the outcome of the
confiscation of goods and assets, as well as the looting
of sovereign resources, and how the resources that have
been stolen from us are used to finance heinous and
criminal projects. Hence, it does not surprise us that
those who continue to attack my country today, stealing
billions of dollars, including tons of our national gold
reserves, are the very ones promoting the establishment
of this type of dark mechanism, which, moreover, has
serious deficiencies, both conceptual and operational,
and seems to fit within the logic of the perpetual war
being waged of the United States.
Now, the General Assembly is being asked to
establish that mechanism, but in no way should it also be
accountable to this same organ. There are also no details
on its terms of reference or how it would work, who
would run it, and so on. That is precisely the so-called
rules-based order that the West so often touts — rules
that are unknown but which are discursively useful to
invoke so long as they serve to advance its interests.
On the other hand, it underscores the fact that the
proponents of the draft resolution seek to ignore the
just struggles of various peoples in Africa, Asia, Latin

We also regret the fact that the promoters and
sponsors of the text submitted to us today include
Governments of countries that, like Venezuela, have
been subjected to occupation, domination and the
oppression of the colonial yoke, and whose brother
peoples claim today, like so many others around the
world, just reparations for the crimes committed, be it
in the form of genocide, extermination, slavery, human
trafficking, apartheid or many other atrocities.
It is for all those reasons that we believe that the
draft resolution contained in document A/ES-11/L.6
will in no way contribute to the objective of achieving
lasting peace through political dialogue and diplomatic
negotiation, which is why we call on the responsible
members of the international community to vote
against it. We reiterate that, quite to the contrary, our
Organization must play the central role that falls to it at
this historic and decisive moment for the preservation
of humankind, through the facilitation of a constructive
and good-faith environment that favours dialogue,
negotiation and the achievement of a peaceful solution.
If this new draft resolution is adopted, we cannot
fail to emphasize that a serious precedent would be
set that would have serious implications for the work
and credibility of the United Nations and the General
Assembly.

22-6888229/30

A/ES-11/PV.15

To conclude, from this rostrum we once again
reiterate our call for a reduction in tensions and an
end to the propaganda of war, as well as the discourse
of intolerance guided by hateful ideologies, while
emphasizing that it is only through diplomacy, dialogue
and restraint, without pressure or sanctions, that can we
avoid being shepherded like sleepwalkers into a more
acute phase of the conflict — one that will be longer
and more difficult to resolve and that will only prolong
the crisis and generate consequences that will take
generations to overcome.
The Acting President: Before proceeding to take
a decision on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6, I wish to
address the question concerning the majority required
for the adoption of the draft resolution.
In the light of Article 18, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations, is there any objection
to taking action on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6 by a
two-thirds majority of the members present and voting?
I see no objection.
A two-thirds majority of members present and
voting is therefore required for the adoption of draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.6.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.6, entitled “Furtherance of
remedy and reparation for aggression against Ukraine”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.6 and in addition to the delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra, Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, Liberia, Monaco, Myanmar,
North Macedonia, Palau, the Republic of Korea, San
Marino and Switzerland.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,

30/30

14/11/2022

Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Togo, Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Zambia
Against:
Bahamas, Belarus, Central African Republic,
China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian
Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, Congo,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini,
Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.6 was adopted by 94
votes to 14, with 73 abstentions (resolution ES-11/5).
The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.

22-68882
