2

General AHemhly-Seventh Session

---------------------------------•······--·-·-··

RESOLUTION ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
700 (VIl). Credentiala of representatives to the seventh 11e88ion of the
General Assemhly
The General, Assembly
Approves the third report 1 of the Credentials Commitee.
425th plenary meeting,
8 April 1953.
1 See document A/2374.

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE l<"'IRST COMMITTEE
701 (VII). Korea: reports of the United Nations
Agent General for Korean Reconstruction
The General, Assembly
1. Reaffirms the objective of the United Nations,
adopted in General Assembly resolution 410 (V) of
1 December 1950, to provide relief and rehabilitation in
assisting the Korean people to relieve their sufferings
and to repair the great devastation and destruction in
their country ;
2. Recognizes that the need of such relief anù rehabilitation continues to be most urgent;
3. Takes note of the reports 1 of the Agent General
on the work of the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency for the period February 1951 to 15 February 1953;
4. Notes with approval that the Agent General
has now undertaken, in co-operation with the Government of the Republic of Korea and the United Nations
Commana, and in consultation with the United Nations
Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea, a programme of relief and rehabilitation projects
for the period ending June 1953, which has received the
approval of the United Nations Advisory Committee to
the Agent General, and looks forward to its successful
executioq;
5. Expresses its appreciation of the contributions
which have been made by governments, specialized
agencies and non-governmental organizations;
6. Requests those governments which have made
pledges to the United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency to make prompt payment of such pledges;
7. Further requests all governments, specialized
agencies and non-governmental organizations to assist,
within the limits of their financial possibilities and in
accordance with the provisions of their constitutions and
statutes, in meeting the great and continuing need of
the Korean people for relief and rehabilitation assistance.

414th plenary meeting,
11 March 1953.
1 See Official Records of the Gfflef'al Assembly, S~r,,th S,s-

sitm, Supplemettt.r Nos. 19 atul 19 A.

702 (VII). Complaint of non-compliance of States
still detaining memhers of the Greek armed
forces with the provisions of resolution 382 A
(V), adopted by the General Assemhly on
1 Decemher 1950, recommending "the repa•
triation of ail those among them who express
the wish to be repatriated"
The General Assenibly,
Confirming its resolution 382 A (V) of 1 Decembcr
1~50 recommending the repatriation ot all those mem.·
bers of the Greek armed forces detained outside Greece
who express the wish to be repatriated,
Noting with deep appreciation the continued efforts
of the International Committee of the Red Cross with
a view to implemcnting the afore-mentioned resolution,
Recalling the latest communication2 of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the national Red
Cross societies of the governments concerned,
1. Addrcsses an carncst appeal to these governments
to conform their attitude in this question with Gencral
Assembly resolution 382 A (V) ;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to consult to this end with the governments in question and to report back to the General Assembly before
the close of its current session;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to keep this humanitarian issue under constant review and to notify the
Member States of important developments as appropriate.
415th plenary meeting,
17 March, 1953.

703 (VII). Methods which might be used to maintain and strengthen international peace and
security in accordance with the Purposes and
Principles of the Charter: report of the Collective Measures Committee
The General Assembly,
H aving received the second report3 of the Collective
Measures Committee,
2 See document A/2365.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Ses-

sion, Supplement No. 17.
