S/PV.9047

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9047th meeting

Thursday, 26 May 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2022/409)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-36339 (E)
*2236339*

S/PV.9047

The situation in Libya

and constructive atmosphere and reviewed the 2017
constitutional draft, reaching agreement on 137 of 197
articles in the areas of the form and nature of the State;
basic rights and freedoms, including women’s rights;
the structure and powers of a bicameral Parliament;
and some of the prerogatives of the President and
Prime Minister.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2022/409)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

26/05/2022

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/409, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.

The progress achieved during the second round of
talks is commendable. The members have agreed to
reconvene in Cairo beginning on 11 June under United
Nations auspices and hosted by the Government of
Egypt. The objective of the third and final round is
to reach a consensus on outstanding issues in order
to finalize the constitutional arrangements for the
holding of national elections at the earliest possible
date. In the interim, the delegations have pledged to
continue consultations with their respective Chambers.
Meanwhile, national and international stakeholders
are expressing concern about the continued impasse in
the executive. Ms. Williams has continued to engage
with Mr. Dbeibah and Mr. Bashagha to encourage
dialogue. She is urging them to avoid provocative acts
and negative rhetoric in order to ensure that the country
does not plunge back into conflict.

Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
latest developments in Libya.

The Special Adviser has also held meetings with
members of the Presidency Council, who expressed
their intention to continue working on a national
reconciliation process with support from the African
Union and the United Nations. The United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and the United Nations
Development Programme are providing technical
expertise on the draft law on national reconciliation and
transitional justice. In addition, they are helping with
the development of a national online platform to gather
civil-society proposals for national reconciliation.

Since my most recent briefing to the Security
Council in consultations on 19 April, the deadlock
on the political, security and economic fronts has
persisted, despite the best efforts of the United Nations
to facilitate agreement among the Libyan actors. The
human rights situation has also deteriorated. We are
concerned about the fact that the protracted political
impasse is having an increasingly negative impact
on security, as shown by the clashes in Tripoli last
week. Ms. Stephanie Williams, Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General, convened a second round of
consultations of the joint committee of the House of
Representatives and High State Council in Cairo from
15 to 20 May. The two delegations met in a positive

While the ceasefire reached in 2020 continues
to hold, the security situation remains fragile. In the
early hours of 17 May, Mr. Bashagha entered Tripoli,
backed by armed groups. Clashes in and around the
city with armed groups supporting Mr. Dbeibah
ensued, lasting for several hours. The fighting left
one armed group member dead, a policeman injured
and several buildings damaged. Following mediation
by local actors and outreach by the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission, Mr. Bashagha was escorted out of Tripoli.
While the fighting has ceased, the situation remains
tense. Tripoli-based armed groups supporting either
Mr. Dbeibah or Mr. Bashagha remain in a state of high
alert. On a positive note, I am pleased to report that on

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. DiCarlo and Ambassador T.S.
Tirumurti, Permanent Representative of India, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

2/16

22-36339

26/05/2022

The situation in Libya

23 and 24 May the eastern and western delegations of
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission met for the first time
since the eastern delegation suspended its activities
at the end of February. The meeting took place in
Spain, on the margins of the meeting on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in Libya hosted by the
Spanish Government. Ms. Williams met with the 5+5
Commission, which expressed its readiness to resume
its activities upon returning to Libya.
As reported during my most recent briefing (see
S/PV.8996), the reluctance of the Government of
National Unity to pay the Libyan National Army’s
salaries for the first quarter of 2022 led elements
affiliated with the army to close several oilfields and
ports, cutting the country’s daily oil output in half.
Following Special Adviser Williams’s intercession
with the Government, the outstanding salaries were
paid. Oil production, however, has yet to return to
normal. On 11 May, Mr. Dbeibah confirmed that he
would authorize regular monthly payments for Libyan
National Army salaries. We hope that this contentious
and recurring issue has now been resolved. Meanwhile,
the Economic Working Group of the Berlin process
has been crafting a revenue management mechanism
to overcome the disagreement over the control and use
of public funds. The mechanism would consist of a
short-term financing facility to fund the National Oil
Corporation and other specific priorities, including
salaries, subsidies, essential Government operations
and expenditures, which could ease competition for
resources and improve accountability.
Efforts also continue towards the reunification of
the Central Bank of Libya, with the help of independent
experts. The Bank’s Governor and Deputy Governor
held a third steering committee meeting on the Bank’s
reunification and reform in Istanbul on 24 April. They
will meet again in September to review progress and
activate the Board of Directors.
The human rights situation in Libya remains
a source of great concern. In the first week of May,
Libyan security agencies launched a new wave of
arrests of young people for alleged crimes against
Libyan culture and values. Security agencies were
accused of posting on social media so-called video
confessions and photos of those arrested, which was
seen as a form of intimidation during the preliminary
stages of investigation.
Restrictions persist on the work of civil-society
organizations, including women’s rights groups,

S/PV.9047

accused of violating “the principles and values of Libyan
society”. We remain concerned about the continued
detention on those grounds of nine civil-society and
social activists who had peacefully exercised their right
to freedom of expression. Some of them have been in
detention for six months.
On 10 May, Special Adviser Williams travelled to
Tarhuna, where she visited the sites of mass graves and
met with families of victims who disappeared between
2012 and 2020. The perpetrators of those horrific
crimes have yet to be brought to justice.
The situation of people internally displaced in
Libya, including those forcibly evicted, remains highly
precarious. To cite just one instance, on 3 May, 477
displaced Tawergha families, totalling more than 2,000
individuals, were forcibly evicted from two camps in
Tripoli. The continued campaigns by the authorities
of mass arrests and the detention of undocumented
foreign nationals and migrants in urban settings in
the western region are equally worrying. As of 8 May,
1,717 persons were detained in centres run by the
Department for Combating Illegal Migration. Some
5,000 other migrants and refugees are being arbitrarily
detained in inhumane conditions in both regular and
unofficial detention centres.
It is imperative that the ceasefire in Libya be
maintained, calm preserved and any steps that could
result in renewed violence avoided. We must urge all
parties to uphold their commitment to the peaceful
resolution of political differences through dialogue and
negotiations. It is also critical that Libyan political and
security actors look beyond their personal interests
and continue to engage constructively in the upcoming
Cairo talks in support of the electoral-constitutional
track. That is the only way to fulfil the aspirations
of the Libyan people to select their representatives
through the ballot box. The United Nations will spare
no effort to support the Libyan people in in building
a noble and peaceful country, including by providing
good offices and mediation. The Security Council has
been at Libya’s side on its journey out of conflict and
towards peace and stability. The path has not always
been smooth, but Council support and attention have
proved invaluable in keeping a political process alive.
Today, a coordinated and constructive effort is required
to prevent further polarization and end the political
stalemate. At a time of aggravated global turmoil,
counsel and international unity on the need for peace

22-363393/16

S/PV.9047

The situation in Libya

in Libya are especially important. It is what Libyans
deserve and what the world needs.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Tirumurti.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. The report
covers the period from 17 March to 26 May of this year,
during which time the Committee met once in informal
consultations and conducted additional work by silence
procedure. During the informal consultations held on
20 May, the Committee heard a presentation by the
Panel of Experts on its final report. I will not summarize
the findings and recommendations contained in the
report, as it was transmitted to the Security Council on
25 May in accordance with paragraph 13 of resolution
2571 (2021), and will shortly be issued as a document
of the Council.
In the discussion that ensued, Committee members
expressed their support and appreciation for the
work of the Panel of Experts. The main issues raised
during the discussion included acts that threaten the
peace and stability or security of Libya; violations
of the arms embargo; violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, including in the
context of human trafficking and migrant smuggling;
illicit exports of crude oil and refined petroleum
products from Libya; and the implementation of the
assets freeze. The Committee members are currently
considering, for possible follow-up action, the three
recommendations addressed to the Committee, as well
as the recommendation addressed to all Member States.
Let me now touch briefly on the other activities of the
Committee during the reporting period.
Concerning the arms embargo, no negative decision
was taken by the Committee in connection with an
arms embargo notification invoking paragraph 13 (b)
of resolution 2009 (2011), submitted by Germany. The
Committee also received a vessel inspection report
from the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI. The Committee was informed by
Italy of the transfer of certain items meant for Libyan
coastal patrol.
In relation to the assets freeze, the Committee
approved
an
exemption
request
submitted
by Luxembourg under paragraph 19(b) of
4/16

26/05/2022

resolution 1970 (2011). The Committee also received a
letter from Libya transmitting a communication from
the Libyan Investment Authority, a listed entity, to
which the Committee responded.
In connection with the measures aimed at
preventing illicit exports of petroleum, including crude
oil and refined petroleum products from Libya, the
Committee responded to a communication received
from the Libyan Government focal point appointed
pursuant to resolution 2146 (2014) regarding an alleged
attempt to illicitly export gasoil outside the umbrella of
the National Oil Corporation. The Panel of Experts also
reported to the Committee on that matter.
With regard to the travel-ban measure, the
Committee received a travel notification from Ms. Safia
Farkash Al-Barassi, for travel from Egypt to Oman
and back, under a travel exemption granted previously
for unlimited travel within a six-month period for
humanitarian purposes.
With respect to the sanctions list, the Committee
received a sixth communication from the focal point for
delisting established pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006),
in connection with the delisting request of a listed
individual. The focal point process is still ongoing.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the
Committee’s commitment to contributing to promoting
peace and stability in Libya.
The President: I thank Ambassador Tirumurti for
his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Ambassador Tirumurti for their briefings. Recent
events in Tripoli make today’s discussions particularly
timely. I would therefore like to make three points.
First, I echo calls from the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser, Stephanie Williams, and others
for calm and de-escalation following the events of
17 May. Our priority should be to protect the progress
22-36339

26/05/2022

The situation in Libya

made since the 2020 ceasefire agreement. Long-term
stability will be achieved in Libya only through a
refreshed and inclusive political process, including
free and fair parliamentary and presidential elections,
and the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries,
including the Wagner Group. I would like to thank
Ms. Williams for her tireless efforts to mediate a basis
for elections in Libya. That responsibility now sits with
the joint committee of the House of Representatives
and the High Council of State. The joint committee
must now live up to the hopes and expectations of the
Libyan people.
Secondly, we call on all Libyan parties to protect
the neutrality and integrity of public institutions and
support their reunification. The latest closure of
oil facilities must end. It is damaging to the Libyan
economy and to the Libyan people. The National Oil
Corporation should not be politicized and must be able
to fulfil its duties without interference. Libyan public
institutions should be supported to serve the whole of
Libya and all Libyan people.
Thirdly, I would like to thank the brave, dedicated
women and men who defend human rights in Libya.
Accountability for human rights abuses and violations
is essential for ending the cycle of impunity. The Human
Rights Council Fact-Finding Mission is an important
mechanism for identifying violations and abuses.
The United Kingdom welcomes Libya’s engagement
with the Fact-Finding Mission, and would support the
extension of the Mission’s mandate at the next Human
Rights Council session to allow the Mission enough
time to complete its important work.
The United Kingdom continues to support the
United Nations-facilitated, Libyan-led and -owned
political process. We stand ready to work alongside
Libya and our international partners to build a
more peaceful, stable and prosperous future for the
Libyan people.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): It is my honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Ambassador Tirumurti, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), for their briefings. We also welcome the
participation of our colleague Ambassador Taher
Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya.

S/PV.9047

We acknowledge the ongoing efforts by the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, Ms. Stephanie
Williams, in bringing together the joint committee
of the House of Representatives and the High State
Council in dialogue.
We note the positive outcomes of the session, held
from 15 to 20 May in Cairo under the auspices of the
United Nations. We laud the members of the joint
committee for their cooperation and dedication to the
talks. That demonstrates the ability of the political class
in Libya to opt for dialogue in breaking the current
political stalemate. We urge all Libyans to insist on
dialogue as the best option for a Libyan-led and -owned
peace process.
We have noted with concern reports of the
mobilization of armed groups in and around Tripoli, as
well as sporadic outbreaks of violence. We emphasize
that violence cannot deliver peace for Libyans. It will
only deliver pain for the vulnerable and a more deeply
divided nation. We therefore urge the leadership and
people of Libya to exercise restraint, shun violence and
seek to resolve their differences by peaceful means.
We believe that dialogue and reconciliation will
achieve gradual, yet firm and sustainable outcomes,
including a constitutional framework that enjoys the
widest possible consensus for the delivery of credible
elections. It is important to have it mainstreamed in
all tracks and stages of the peace process, which must
be inclusive of all stakeholders, including women and
the youth.
It is for that reason that the African Union has
committed to supporting an inclusive and comprehensive
national reconciliation process, as highlighted in
resolution 2510 (2020). We invite all members of the
Council to join in strongly embedding such support in
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL).
We continue to urge fellow members of the Council
that we provide UNSMIL with the necessary support
for the effective execution of its mandate. That includes
starting to genuinely work together to achieve a
substantive renewal of the mandate in July.
We look forward to the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2629 (2022), including
the appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. In that regard, Africa avails its
rich capacity, including the critical appreciation of the

22-363395/16

S/PV.9047

The situation in Libya

26/05/2022

impact of the conflict in Libya on the region, for the
Secretary-General’s consideration.

Ghana and Kenya — and Africa as a whole — recommit
to standing with them in this regard.

We believe that a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General who has a deep understanding of the
security threats of the conflict in Libya to the Sahel
and the wider region will reinvigorate United Nations
efforts in support of the Libyan peace process. Such
a Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
also contribute to the necessary safeguard against the
spillover of instability into the region and beyond.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our unreserved support
for a truly Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process.
We also reaffirm our respect for Libya’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty.

We condemn the continued foreign interference
in Libya, especially as manifested by the continued
presence of foreign fighters and mercenaries, as well
as rampant undue political influence. The reports of
the increased politicization of the oil sector, which
is Libya’s economic mainstay, for individual gains in
deeply concerning. We demand the protection of the
Libyan oil resources for the people of Libya.
We also call for the immediate withdrawal of
foreign fighters, foreign forces and mercenaries from
Libya and the implementation of the comprehensive
action plan of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission of
October 2021.
We remind the Council that all Libya’s frozen
assets are to be preserved and eventually returned to,
and for the benefit of, the people of Libya. Any actions
that affect those assets must be done in consultation
with the Libyan authorities. In that regard, the assets
freeze should be periodically reviewed to ensure that
those assets are protected.
We remain deeply concerned over the plight of
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers in Libya. We
are saddened by the number of people who died trying
to cross the Mediterranean Sea into Europe and those
intercepted and returned to Libyan ports, only to be
detained and made to suffer more.

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank our briefers,
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, and my colleague,
Ambassador Tirumurti, for their briefings. I would
also like to welcome our Libyan colleague and friend,
Ambassador Elsonni.
The situation on the ground in Libya is becoming
increasingly precarious. Recent armed confrontations
in Tripoli are deeply troubling, and we call on all actors
to exercise restraint, refrain from escalation and ensure
the protection of civilians. In this context, we welcome
the second round of talks by the joint committee in
Cairo last week. We look forward to the next round
on 11 June. These meetings represent, we hope, the
genuine desire of both sides to advance a Libyan-led
and Libyan–owned political process under United
Nations auspices. We welcome what Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo described just now as a positive and
constructive atmosphere.
The ultimate goal of this process remains reaching
agreement to deliver credible, transparent and inclusive
elections to the 2.8 million Libyans who registered to
vote last December. We fully support Special Adviser
Williams for her tireless efforts aimed at reaching
this point. We strongly urge all parties to heed the
calls from Libyan civil society and the international
community to ensure the full, meaningful and safe
political participation of women in the process and the
inclusion of youth. We are concerned at the backlash
that activists who are promoting women’s participation
are having to face.

We condemn that inhumane treatment and call on
all involved to desist from it. We also call on those who
allocate resources to migration in Libya, including for
the establishment of holding areas, to demand strict
adherence to human rights and accountability.

Recent events demonstrate the perpetual and
dangerous influence of armed groups on Libya’s
security landscape. It is crucial that the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission (JMC) continue its important
work in unifying the security sector, as an example of
successful east-west cooperation that had previously
been free of politicization.

With respect to our brothers and sisters from Libya,
only they fully understand the cost of this unnecessarily
protracted conflict. We therefore urge them to be
inspired by their shared nationhood to engage in
dialogue and reconciliation in building back. Gabon,

Efforts should continue towards the full withdrawal
of foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries from Libya,
and this should be done in close consultation with Libya’s
neighbours and in line with the JMC’s action plan, and
resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021). This should

6/16

22-36339

26/05/2022

The situation in Libya

also be coupled with a United Nations-supervised,
gender-responsive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.
We were deeply disturbed by images and testimony
from Tarhouna, which was visited by the Special Adviser
earlier this month, where mass killings and large-scale
atrocities were perpetrated. We welcome efforts by the
Libyan authorities to investigate these incidents and
encourage them to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court’s own investigation in this regard. We
want to extend our deepest sympathies to the survivors,
victims and their loved ones, as they continue in their
pursuit of justice and accountability, without which
true national reconciliation will remain elusive.
Reports of deaths in custody, torture, starvation,
sexual violence and extortion in detention centres,
including at the Al-Mayah detention centre in Tripoli,
are deplorable. It is crucial that the Libyan authorities
ensure full humanitarian access to these centres.
However, the ultimate priority should be to release
those arbitrarily detained. In an environment where
it can be difficult or dangerous for survivors to offer
testimony, the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on
Libya plays a key investigative role. We fully support
its renewal next month.
Following the adoption of resolution 2629 (2022)
in April, implementation of the strategic review of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya can finally
begin. The Mission has our full support, and we hope
for the timely appointment of a Special Representative
of the Secretary-General.
I will conclude by conveying our strong support
to the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI, which includes Irish Defence Forces
personnel, and which has effectively contributed to the
implementation of the United Nations arms embargo on
Libya for the past two years. We look forward to, and
call for, the timely renewal of resolution 2578 (2021)
next month, and fully support France in its efforts
as penholder.
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
I also thank Ambassador Tirumurti for his briefing on
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuit to resolution 1970 (2011). We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Libya
at this meeting.

S/PV.9047

We take note of the new round of negotiations
in Cairo to overcome the political impasse in Libya.
We hope that the Libyan political forces will reach
an agreement on the constitutional framework
that will make it possible to set new dates for the
presidential and legislative elections. Completion of the
transition period is a condition for the success of the
national reconciliation.
Brazil understands that civil society has an
important role to play in this process and therefore
urges the Libyan authorities to reconsider the
restrictions imposed by the Civil Society Commission.
Reports of arbitrary arrests of activists and opinion
makers are extremely concerning at a time when
Libya is engaged in the construction of a democratic
constitutional framework.
There are also concerns about the threat of
deterioration in security conditions. We commend
Libyan stakeholders for their commitment to preserving
the ceasefire. However, we know that the political
impasse and the continuation of serious human rights
violations place additional pressure on an extremely
fragile stability.
The recent visit by Special Adviser Stephanie
Williams to Tarhouna highlights the importance the
United Nations attaches to the investigation of crimes
perpetrated by individuals and groups opposed to
reconciliation. It is necessary to ensure that those
involved in violations and abuses are held accountable
for their actions with transparency and in accordance
with due process of law.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/409)
shows that the situation of migrants and refugees
remains precarious. Reports continue to circulate
about deaths, arbitrary and clandestine prisons,
disappearances, torture and sexual violence against
vulnerable individuals and families. Brazil appreciates
the work carried out by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya in documenting cases, and we reiterate
our appeal to the Libyan authorities to redouble their
efforts aimed at preventing such abuses from recurring.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), Mr. T.S. Tirumurti, for
their briefings.

22-363397/16

S/PV.9047

The situation in Libya

We are increasingly worried about the developments
in Libya, especially in the light of recent events. With
great regret, we note that the political process in the
country is once again close to a dead end. In fact, what
we are seeing in Libya is two competing Governments,
in which the new Prime Minister Bashagha, who
was elected by the parliament in February, formed a
Government of a National Stability, which he has
been fighting to have recognized as legitimate for two
months. In this context, we are extremely concerned
about reports about recent armed clashes in Tripoli
that coincided with the Prime Minister’s arrival. Once
again, we would like to point out that the use of force to
resolve disputes is unacceptable, especially in today’s
complex situation.
As far as we can tell, attempts to reset the political
process have had mixed results. A number of initiative
meetings have not led to any meaningful outcomes.
Nevertheless, we welcome the positive steps during
the meeting between the delegation of the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State in Cairo
at the end of May, during which it was possible to
reach a preliminary compromise on a number of issues
in relation to legislation that would form the basis for
future elections.
We note with satisfaction that the Libyans managed
to overcome the recent impasse on the military aspect
of the peace process, and the meeting of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission in Toledo, Spain is proof of that.
We call on the Libyan people once again not to let that
initiative slip through their fingers in that delicate area,
as that could lead to an escalation of military conflict
and a repeat of the sad scenario of 2019.
On the issue of the evacuation of foreign forces
from Libya, our approach remains unchanged. We
continue to consistently advocate for the simultaneous,
gradual and balanced withdrawal of all non-Libyan
armed groups and military units. Failing that, we see
serious risks of upending the fragile balance in Libya.
Overall, we hope that the Libyan people will be
able to independently overcome the difficulties facing
them on the basis of an inclusive dialogue, without any
heavy-handed external assistance.
We are convinced that given the new realities in
Libya, the role of the United Nations has become even
more important. However, for a long time now, owing
to the absence of an appointed Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) entrusted
8/16

26/05/2022

with a Security Council mandate, that role is not being
fulfilled. After Jan Kubiš’s resignation, in November
2021, at a pivotal stage of the Libyan peace process,
UNSMIL was left without de facto leadership. Now, as
we see it, it is clear to everyone that the configuration
of the United Nations presence in its current form does
not meet the necessary requirements.
I think that we can all agree that the uncertain
status in which the Secretary-General’s envoys have
had to operate on the Libyan dossier has lasted far too
long and has begun to have a negative impact.
In that connection, we are in favour of the early
appointment of a new Head of the Mission, and, in
the process of selecting such a candidate, we deem
it vital to secure the consent of the Libyan people
themselves, regional players and the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I, too, would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her remarks
and valuable insights at this critical time for Libya.
I also thank the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, Ambassador Tirumurti,
for the updates, and we welcome the participation of
Ambassador Elsonni in this meeting.
After more than a decade of conflict, the situation
in Libya remains uncertain. A legitimacy crisis
affecting all its institutions is being worsened by
divisions, political rivalry, the emergence of parallel
governments and the presence of foreign fighters
and mercenaries. Natural resources remain contested
instead of benefiting the entire Libyan population.
The urgent stabilization of Libya is of strategic
importance not only for its people but also for the wider
region. We must explore every possibility in order to
overcome the current political impasse. The dispute
over control of the executive threatens to trigger
instability and violence on the ground, as we recently
saw in Tripoli.
We concur with the Secretary-General in his
assessment that a clear, consensual path to elections
is now more than ever a political necessity. It is now
time for Libyan stakeholders and the international
community to redouble their support for the mediation
efforts of the United Nations.
The talks in Cairo between the House of
Representatives and the High State Council, mediated
22-36339

26/05/2022

The situation in Libya

by Special Adviser Stephanie Williams, have shown
signs of encouraging progress towards a constitutional
basis for the elections. That constitutes a very promising
basis for an agreement. It is what Libya needs. It is what
we expect. A consensual constitutional basis and the
establishment of an electoral horizon could be crucial
to resolving the tensions surrounding the executive as
well. That momentum should be maintained during the
third round in June in order to prepare for and hold free,
fair, credible and inclusive elections.
We call on all Libyan stakeholders, including the
leadership of both the House of Representatives and
the High State Council, to cooperate fully and in good
faith with Special Adviser Williams. We commend
Special Adviser Williams for her mediation efforts as
well as the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
for its role in supporting accountability efforts. Justice
is paramount for sustained peace.
Progress on the political track is necessary and
urgent to reduce volatility, which has engendered a
stalemate also on the military track. While the ceasefire
has been maintained and all Libyan actors reiterate
their rejection of conflict, many of the achievements of
the military dialogue and of the work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission are now in question. Therefore,
no progress can be envisaged in the context of the
withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries.
That volatile and perilous situation affects every
aspect of life. We remain very worried by the continuing
increase in restrictions on civil society in Libya. That
reduces civic space and undermines the meaningful
participation of all stakeholders in the country’s
political process and public life, especially women.
Every attempt to control civil-society organizations
and limit their space for international cooperation is
regrettable and should cease.
Furthermore, the political stalemate is depriving
the Libyan people of access to their national resources,
jeopardizing their economy and investments in critical
infrastructure and even the provision of basic services,
and undermining the socioeconomic rights of the
population. That is unacceptable and most unfortunate
in a country of just 7 million citizens that is richly
endowed with natural resources.
It is crucial that the National Oil Corporation
remain neutral vis-à-vis the political impasse and that
the production of hydrocarbons not be held hostage
to political infighting. Those resources, which are

S/PV.9047

now fuelling and exacerbating divisions among local
stakeholders, must be redirected to the socioeconomic
development of the country and for the benefit of all the
Libyan people.
Let me conclude by stating that European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI has made
an important contribution to ensuring respect for the
United Nations arms embargo within the overall efforts
to find a solution to the Libyan crisis. For that reason,
Albania fully supports the renewal of the mandate and
of Operation IRINI.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing and
the Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for
their statements. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Libya at this meeting.
The uncertainty of the Libyan political process
continues to grow. The differences between the parties
on important issues such as the legitimacy of the
Government remain difficult to resolve, and clashes
have broken out in Tripoli, which is of deep concern to
China. We call on all parties in Libya to put the interests
of the country and the people first, remain committed
to the general direction of the political settlement,
exercise maximum restraint, refrain from taking any
action that may escalate tensions and maintain the
hard-won peace and stability.
Dialogue and consultations represent the only
solution that can break the political impasse in Libya.
The Libyan General National Congress and the High
State Council recently held the second round of the
dialogue in Cairo and reached a partial consensus on
the basis of the Constitution, which China commends.
The transitional phase envisaged by the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum is coming to an end. All
parties in Libya should maintain the momentum of
dialogue in order to reach a comprehensive consensus
on important issues such as the constitutional basis and
the election timetable as soon as possible and create
the conditions necessary for holding elections and
completing the political transition.
In the long run, the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should support the
parties in Libya in advancing national reconciliation
and resolving the deep-seated imbalances caused by
years of turmoil, so as to lay a solid foundation for
Libya to achieve long-term stability. China encourages

22-363399/16

S/PV.9047

The situation in Libya

regional organizations such as the African Union and
the League of Arab States to play an active role to that
end.
Under the current circumstances, it is essential
that the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) resume implementation of its full mandate.
China reiterates its support for the Secretary-General,
in line with resolution 2629 (2022), appointing, as
soon as possible, an African candidate as the Special
Representative for Libya.
External interference has been a major factor in
the long-standing issue of Libya. The international
community should remain committed to the principle
of Libyan leadership and ownership and provide
constructive assistance while refraining from imposing
external solutions.
The ceasefire agreement is the cornerstone of
maintaining security and stability in Libya and the
region. The 5+5 Joint Military Commission plays an
important role in implementing the ceasefire agreement
and facilitating the withdrawal of foreign armed forces
and mercenaries. The Commission’s resumption of its
full duties as soon as possible will help all parties to
maintain coordination and communication and prevent
any misunderstandings or miscalculations. China
supports the deployment of the UNSMIL ceasefire
monitoring team to Sirte as soon as possible.
Oil is Libya’s main source of national income.
China has noted some recent developments in Libya’s
oil production and encourages all parties concerned
to resolve their differences in the areas of oil revenue,
management and distribution through dialogue and
consultations; restore a stable oil production as soon as
possible; and create conditions favourable to the normal
functioning of the Libyan Government, public-service
delivery and the advancement of the political process.
In the current geopolitical context, that will also help to
stabilize international crude-oil market prices.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates)
(spoke in Arabic): I thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Ambassador Tirumurti
for their comprehensive briefings. I also welcome
the participation of Ambassador Taher Elsonni in
today’s meeting.
The future of the political process in Libya
remains unclear and is threatened by the rivalry for
power and the potential for renewed clashes between
armed groups, especially in the capital of Tripoli.
10/16

26/05/2022

Nevertheless, despite the current differences between
them, we are encouraged by the efforts of the Libyan
parties to defuse tensions and avoid falling into a spiral
of violence, giving the intra-Libyan dialogue a chance
to move forward. Their efforts deserve the support of
the international community at this critical juncture.
We also stress the need to conclude all the transition
phases, with a view to realizing the aspirations of
the Libyan people through the holding of free, fair,
inclusive and credible presidential and parliamentary
elections, while adhering to the timeline that they
agreed to. In that regard, we welcome all good offices
and initiatives aimed at achieving those goals and
resolving the crisis in Libya. We also welcome the
understanding reached by the Libyan parties in Cairo
during the consultations on the constitutional path. We
appreciate Egypt’s role in that regard and hope that a
similar agreement among the relevant Libyan parties
will be reached on the remaining issues during the
next meeting in June. We also stress the importance
of including women and young people at every step
of the State-building process in Libya. We must not
lose sight of the importance of focusing on achieving
comprehensive national reconciliation and initiating
genuine dialogue that includes all segments of Libyan
society. That will support confidence-building among
all the parties and political actors in Libya, preserve the
unity and the interests of the Libyan State and promote
peaceful coexistence among its citizens.
If sustainable peace is to be achieved, the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission must maintain its impartiality. We
also call on the Commission to resume its meetings, with
a view to safeguarding the security and military gains
that have already been achieved, particularly with regard
to combating extremism, terrorism, border infiltration
and smuggling. For the process of State-building to
continue, all of Libya’s vital institutions must be united
and distanced from disputes. They must be independent
and allowed to carry out their work despite the current
political situation and turmoil. We emphasize that those
institutions belong to the Libyan people, and that it is
important to preserve Libya’s resources and wealth and
to manage them fairly, transparently and equitably. In
conjunction with that, it is also important to step up
efforts to establish the rule of law throughout Libya
and maintain its security and stability. That will also
help to address the issue of migration in Libya and the
wider African region, which requires the international
community to support countries of origin and transit
while addressing the root causes of migration.
22-36339

26/05/2022

The situation in Libya

With regard to the work of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, we look forward to its reconfiguration
in accordance with the recommendations of the
independent strategic review (S/2021/716, annex). We
also look forward to seeing the Mission led by a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, based in
Tripoli, and to seeing the Secretary-General appoint
such a Special Representative expeditiously, in line
with resolution 2629 (2022).
In conclusion, my country reaffirms its commitment
to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of Libya. We hope that efforts will
be stepped up to achieve a national consensus and
overcome the current political impasse.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya for their briefings. I welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya.
Maintaining the status quo is not an option for Libya,
and we need to resolve the crisis involving the executive
authority urgently. France calls on Libyan stakeholders
to engage in genuine dialogue aimed at reaching a viable
political solution without delay. It will be vital to form a
united and inclusive Government capable of governing
throughout the country if presidential and parliamentary
elections are to be held and secured throughout Libya
as soon as possible, in accordance with the appeals of
the Secretary-General, the relevant Security Council
resolutions and, above all, the expectations of the
Libyan people. The postponement of the elections six
months ago has resulted in a period of uncertainty that
undermines our efforts to restore a united, stable and
sovereign Libya. France fully supports mediation by
the United Nations in establishing the constitutional
basis for holding elections. Dialogue among all the
Libyan parties, including but not limited to the two
Chambers, is crucial to establishing a new road map for
holding elections and is needed to reduce tensions as
well as make progress on a constitutional foundation.
We therefore encourage the United Nations to continue
its efforts in that regard.
The security gains that have been made must also
be protected from the political deadlock. France calls
on all Libyan actors to refrain from acts of violence,
incitements to hatred and provocations and to uphold the
ceasefire. To that end, France will continue to support
the Libyan 5+5 Joint Military Commission, which has
demonstrated its determination to implement all the

S/PV.9047

provisions of the ceasefire agreement, including the
gradual and progressive withdrawal of all mercenaries,
foreign fighters and foreign forces, as set out in its action
plan. That is as essential to restoring Libyan sovereignty
as the implementation of a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process. France stands ready to work
to that end together with the Libyans, the countries of
the region and the regional organizations concerned. It
is also incumbent on all Member States to ensure that
the arms embargo is observed. The European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI represents
a unique instrument for implementing it. France thanks
Libya for its cooperation and calls on Council members
to facilitate renewing the authorization for IRINI’s
operations by 3 June.
France remains concerned about the continuing
oil blockade. We are following with interest the
recommendations for a freeze on oil revenues and the
establishment of a mechanism for their transparent
and equitable management. It should be accepted
by all Libyan stakeholders and, if necessary, should
enable the blockade of wells to be lifted rapidly. France
also recalls the efforts of the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General to achieve genuine unification of
the Central Bank of Libya, which has yet to be realized.
France remains concerned about the increase in
human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law, particularly against refugees,
migrants, human rights defenders in particular,
and women. France would like to emphasize
the importance of extending the mandate of the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya in June and
of the cooperation of all parties with the International
Criminal Court. The fight against impunity is essential
to guaranteeing lasting peace.
The Council’s priority today must be to preserve the
political and security gains made in the past few years
and to relaunch an electoral process without further
delay, because that is essential to ensuring lasting
stability in Libya. I call on all Council members to
rise to the challenges confronting the establishment of
peace and security in Libya and throughout the region.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing today. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Libya.
The challenges that Libya is facing came into
sharp focus earlier this month with the reports of

22-3633911/16

S/PV.9047

The situation in Libya

clashes outside Tripoli. It is imperative that the parties
concerned resolve all outstanding political issues
peacefully, keeping the larger interests of the Libyan
people in mind. We hope that all the parties will work
together to maintain peace and stability in the country.
In that regard, we once again reiterate the importance
of holding the presidential and parliamentary elections
as soon as possible, as that will be critical to carrying
forward the momentum generated by the signing of the
ceasefire agreement.
The priority right now is to ensure that elections
are held without delay in a free, fair, inclusive and
credible manner. We hope that all parties in Libya
can unite around that common purpose. We note that
positive movement has been achieved in several areas
by the Joint Committee of the House of Representatives
and the High Council of State, and we look forward to
seeing the Libyan parties arrive at a consensus soon
on the constitutional basis for holding the elections.
It is important that the Security Council and the
international community support the Libyan people
as they prepare for the elections. Violence in any form
could undermine the progress achieved since 2020 and
should be strongly discouraged.
The sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Libya needs to be safeguarded. The political process
must be fully Libyan-led and Libyan-owned with no
conditions imposed or external interference. It is also
important to see concrete progress on the full and
complete withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries.
It is regrettable that more than a year and a half after the
signing of the ceasefire agreement, we have yet to see
tangible progress in that regard. The continued presence
of foreign forces and mercenaries is detrimental to the
peace and stability of the country and the region. In that
context, I also want to stress the importance of planning
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of armed groups and non-State armed actors. Libya
also needs an inclusive and comprehensive national
reconciliation process.
It is important for the international community to
direct its attention to the threat of terrorism in Africa,
particularly in the Sahel region. Recent reports of the
Secretary-General have highlighted the presence in
southern Libya of training camps belonging to Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates.
ISIL’s continuing ability to launch attacks is deeply
concerning. The Council should be focusing on
eliminating every threat posed by ISIL and other terror
12/16

26/05/2022

groups anywhere in the world. Terrorism is a growing
threat to Africa, and it is important for the Council to
focus on it before it is too late.
India has traditionally enjoyed close and mutually
beneficial bilateral ties with Libya, and we remain
committed to supporting Libya and the Libyan people
in their endeavour to bring about lasting peace in
their country.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Ambassador Tirumurti for their
briefings. We also welcome our Libyan colleague to
today’s meeting.
We would like to commend the work of
Ms. Stephanie Williams, the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General, and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya in convening the Joint Committee of
the House of Representatives and the High Council of
State earlier this month in Cairo. The United Nations
plays a critical role in assisting the Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political process, and particularly in
bringing the parties together to discuss the muchneeded constitutional arrangements. Let me also thank
Egypt for hosting the parties. We further commend the
Joint Committee for reaching an initial consensus on
137 articles in last week’s round of talks. That is an
encouraging sign of progress, and we urge the parties to
build on the consensus in order to reach agreement on
the remaining articles when they meet again in June. We
trust that they will live up to their responsibilities and
provide a firm constitutional framework that can enable
the holding of inclusive national elections as soon as
possible. As we all know, there are 2.8 million Libyans
who have registered to vote and expect timely and safe
elections. The only viable path to legitimate political
leadership is to allow the Libyan people to choose their
leaders. Attempts to seize or hold on to political power
through violence will only hurt the people of Libya. We
call on all the parties to exercise maximum restraint,
refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric and
ensure the protection of civilians, which are critical to
avoiding a new escalation of violence.
We are pleased to see that the ceasefire is still
holding, and we commend the work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission in that regard. However, as we
underlined at the previous briefing (see S/PV.8996), it
is very important that the Commission’s essential work
continue and not be obstructed by the ongoing political
tension. It has made great progress in preserving
stability and improving the daily lives of the Libyan
22-36339

26/05/2022

The situation in Libya

people. We also welcome the Commission’s recent
meeting with Special Adviser Williams on the margins
of the workshop on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) in Spain and applaud the renewed
commitment to an inclusive, rights-based DDR process.
We encourage further cooperation with neighbouring
countries and the African Union in that regard.
The disruption of oil production must also be
avoided. Libyan natural resources are important to the
global energy supply at a time of increasing demand.
More importantly, they are a source of income for the
Libyan people that is essential to improving public
services and securing reliable funding for the nation’s
priority needs. The oil sector must not be politicized,
and the ongoing oil blockade must be lifted, thereby
enabling full oil production and export.
Finally, we remain gravely concerned about the
reported arrest and detention of members of civil
society, human rights organizations and international
non-governmental institutions. We are also alarmed by
the violence and harassment targeting women activists
and officials. I want to underline that it is the duty of
States to respect, protect and fulfil their human rights
obligations, including by ensuring that perpetrators are
held accountable.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Ambassador Tirumurti for their briefings.
Mexico welcomes the progress made in Cairo during
the latest round of talks facilitated by Ms. Stephanie
Williams between the High Council of State and the
House of Representatives. We are aware, however,
that it has not yet been possible to reach agreement
on fundamental issues related to the reactivation of
the electoral process, such as the eligibility criteria
for candidates and the sequence of legislative and
presidential elections. It is worrying that with less than
a month to go before the end of the transitional period
envisaged by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum,
there is no clarity on the course of action to be taken
to preserve the political process. In the circumstances,
the existence of two Governments claiming to control
the country poses a threat to the stability of Libya and
the region as a whole, a threat that the Council must
take seriously.
The experience of recent years has shown that
any political arrangement leading to the formation of
a Government without the endorsement of the popular

S/PV.9047

vote will be limited by questions surrounding its
legitimacy. The irregularities in decision-making in the
House of Representatives, as reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/409), also mean that this space
for popular representation has so far failed to offer a
viable alternative.
The Council must therefore use all the instruments
at its disposal to meet the expectations of the almost
3 million Libyans who registered to vote last December.
Mexico believes it urgent, as a first step, that the
Secretary-General appoint his Special Representative
to head the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and take an active role in seeking a way
out of the current political impasse. We regret that
the prolonged lack of stable UNSMIL leadership is
hampering the implementation of the recommendations
of the independent strategic review.
On the security front, the recent armed clashes in
Tripoli remind us that an escalation of the conflict can
occur at any time. It is therefore essential that the 5+5
Joint Military Commission fully resume its functions
and make progress on the outstanding tasks, particularly
the implementation of the plan for the withdrawal of
mercenaries and foreign fighters and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.
The current instability has allowed armed groups
of all affiliations to continue to abuse migrants and
asylum seekers with impunity, intimidate activists and
limit the civic space with detrimental consequences
for the participation of women and young people. My
country, Mexico, urges the authorities to prioritize
accountability for human rights violations and abuses
in order to break the cycle of impunity and end the
suffering of civilians.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.
Let me start by thanking Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her informative, timely briefing today.
I also thank Ambassador Tirumurti for updating
the Security Council on the developments of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya. I welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya to our deliberations today.
Yet again, we meet to discuss the situation in Libya,
and, yet again, we heard that the Libyan people are still
being robbed of the peace, stability and democracy for

22-3633913/16

S/PV.9047

The situation in Libya

which they long. Violence continues unabated. Just days
ago, as Council members already heard, on 17 May,
we saw clashes between rival militias in the streets of
Tripoli. Over and over, we see reports that weapons
and foreign fighters are still flowing into the country,
fuelling violence and violating resolution 1970 (2011).
The United States urges all armed groups to cease
fighting and to work to preserve the 2020 ceasefire and
the goals of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.
Today I also want to call attention to the deeply
troubling trend of Libyan leaders courting violent
extremists and using restrictive laws to crack down
on civil society activists, silence critics and shore up
power. That is not what a free, fair and open Libya
looks like.
We are pleased to hear of the progress towards
agreeing to a constitutional basis for presidential and
parliamentary elections, and we welcome the plan to
reconvene again in June. But how many more months
will we wait until Libya holds the election for which
more than 3 million people registered? The delays and
roadblocks must end.
We appreciate the work of the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser, Ms. Stephanie Williams, and of
delegates from the House of Representatives and the
High State Council, who met in Cairo last week to move
us towards political consensus. But let me be 100 per
cent clear: those who obstruct or undermine a successful
political transition in Libya may face sanctions.
Libya is at a critical juncture. Its leaders can
choose to move boldly towards a unified Libya with a
Government that strives to meet the needs of its people
and protects human rights, including for the many
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers in Libya, or
they can choose to backslide into disunity, instability,
halted development and the possibility of further
violent conflict.
There is still an opportunity to rekindle the
spirit of political unity that led to the ceasefire and
the establishment of an electoral road map. But that
window of opportunity is shrinking with each passing
day and month. It is time for Libya’s leaders to do right
by its people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to again draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
14/16

26/05/2022

encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I congratulate you, Madam President, on the United
States presidency of the Security Council this month.
I wish you every success. I also thank Ms. DiCarlo and
Mr. Tirumurti for their briefings.
We have delivered scores of statements before the
Security Council, and we heard many statements. We
have the impression that we just keep repeating ourselves.
The Libyan people have had enough of hearing the same
speeches. It would seem that we are in a vicious circle.
Today I wish to speak directly to Member States while
trying to convey the messages of Libyan citizens, who
have had enough of following all these meetings, which
do not produce any tangible outcome. Moreover, I wish
this time to convey the voices of the Libyan people,
whatever their affiliation — whether they support the
old regime, the February regime, or whether they are of
any other affiliation. I will attempt to convey the views
of simple Libyan citizens who wonder as to what will
happen next. I therefore ask those present to listen to
me with full attention.
Today’s briefing comes amid difficult challenges
and serious crossroads. Libyan citizens are aware that
what is happening today is the result of several crises
that have been accumulating since 2011. After many
Libyan people took to the streets calling for change,
the Security Council decided to intervene, raising
the slogan of protecting civilians and supporting the
democratic process. We therefore thought that that was
the fundamental objective of the intervention, but the
involvement quickly led to chaos, a proxy war and the
proliferation of weapons and militias throughout the
country, in addition to terrorism and imposing solutions
and agendas.
Our dream for change has therefore become a
nightmare of division and destruction. My country is
now in an endless spiral of conflict, while the Council
has been completely unable to act. That is unfortunately
the view of the majority of Libyan citizens. It is therefore
incumbent on all Council members to shoulder their
moral responsibilities in terms of what is happening
in my country. It is up to the Council to take things
seriously this time.
22-36339

26/05/2022

The situation in Libya

With regard to the political situation, Libya has
seen successive developments in recent years. Many
initiatives and conferences took place with various
political agreements, starting with the Skhirat
Agreement and the Paris and Palermo Conferences.
There was also the Berlin Conference, in addition
to the Tunisia and Geneva talks. All of those led to
a road map, which the Security Council endorsed by
adopting relevant resolutions. There has been also an
attempt to complete the transition phase and establish
a constitutional basis, which will finally allow us to
organize elections.
What happened? Why did all that fail? That is
what Libyan citizens are asking. In reality, the Security
Council has failed to implement its resolutions and could
not make obstructing States or individuals accountable.
The Council simply settled for expressing its concern
and condemning the situation. For that reason, Libyan
citizens no longer have any faith in the Security Council
or in the international community. And neither do they
have faith in any new initiatives and proposals being
put forward by the international community. They are
against all the solutions being offered, which do not
meet the expectations of the Libyan people and instead
meet the interests of the sponsoring States. That is
why Libyans ask: What is the benefit of international
dialogues or United Nations resolutions if obstructers
are not made accountable?
What did the Security Council do when the
elections were not held on 25 December 2021? What
happened afterwards? Nothing happened. Council
members’ statements all referred to 25 December, to
the point we felt that it is a sacred day.
The Council was divided on many occasions, the
latest of which was its inability to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
appointing a new envoy. Instead, the Secretary-General
had to appoint a consultant to manage issues. When it
comes to appointing a new envoy, I remind the Council
that the next envoy will be the ninth in 11 years. That
leads us to ask whether the problem is really a problem
of special envoys or whether it is a problem with the
strategy put in place by the United Nations Mission and
the various bodies. That is a question being asked by
Libyan citizens.
We are facing another dilemma that Libyan citizens
cannot really understand. On the one hand, the Council
calls for compliance with Security Council resolutions,
international agreements, dialogues and road maps,

S/PV.9047

while, on the other hand, it calls for respect for a
genuine Libyan-led and Libyan-owned solution. There
is a kind of contradiction between the two appeals.
Libyan citizens and political leaders are confused.
Libyans hope for a Libyan consensus in order to end
this vicious cycle. We also hope that the dialogue under
way in Cairo between the House of Representatives and
the High State Council will be successful and reach
a constitutional agreement that will lead to elections.
However, the same questions arise. Where will things
stand if the Cairo talks fail? Where will things stand
if those talks succeed? What will be the Security
Council’s position against the obstructers if the Cairo
talks reach a partial agreement without taking into
consideration active political actors?
Those are the questions being asked by the Libyan
people, who are hoping that the Security Council will
be able to answer them. Libyan citizens do not care
for provisions of laws. What really matters to them is
stability and safety. They do not care about the details.
Pertaining to the security situation, Libyan citizens
see the day-to-day deterioration of security because of
instability in their country. No just political solution
has been found for the crisis to date. Unfortunately,
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission is faltering. Libyan
citizens were once optimistic about the Commission
being able to unify the military institution and ensure
the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Libya. That
was necessary for putting an end to non-State armed
groups in Libya, which every honest Libyan citizen was
asking for.
Nevertheless, we are happy with the results of
the meetings that were held recently in Spain ,where
the issue of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of fighters was discussed. We hope that
issue will not be politicized.
Also with regard to the security situation, we have
seen a resurgence of actions by terrorist groups, such
as Da’esh and Al-Qaida, especially in the south of
Libya, where numerous military patrols and civilians
have been attacked. The number of weapons is also
growing, and abductions, killings and clashes among
armed groups continue to increase, as has happened in
the western part of Libya. Silencing the Libyan people
continues in many parts of Libya without.
The crisis concerning illegal migrants has
continued, while cases of cross-border human
trafficking are growing. In that regard, we repeat

22-3633915/16

S/PV.9047

The situation in Libya

that Libya is a victim and cannot be responsible for
this issue. According to reports, there are 650,000
migrants in Libya; but migration centres hold no more
than 4,000 migrants. What has happened to the rest?
The Council needs to shoulder its responsibility in
that regard. Libyan citizens ask: Why do we not hear
about sanctions against international human traffickers
in origin, transit and destination countries? If Libya
represents the gates of hell for migrants as a result
of human trafficking, then members of the Council
need to open the doors to heaven for migrants in their
countries. Undoubtedly, stability in Libya will resolve
this problem, and it is therefore important to address all
these issues comprehensively.
With regard to the economic and basic service
situation, the Libyan economic situation is currently
facing major challenges because of the absence of
comprehensive political solutions. State institutions are
divided. The central administration, ports and oil wells
are often closed. There is no social justice, equitable
distribution of wealth or development opportunities — to
say nothing of the current international crisis, which has
a direct impact on the local economy and food security
in Libya. In addition, we are witnessing a deterioration
of basic services and the health sector, particularly in
the south of the country. The situation of the displaced
people and migrants is deteriorating. Libyan citizens
are tired and have lost faith in everybody. All of that is
the result of a political void and division.
In conclusion, I ask the usual question. What is the
solution for all those challenges? First of all, we need to
put an end to interference in Libya’s domestic affairs.
There should be respect for a Libyan-owned and Libyan
led solution. The solution is to listen and respond to the
nearly 3 million voters who had hoped for the holding
the elections and clearly demonstrated their position.
The majority of the Libyan people want to resolve all
of the accumulated political problems. They want State
legitimacy to be revived. And they want to choose their
leaders and representatives themselves. They want a

16/16

26/05/2022

strong and unified Libyan Government that controls all
Libyan territory.
The solution is to hold constitutional general
elections as soon as possible. Libyans want free and
fair elections that rely on an equitable and robust
constitutional basis, with broad political participation
that ensures national consensus. That is the solution
that the Libyan people are calling for. That is why we
are asking the Security Council to bolster the Libyan
people’s will and correct the mistakes of the past.
We thank the many States that have changed position
and understood that the cycle of conflict cannot go
on forever.
Dialogue and peace are the only way to ensure
stability and security in the region. Libyan citizens
call on influential actors in Libya to heed the voice of
wisdom and abandon war and conflict. Concessions
should be made for the sake of the country. It is not
acceptable anymore to kill more people in a senseless
war that only brings destruction with it. Accordingly,
we once again thank all political leaders for their
national positions on not allowing the waging of
a new war for the sake of power. It is time to forget
the painful divisions of the past and work together to
establish a national pact and genuine reconciliation.
In that regard, as we celebrate Africa Day, we repeat
our call for supporting the efforts of the African Union
and the Presidency Council to ensure comprehensive
national reconciliation that unites all of us and makes
us stronger.
Despite all of the challenges I have outlined, I can
assure the Council that we remain optimistic. Libyan
citizens, in particular the younger generation — men and
women — have become more mature and increasingly
aware. We are confident that, through our national
efforts, we will overcome this crisis, move towards
reconciliation and make progress, notwithstanding the
challenges before us, towards building our institutions
and achieving stability and prosperity.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

22-36339
