United Nations

S/PV.6180

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6180th meeting
Friday, 7 August 2009, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir John Sawers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Ms. Rice
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1820
(2008) (S/2009/362)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-44842 (E)

*0944842*

S/PV.6180

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1820 (2008)
(S/2009/362)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Cape Verde,
Ecuador, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Israel, Italy,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste and the United Republic of
Tanzania, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2009/362, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008).
I should like to start by welcoming the SecretaryGeneral, who joins us today to present his first followup report to resolution 1820 (2008) on women, peace
and security.
In addition, I should like to extend our welcome
and thanks to three female United Nations police
2

officers from United Nations missions in Liberia, Haiti
and the Sudan, who are here to observe our debate.
Yesterday, they attended a round-table event at the
United Nations that was sponsored by the Canadian
Mission and the Pearson Peacekeeping Training
Centre. It is important that we have opportunities in
New York to hear from field practitioners dealing with
those difficult issues.
Resolution 1820 (2008) builds upon resolution
1325 (2000). It confirms the Council’s readiness to
address more systematically the scourge of conflictrelated sexual violence. It also underlines the vital
contribution that women themselves can make as
peacekeepers and peacebuilders.
Our objective today is to hear the views of
colleagues from across the United Nations membership
to aid Council consideration of the way forward in the
light of the Secretary-General’s report.
I now invite the Secretary-General to take the
floor.
The Secretary-General: I commend your
initiative, Mr. President, to convene this Security
Council debate on one of the important priorities of the
United Nations: women, peace and security.
Despite some progress over two decades, the
deliberate targeting of civilians through acts of sexual
violence continues on a widespread and systematic
basis. Parties to armed conflict continue to use sexual
violence with efficient brutality. Like a grenade or a
gun, sexual violence is part of their arsenal to pursue
military, political, social and economic aims. The
perpetrators generally operate with impunity.
I have met victims of sexual violence. I am
haunted by their testimony, and I will not relent in
calling on States and non-State parties to prevent those
terrible crimes. Beyond its enormous toll on victims,
sexual violence in armed conflict hurts recovery and
peacebuilding. In Burundi, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
the fighting may have ended but sexual violence
persists on a very serious scale. We are helping those
countries to recover, but we must also do more to
prevent others from suffering the same fate.
My report (S/2009/362) highlights where States
and other parties must act. I also call on the Security
Council to focus on concrete actions. Allow me to
briefly underscore four areas.

09-44842

S/PV.6180

First, preventing and responding to sexual
violence requires a multisectoral response, the pillars
of which are interdependent. The efforts of the United
Nations system reach across our main work areas from
the normative to the operational. I am committed to
strengthening the United Nations system to ensure that
we deliver as one.
Secondly, sexual violence should be addressed
from the planning to the implementation of mandates.
Our actions must be focused and sustained over time to
achieve results, as the causes and consequences of
sexual violence are often intractable. I am pleased that
the issue will be included in the terms of reference for
technical assessment missions and the integrated
mission planning process. Peacekeeping missions and
United Nations country teams will establish joint
priorities in that regard through integrated strategic
frameworks.
I am also working with my top advisers to ensure
that the United Nations gives priority attention to
preventing and responding to sexual violence.
Yesterday, in my meeting with force commanders, I
gave a clear and strong instruction that military leaders
should keep that issue as the top priority in working to
maintain peace and security. I call on Council members
and other States, as well as civilian and military
leaders, to join forces to address that grave problem. I
repeat: No act of sexual exploitation and abuse by any
United Nations personnel will be tolerated.
Thirdly, I urge the General Assembly to conclude
its deliberations on the creation of a United Nations
institution to advance gender equality and women’s
human rights. I am also in discussions with the United
Nations system partners on appointing a new senior
system-wide official to address sexual violence. I am
considering that in the light of the General Assembly’s
discussions and existing mechanisms, such as the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women and the
Special Representative on Children and Armed
Conflict. I am also studying the additional costs that
this would entail.
Fourthly, we must improve monitoring,
investigation and documentation to address the many
challenges that we face in gathering information and
reporting on sexual violence. We will also continue to
promote a greater understanding of resolution 1820
(2008) in all United Nations missions and duty stations
and to adapt our approaches and systems, including for

09-44842

monitoring and reporting, to support its effective
implementation.
The recommendations in my report are mutually
reinforcing. If they are carried out together, we can
foster greater progress. Those recommendations are
also designed to provide the Council with more
consistent, evidence-based and timely information to
help it in addressing that challenge.
Towards that end, I urge the Council to
immediately authorize the establishment of an
independent commission of inquiry, supported by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. It would be tasked with investigating
and reporting on violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law in ongoing conflict
situations in Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan. That independent commission of
inquiry should recommend to the Council the most
effective mechanisms to ensure accountability for those
egregious crimes.
I also draw the Council’s attention to the brutal,
predatory and deliberate targeting of civilians by the
Lord’s Resistance Army, whose activities have
destabilized civilians in the Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Uganda and the Democratic People’s
Republic of the Congo.
I am prepared to submit an annual report on
resolution 1820 (2008). I want to help ensure that all
parties respect their obligations under international law
and are held accountable when they violate them.
Victims of sexual violence are among the world’s most
vulnerable and traumatized people. For the sake of
these innocent women and men, their families and their
societies, we must come together and act. That will
help victims in war-torn countries and set us on a
course for a better world.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and for his leadership on this issue.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Security Council members, I wish to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes, in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.

3

S/PV.6180

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America):
Mr. President, I want to begin by thanking you and
your delegation for hosting this very important event
and for ensuring that it remains front and centre on the
Council’s agenda. I also want to thank the SecretaryGeneral very much for his important report
(S/2009/362) and his very helpful recommendations, as
well as for his presence here today.
Throughout history, sexual violence has often
occurred in places racked by armed conflict. But over
the past decade, reporting from several countries has
confirmed that rape is becoming increasingly frequent
and brutal, and in some places a systematic weapon of
war. In response, the Security Council has adopted
resolution 1820 (2008), repeatedly condemned these
crimes and called on all parties to immediately end acts
of rape and sexual violence during armed conflicts.
But thousands of women and girls are still being
gang-raped, mutilated, assaulted and forced into sexual
slavery every single day. This we must end. I will
never forget when we took our trip to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and met with two very eloquent
victims of rape and sexual violence at the Heal Africa
Hospital. They spoke movingly of the horrible, horrible
crimes they had experienced. After our discussion, I
had the opportunity briefly to speak privately with the
older of those two women. She pulled me aside, I think
looking to me as the one woman on the Security
Council at present. She asked me, with tears in her
eyes, to do everything I could, and that we could, to
end this horrible systematic violence that she and so
many others had experienced. I gave her my word that
I would, and, with the cooperation and support of my
fellow Council members, I intend to keep my word.
This is because sexual assaults against women are
often committed in front of their husbands and
children, and they do more than inflict appalling
physical, mental and emotional injuries on their
victims. They can also spread HIV/AIDS and other
diseases, produce unwanted children who become
neglected or orphans and undermine families and
communities when the survivors are stigmatized and
shamed. All too often, the result is a smouldering anger
and an insatiable desire for revenge that only worsens
the violence and makes peace agreements all the harder
to reach or sustain.

4

We must end these atrocities. We must better
protect women and girls, halt the impunity that
perpetrators enjoy and make it easier to achieve lasting
and inclusive peace. To succeed, we need to ensure that
rapists and other perpetrators of sexual violence are
identified and punished. We need sustained efforts to
prevent new acts of sexual violence, including by
increasing human rights training and vetting for
members of domestic security forces. We also need
quality and accessible treatment for survivors of rape
and abuse.
At the same time, we need to collect more data on
sexual violence, share United Nations reporting more
widely and bring that information into the Security
Council in real time. The Secretary-General’s report
includes several recommendations that could
dramatically improve current practice. Building on
resolution 1820 (2008), the United States urges the
Council to consider these recommendations seriously
and to act swiftly on them.
Job one is to hold perpetrators accountable, and
so the United States supports credible domestic or
hybrid and international accountability mechanisms
that investigate and prosecute these crimes, particularly
in countries incapable of bringing such criminals to
effective justice. We aim to build State capacity to enforce
the rule of law through a range of measures, from
technical assistance through training by international
lawyers to assistance in drafting legislation.
In this regard, I would like to say a few words
specifically about the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where the interlinked problems of sexual
violence and impunity are particularly grave.
According to the United Nations Population Fund,
nearly 16,000 new cases of sexual violence were
registered throughout the country in 2008, with 65 per
cent of those cases involving children. Yet data
collected from provincial health centres between 2005
and 2007 suggest that Congolese courts heard only
2 per cent of the registered rape cases in the conflictridden eastern Congo.
Some
cases
against
accused
Congolese
perpetrators of mass atrocities are pending in the
International Criminal Court, but we should establish
other mechanisms for ensuring accountability and
bringing perpetrators to justice. A commission of
inquiry, as suggested by the Secretary-General, is one
option that deserves serious consideration. The Council

09-44842

S/PV.6180

should also explore deployment of technical assistance
teams to develop the capacity to combat sexual
violence in all conflict zones. These teams could
determine the feasibility of establishing a dedicated
chamber in domestic courts that would prosecute war
crimes and crimes against humanity, with a substantial
focus on sexual and gender-based violence.
We welcome the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s recently announced zerotolerance policy for members of its security forces who
commit sexual violence. We also welcome the April
2009 launch of a comprehensive strategy by the United
Nations and the Congolese Government for combating
gender-based violence. And we will continue to insist
on the complete resolution of the five cases discussed
by the Council earlier this week. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
recent approval of a six-officer sexual violence unit to
help the Mission implement its protection mandate, and
we encourage MONUC to work further with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on this immense problem. And we will work with the
Congolese and all stakeholders to help craft more
effective solutions.
Next, we need specialized leadership and highlevel attention at the United Nations, to focus on
implementing the goals of resolution 1820 (2008). The
United States believes that the appointment of a highlevel special representative on women and peace and
security by the Secretary-General for a specified period
of time would help focus the Secretariat’s efforts. This
time-limited mandate would be to review and
streamline multisectoral responses to sexual violence
in conflict situations, promote integrated and
coordinated approaches, bolster the role of women in
peace negotiations and peacekeeping operations, and
promote accountability for the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008).
Thirdly, we should use targeted measures to
thwart sexual violence as a tactic of war. We fully
support the report’s recommendations on incorporating
provisions on sexual violence in armed conflict into
existing sanctions regimes, as appropriate. To best
apply such targeted measures and give the Council the
up-to-date information it needs, information-sharing
among all Council-mandated bodies is essential. The
Secretary-General’s relevant Special Representatives
and emergency relief coordinators should work with

09-44842

Member States to develop comprehensive, joint
Government-United Nations strategies for combating
sexual violence, in consultation with all relevant
stakeholders. They should also provide regular updates
on sexual violence in their reporting to the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council.
Fourthly, to curb rape and sexual violence by
military officers, we must create a culture of awareness
and accountability within national militaries, starting
with the top commanders and marching all the way
down the chain of command. Neither soldiers nor
officers should be able to commit sexual violence,
especially with impunity. Perpetrators must not be
promoted. We must work to build up effective vetting
mechanisms that will exclude persons who face
credible allegations and evidence of crimes.
We in the international community need to
explore ways to foster such a culture of accountability
through better training, capacity-building and other
targeted programmes. And the United Nations needs to
lead by example, by actively enforcing the zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeepers. Simply put, abusers
cannot be allowed to serve in United Nations
peacekeeping missions, now or in the future.
Efforts to combat sexual violence must also be
placed squarely on the political agenda when countries
are searching for lasting stability and peace. The
United Nations and its Member States and future
mediators should address sexual violence in today’s
peace processes and include them from the very start in
future peace talks. In addition, we must include more
women as mediators and members of negotiating
teams.
During last year’s open debate on sexual violence
(see S/PV.5916), the former Division Commander of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) warned
against the troubling dynamic of men with guns
forgiving other men with guns for crimes committed
against women. If peace processes are to succeed and
endure, they must avoid this pitfall.
Finally, reporting by the Secretary-General on
sexual violence in conflict zones is critically important
to all these efforts, and we endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to extend a standing
invitation to the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Special Rapporteur on violence against

5

S/PV.6180

women and the Chairperson of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict to provide
additional briefings on sexual violence and to
supplement the information received from the Special
Representatives and the emergency relief coordinators
as the situation arises. We also want continued annual
reporting on this topic by the Secretary-General and we
welcome his commitment to provide it.

The Secretary-General’s report puts forward
useful recommendations. They are pertinent, detailed
and well crafted, and we support all of them in
principle. However, we also believe that any issue
related to the protection of civilians, including women
and children, should be handled carefully, since these
are all sensitive cases. In this vein, I wish to make four
preliminary observations.

Beyond the measures that the Security Council
can take, important aspects of the problem of sexual
violence must be pursued in other bodies, including in
the General Assembly’s discussion of a new gender
architecture. We will work with other stakeholders
within the United Nations system and non-government
organizations to end impunity and assist the victims of
rape and sexual assault.

First, we agree with the necessity of the Security
Council taking a fresh look at the protection of
civilians, in particular women and children. A few days
ago, here in this Chamber, we adopted resolution 1882
(2009) to protect children in armed conflict in a
comprehensive manner. We believe that that resolution
was the right step in the right direction. However,
when establishing new mechanisms we should also be
careful: creating a plethora of institutions carries the
risk of causing duplication. As the Secretary-General
rightly pointed out in his report, the United Nations
should deliver as one to prevent and respond to sexual
violence. Therefore, taking into account the systemwide coherence process, we should first efficiently use
to their fullest extent, and perhaps sharpen, existing
tools and mechanisms, including all the avenues and
special procedures of the Human Rights Council and
the machinery of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

We have a great deal to do to fully implement
resolution 1820 (2008). Putting this topic on the
world’s agenda was an important step forward, but it
was just a first step. We now look forward to working
with our fellow Council members, the Secretariat and
other partners to bring a halt to and prevent further
sexual violence in armed conflict once and for all. The
task is massive, and the time is now.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing and for his
presence among us today. We are also thankful for his
detailed report (S/2009/362).
A great number of the casualties in armed
conflicts continue to be civilians, and that number is
constantly increasing. We have been witnessing serious
challenges in securing a safe environment for women
in many parts of the world. Within this context, sexual
violence, particularly against women and children, are
also on the rise. We condemn in the strongest possible
terms all deliberate attacks on civilians, including
women and children, as well as any kind of sexual
violence used as a tool of war in armed conflict.
It is within that framework that we welcome the
Secretary-General’s report, which gives us a
comprehensive account of the most recent situation in
various theatres and the difficulties that are being
encountered. The report shows the huge task we are
facing. We should make a collective effort to prevent
sexual violence against women, with the primary
obligation and responsibility resting first and foremost
with States.

6

Secondly, as rightly indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, data needs to be more systematically
collected, preserved and analysed. However, we are
also aware of the difficulties that United Nations actors
and non-governmental organization workers are
confronting while collecting data.
Thirdly, we believe that another important issue
is the situation of camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons. Protection of the civilian nature of
those camps is vital. The United Nations and the host
countries are responsible for the preservation of their
civilian status. Violation of that status, either by outsiders
or by insiders who bear arms, will only jeopardize
vulnerable persons in those camps, in particular women,
who could face the most heinous crimes.
Fourthly, we must prevent sexual violence, fight
impunity and address the issue of discrimination
against women, both in legislation and in practice. This
effort should be accompanied by assistance to victims.
We should also look into enhancing the possible role of

09-44842

S/PV.6180

peacekeeping forces in the prevention of these
unacceptable crimes.
Finally, I would stress that it is only through the
strengthening of the rule of law, enhanced political
participation, human rights, democracy and good
governance that we can secure the long-term and
lasting protection of women. As a party to the United
Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women since 1985 and having
ratified the Convention’s Optional Protocol in 2002,
my Government believes that it should be our priority
to encourage all nations to adhere to the principles of
those international documents. We also support the
Global Campaign to end violence against women
initiated by the Secretary-General at the opening of the
fifty-second session of the Commission on the Status
of Women in February 2008.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Turkey is ready to participate in and positively
contribute to every effort to eliminate sexual violence
and discrimination against women.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
having taken the initiative of holding this ninth open
debate on women and peace and security. I would also
like to welcome the Secretary-General here today and
to thank him for the presentation of his first report on
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008). More
broadly, we welcome his determined commitment to
this issue. My delegation, of course, completely
supports the statement that will be made by the
Permanent Representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

Council’s annual visit to Africa in May. Because we
believe in the value of deterrence in the struggle
against impunity, we argued with the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for five officers
accused of perpetrating sexual violence to be brought
to justice. Earlier this week, the Council noted with
satisfaction that judicial procedures had been launched
against those individuals and that they had been
removed from their command duties. That is an
important message in the fight against sexual violence
and impunity. The United Nations and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo played an important role in
achieving that outcome. The Council will continue to
monitor the matter closely.
France also welcomes the significant institutional
progress that was achieved two days ago with the
adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), which, inter alia,
extends the reporting and monitoring mechanism of
resolution 1612 (2005) to sexual violence committed
against children, regardless of whether or not child
soldiers are involved. The extension will allow the
Security Council and the international community to
focus greater attention and response on this widespread
phenomenon, which targets girls in particular.

The Secretary-General’s assessment of sexual
violence is, unfortunately, definitive. Sexual violence
is widespread and often systematic, and is sometimes
even used as a weapon of war in several regions and in
many situations on the Council’s agenda. The United
Nations has a special and critical role to play in
responding to this phenomenon. In many instances, it
has specific tools to assist national authorities in
supporting the victims of sexual violence, prosecuting
and trying suspects, and arresting those who are guilty
of such crimes. The Organization also has the
responsibility to encourage relevant authorities to act
to that end.

In his report (S/2009/362), the Secretary-General
notes that many interesting initiatives have been
undertaken to address the gravity of the situation. We
must strengthen those initiatives and ensure the
dissemination of good practices. The role of
peacekeeping operations is essential in that respect,
and I welcome the presence here of female police
officers deployed in those operations. To the extent
possible and necessary, peacekeeping operations must
develop ambitious strategies to address sexual
violence. They must engage in dialogue with the
parties to armed conflicts, and their components —
primarily gender and human rights advisers, as well as
special representatives of the Secretary-General —
must take every opportunity to make the parties aware
of their obligations in this area and to encourage them
to change their behaviour. We hope that the parties’
response to the issue, or lack thereof, will be reflected
in the Secretary-General’s next report so that we can be
better informed and assess to the best of our ability the
international community’s action and progress with
respect to the scourge.

At the initiative of France, the fight against
sexual violence was a high priority of the Security

France welcomes the work undertaken by the
sanctions committees on the matter under consideration

09-44842

7

S/PV.6180

today. Pursuant to the commitment it made in
resolution 1820 (2008), the Security Council must
systematically consider the relevance of including
sexual violence among the triggers of sanctions during
the establishment or revision of the committees’
mandates. When the criteria are met, it will be up to the
committees’ experts to raise the matter.
In that regard, we recall the role of France,
alongside the United Kingdom, Belgium and the
United States, in the inclusion by the sanctions
committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
the names of four members of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda on the list of
those targeted for individual sanctions.
France welcomes the set of recommendations
proposed by the Secretary-General to strengthen our
action against sexual violence. We are ready to play an
active role in any initiative to promote Security
Council action on those recommendations as soon as
possible. For our part, we believe that the
implementation of the following proposals, referred to
by the Secretary-General in his statement, is of special
importance.
First, the Secretary-General should submit to the
Council an annual report on the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008). We invite him to formulate
proposals on the modalities for the Security Council’s
consideration of measures taken by parties to a conflict
to meet their obligations, including in the fight against
impunity, and its identification of appropriate steps in
response.
Secondly, a commission of inquiry should be
established. France endorses the concept of creating a
commission to investigate and advocate the most
effective mechanisms for prosecuting those who
commit sexual violence. The commission’s competence
should be limited to sexual violence, and its work
coordinated with peacekeeping operations mandated to
counter sexual violence. In that respect, we would be
interested to learn more about the criteria that led the
Secretary-General to propose that we focus initially on
three geographical situations. We are ready to discuss
that and should like the Secretariat to explain how it
foresees extending that mechanism in its future phases.
The third and last proposal that I wish to
highlight is that of appointing an official to lead the
fight against sexual violence throughout the entire

8

United Nations system. We strongly endorse that
proposal.
In conclusion, I reiterate France’s full
commitment to fighting sexual violence against
women. The Council can rest assured of our full
commitment to that issue within the Security Council
in the months to come and of our resolve to pursue our
efforts to strengthen the role of women in conflict
prevention and settlement and in rebuilding peace in
the context of the follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000),
which we will be discussing shortly and concerning
which there remains a great deal to be done.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
thank you, Sir, and the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing this debate. I would also like to welcome
the Secretary-General. Austria applauds him for his
unwavering commitment in the fight against all forms
of violence against women.
The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) a year
ago was an historical event. The resolution clearly
states that sexual violence against women in armed
conflict can constitute a threat to international peace
and security that requires the attention of the Security
Council. Despite positive and successful steps
undertaken by the United Nations and individual
States, women continue to fall victim to sexual
violence used as a deliberate means of warfare. This
takes place on a daily basis in conflict situations
around the world.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union, as well as with that to be made by
the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the
Human Security Network. I would like to concentrate
on a number of practical proposals on how the Council
could further improve its action on this important
matter.
Systematic attention needs to be paid to the
prevention of and protection from sexual violence in
the daily deliberations of the Council. We welcome the
recent adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), extending
the scope of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to parties who perpetrate grave sexual violence against
children in situations of armed conflict. As women and
girls represent the majority of victims of sexual
violence, there is a need to ensure that reporting is not
strictly limited to victims under the age of 18. In this
context, we would welcome further information in a

09-44842

S/PV.6180

follow-up report next year on an appropriate
monitoring and accountability mechanism to be
established by the Council.
Austria also welcomes the work of the Council’s
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians,
which we see as a useful forum for discussing
important protection concerns, including those in the
fight against sexual violence.
More consistent and comprehensive reporting on
sexual violence in the Secretary-General’s countryspecific reports would enable the Council to address
the protection of civilians, particularly women and
children, from sexual violence in a more systematic
manner. To this end, the Council should include
specific reporting requirements in resolutions
establishing or renewing mandates.
Briefings by the Secretary-General’s special
representatives, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and relevant
rapporteurs will and can also provide the Council with
information crucial to its work.
We are fully aware of the sensitivities of
collecting data from victims of sexual violence, who
are often severely traumatized by the dramatic
experiences they have gone through. Guidelines on
information gathering must take ethical and safety
concerns into account. Short- and long-term assistance
for survivors of sexual violence, in particular
accessible and quality health care, psychosocial
support and legal advice should be a priority.
Let me also acknowledge the vital role that
non-governmental organizations and humanitarian
organizations play in this regard. Access constraints for
humanitarian actors can severely affect the situation of
victims of sexual violence.
Today, a clear body of rules outlawing sexual
violence, including in armed conflict, is contained in
international human rights, humanitarian and
international criminal law. In spite of this, perpetrators
who systematically commit serious violations against
women and girls still go largely unpunished.
Allegations of sexual violence need to be thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators need to be brought to
account, including not only through prosecution, but
also through the vetting of armed and security forces.
This situation demands further action by the
Security Council to strengthen the rule of law and to

09-44842

end impunity. Where necessary, the Council should
consider appropriate measures encouraging and
ensuring accountability for those responsible for
international
crimes,
including
through
the
establishment of commissions of inquiry, referrals to
the International Criminal Court and the imposition of
targeted measures. Sanctions committees need to
receive relevant information to this end, including
through exchanges with other subsidiary bodies.
The Council took an important step when
deciding to give priority to the protection of civilians
in the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). This led to the subsequent adoption of the
Comprehensive Strategy on Combating Sexual
Violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
endorsed by the Government.
It is also a very important and positive
development that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has now finally decided to take
concrete measures in the five particularly dramatic
cases to which the Council once again drew the
attention of that country’s authorities during its mission
there. It is evidently necessary that the Council
continue to follow up on this matter.
We are encouraged by the valuable work of
MONUC’s new joint protection teams. We must draw
on lessons learned by such best practices in order to
transpose them to the contexts of other missions. That
is certainly an issue with which we will have to deal
when we consider, in general terms, the subject of the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping.
The active contribution of women to
peacebuilding and conflict prevention is crucial to
achieving lasting peace. Resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) have underlined the need to include
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding measures.
Further efforts are needed. The development of gender
guidelines for military personnel by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the development of
guidelines for mediators and their consistent
implementation can contribute to improving our
response to sexual violence in conflict settings.
In order to effectively fight sexual violence,
improved coordination throughout the system, as well
as leadership and accountability, are needed. Austria
fully supports the appointment of a senior person with
responsibility to attend to the prevention of and

9

S/PV.6180

response to sexual violence across the entire United
Nations system.
Austria is grateful for the Secretary-General’s
willingness to provide the Council with annual reports
on this very important matter, and we look forward to
receiving them in the interest of enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).
Mr. Okuda (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over today’s important debate on sexual
violence in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for personally presenting his first report (S/2009/362)
pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008). We also commend
the invaluable efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to collect the information and
insights from many stakeholders that made this report
possible.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) by the Security Council last year was a
milestone because, through the agency of the Council,
the international community recognized that sexual
violence committed amidst armed conflict is a security
issue. Such violence, when used as a strategy for
waging war, not only causes physical and
psychological damage to the victims, but also
significantly sets back any momentum that may have
been generated towards achieving peace and security.
In the year that has passed since the resolution
was adopted, it is clear that some progress has been
made in protecting civilians from sexual violence. As
mentioned in the report, United Nations peacekeeping
missions have strengthened their mandates to provide
effective protection, including in response to sexual
violence. The Peacebuilding Commission has also been
active in addressing this issue, and civil society has
enhanced its advocacy activities.
Japan is also pleased that, by unanimously
adopting resolution 1882 (2009), the Council has now
strengthened its responses to rape and other sexual
violence against children in armed conflict. The
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) nevertheless
faces many challenges. We are deeply concerned, for
example, that grievous sexual violence continues to be
rampant in a number of countries, including the Sudan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Chad.
Now is the time to translate the commitment we
made in that resolution into concrete action. While the

10

report addresses a broad range of issues, I would like
to focus here on three points that we regard as
particularly important: data collection and reporting,
impunity and accountability, and coordination within
the United Nations system.
The first important challenge we face is to clarify
what our objectives are in collecting data, to enhance
the systems we employ to that end, and to report on
sexual violence. In order for the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
be able to act against sexual violence in armed conflict,
accurate data collection on the ground and timely
reporting are vital. We therefore welcome the decision
of the Secretary-General to take action to “ensure more
coherent, comprehensive and regular reporting on
sexual violence” (S/2009/362, para. 53) through the
senior-level Mission focal point system. This system
will expand the capacity of a mission to engage in
monitoring and reporting and to “coordinate with the
United Nations country team to review current data
collection methods and databases” (ibid.) with a view
to enabling the reporting mechanism to produce more
coherent and comprehensive information.
Bearing in mind the newly adopted resolution
1882 (2009), United Nations agencies concerned with
sexual violence need to increase their cooperation with
the monitoring and reporting mechanisms led by the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF.
In collecting data on sexual violence and in the
light of the sensitivity of the issue, the first priority
should be protection of the victims and their privacy.
Establishing a commission of inquiry to investigate
sexual violence in conflict countries, as recommended
by the Secretary-General, is an interesting option.
However, we need to give careful consideration
to the feasibility of the idea, and specifically to how
information would be collected and shared and to
whether the objective of data collection would be to
facilitate the prosecution of perpetrators or simply to
build a strong information resource.
The second challenge is ending impunity for
those responsible for sexual violence in armed conflict
and ensuring accountability. Both are essential, and we
therefore strongly urge the Governments of countries
in conflict to undertake comprehensive legal and
judicial reforms. In this connection, we are encouraged
to learn from the report that some progress has in fact

09-44842

S/PV.6180

been made in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Liberia and the Sudan towards improving legal
mechanisms against sexual violence.
If we want these efforts to succeed, however, we
must provide capacity-building assistance, such as
training for judicial and law enforcement officials on
international human rights and humanitarian law, as
well as on the revision of national laws and improving
the manner in which they are applied.
We expect that serious crimes, such as crimes
against humanity, will be referred to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). At the same time, bearing in
mind that the ICC prosecutes only those who bear the
greatest responsibility, the Security Council must
consider
feasible
and
appropriate
alternative
mechanisms for ensuring the accountability of all
perpetrators of sexual violence in any conflict
situation. We anticipate that the Secretary-General will
include a proposal for such mechanisms in his followup report.
Thirdly, strengthening coordination within the
United Nations system is essential to implementing
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as a number
of United Nations agencies are engaged in combating
sexual violence in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations. We support the commitment that the
Secretary-General makes in his report to strengthening
coordination in the United Nations system so that there
will be a coherent and comprehensive multisector
response both at Headquarters and at the local level.
One useful coordination mechanism is United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which is expected to be utilized not only to promote
the sharing of information and eliminate the
duplication of work, but also to integrate the policies
and programmes of the United Nations system as a
whole, particularly in the field. In that context, we note
that the Secretary-General is considering the
appointment of a senior person to be responsible for
coordinating the prevention of and response to sexual
violence across the United Nations system.
Allow me to say just a few more words on the
subject of human security in connection with the topic
that we are now discussing. In order to respond
effectively to the needs of women and girls who are
victims of sexual violence, we must apply the concept
of human security. Such a multisector approach focuses
on both protection and empowerment at the individual

09-44842

and community levels. For that reason, at the sixth
meeting of Friends of Human Security, held this past
June and co-hosted by Japan and Mexico, the subject
of sexual violence against women in armed conflict
had a prominent place on the agenda.
For the same reason, through the United Nations
Trust Fund for Human Security, Japan has been
providing support for projects that address the issue of
violence against women and its root causes in a
comprehensive and multisectoral manner in countries
including the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia and Burundi.
In 2010, we shall commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. As that observance
draws near, we must redouble our efforts to produce
concrete and tangible results on this important issue.
The Security Council simply must strengthen its
response to sexual violence in armed conflict. To that
end, we request the Secretary-General to continue to
submit regular reports on the progress that is being
made in the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008),
as it is a matter of great concern to all of us.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I wish to join preceding speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/362) and for his presence at this meeting. I
also welcome his personal commitment to combating
the phenomenon of sexual violence in armed conflict.
Both resolution 1820 (2008) and resolution 1882
(2009) on children and armed conflict, which was
adopted last week, represent important steps towards
the development of a system of comprehensive
practical measures to protect civilians, particularly
women and children, in situations of armed conflict.
All the resolutions that have been adopted in that
regard contribute to ongoing efforts to establish and
codify international humanitarian law, which must be
implemented. Today’s open debate on this issue will
undoubtedly help to strengthen efforts and initiatives in
this area, and we wish to commend the United
Kingdom delegation for organizing it.
The changing and complex nature of armed
conflict has caused great harm to large numbers of
civilians, in particular the most vulnerable groups, girls
and women, whom it has made more vulnerable to
sexual violence. We agree with the Secretary-General
that sexual violence dehumanizes its victims, inflicting

11

S/PV.6180

intense psychological and physical trauma, and is often
accompanied by fear, shame and stigma, which usually
cause victims not to report such crimes.
The widespread and systematic perpetration of
sexual violence diminishes the prospects for early postconflict recovery and peacebuilding, and usually
unleashes a vicious circle of attacks and
counterattacks. In our view, that justifies the great
importance attached to continued efforts to develop
practical mechanisms for preventing such heinous acts
and violations against these vulnerable groups.
Here, we express our regret at the continued
attacks on civilians in armed conflicts, including acts
of sexual violence and violence based on ethnicity,
gender or religion or aimed at achieving specific
political goals. We strongly condemn such practices,
which constitute clear violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Indeed, the relevant Security Council resolutions
will be devoid of any value if they are not implemented
in all conflict areas, including the occupied Palestinian
territories and other occupied Arab territories, which
have been subject for many decades to the systematic
commission of violations and inhuman practices
against civilians, including severe human rights
violations against women and children.
We had hoped that the report now before the
Council would address violence against women in
general and refer to the blatant violations of
international law being perpetrated in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including starvation and denial
of access to medical supplies, hospitals and clinics, as
well as to the torture and harassment being endured by
Palestinian women in Israeli prisons. Such practices
constitute physical and psychological violence, and we
ask that they be taken into consideration in future
reports. The same applies to the violations that have
been committed in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Some progress has undoubtedly been made in
efforts to combat violence against women in conflict
areas, particularly in Africa. However, we must
continue to support Governments in protecting their
citizens by helping them to formulate and implement
comprehensive strategies to combat sexual violence,
bearing in mind each country’s specificities and
particular needs. We agree with the Secretary-General
that inadequate measures to prevent sexual violence,
protect civilians, combat impunity for sexual violence

12

and address continuing discrimination against women
and girls, as well the failure of some parties to conflicts
to honour their commitments, have contributed greatly
to the exacerbation and spread of sexual violence.
Therefore, countries must make greater efforts to
build their national capacities to combat this
phenomenon. That, of course, will require the reform
of judicial systems to bring them into conformity with
recognized international norms. There is a need to
ensure that the perpetrators and masterminds of sexual
violence are denied any kind of amnesty or immunity
in order to guarantee justice for the victims.
Furthermore, efforts must be made to raise social
awareness of issues related to sexual violence and of
the need to avoid marginalizing or stigmatizing its
victims and to rehabilitate them. In this respect, I
welcome the initiatives undertaken by various United
Nations entities, including the Peacebuilding
Commission and peacekeeping operations, in the areas
of peace and security, human rights, humanitarian
affairs and development, as well as efforts to provide
strategic advice, raise awareness, promote institutional
reforms, offer support and services to victims, and
provide monitoring and protection. We hope that all
those efforts will help put an end to sexual violence
and impunity for such crimes. It is also necessary to
increase women’s participation in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations.
We have taken note of the recommendations that
the Secretary-General makes in his report. We agree
with him that it is essential that all United Nations
actors ensure full respect for ethical, humanitarian and
safety standards for researching, measuring and
collecting data on sexual violence. We endorse all of
the report’s recommendations.
We welcome the Secretary-General proposal for
the establishment of an independent commission of
inquiry to investigate sexual violence in certain
conflict areas. We are ready to engage with other
Council members in a positive discussion on that
recommendation.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for organizing
today’s debate on this very important subject. I wish
also to welcome the Secretary-General and to thank
him for the comprehensive report (S/2009/362) he has
submitted on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008).

09-44842

S/PV.6180

At the outset, let me reiterate that Uganda
deplores and condemns sexual violence and supports
the various efforts by the United Nations and other
stakeholders to eradicate its use as an instrument of
war. Uganda has continued to advocate at the regional
and international levels for respect for and protection
in armed conflict of women and children who would
otherwise be victims of sexual violence.
It is clear from the report of the SecretaryGeneral that the incidence of widespread sexual
violence tends to escalate in situations where State
institutions have broken down. It is also clear that this
is a global problem and that both Stat and non-State
actors have been responsible for some of the very
serious abuses that have taken place. Thus, sexual
violence is a symptom of a much bigger problem,
about which Uganda is greatly concerned.
There should be no impunity for perpetrators of
sexual violence, and all efforts must be made to ensure
that culprits are held accountable for their despicable
actions. Only then can victims begin to heal and to
develop a measure of confidence that they have not
been abandoned altogether. There remains an urgent
need to sensitize all parties to armed conflict to the fact
that certain practices are not acceptable under any
circumstances.
Effective implementation of resolution 1820
(2008) also requires that, at the very minimum, an
atmosphere of peace, security and stability be in place.
The most effective way to avoid sexual violence during
armed conflict is to ensure that peace and the rule of
law are restored in the affected countries. In order to
address the situation more realistically and
conclusively, institutions of the State have to be
strengthened. When institutions of the State such as the
police, prisons, governance and the army are well
established, law enforcement can then be enhanced and
severe penalties for perpetrators will become an actual
deterrent. There are instances where perpetrators of
sexual violence still live openly among their victims,
with impunity.
Possible solutions to drawn-out conflicts need to
be addressed in a holistic way. For instance, integrating
the various forces in an armed conflict requires more
than just a simple change of uniform. It requires a
change in mindset, and it requires counselling, training
and capacity-building. The integration of armed forces
should be well structured. There should be strict

09-44842

vetting of recruits for the armed forces so that people
who are at high risk of becoming sexual predators are
excluded. High-ranking officers implicated in sexual
violence should be removed from the ranks of armed
personnel as an example to others and in order to send
a clear message of zero tolerance for sexual violence.
It is incumbent upon the Council to ensure that
resolutions to establish or renew mandates or to impose
enforcement measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter contain provisions, as appropriate, on the
prevention of and response to sexual violence, with
corresponding requirements on reporting to the
Council. The United Nations, regional organizations
and civil society need to work together to train good
mediators, including female mediators, in adequate
numbers and to mobilize sufficient resources to carry
out these activities. Uganda supports the creation of an
effective mechanism that will galvanize the various
efforts to find a lasting solution to this problem.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
establishment of United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Its existence is a first step
towards improving the coordination of existing
activities and the exchange of crucial information
between United Nations Headquarters and countrylevel offices. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment to submit an annual report on
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to the
delegation of the United Kingdom for the timely
initiative of convening this Security Council meeting
on such an important issue. Our thanks go to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/362) on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) and for his
briefing on the matter.
Like previous speakers, we believe that sexual
violence, both during conflict and in peacetime, is a
heinous crime that must be strenuously condemned and
severely punished. Of particular concern are situations
in which the phenomenon is widespread and
systematic, which could be a matter of concern for the
Security Council pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution
1820 (2008). But it should not be forgotten that women
and children continue to be victims of premeditated
attacks, including acts of terrorism, the indiscriminate
or excessive use of force and other acts.

13

S/PV.6180

In that connection, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal to parties to conflict to comply
strictly with international criminal law, humanitarian
law and international human rights and refugee law.
Violence takes many different forms, and we believe
that due attention must be paid to all categories of
violence. That conforms to the spirit of resolution 1325
(2000), which remains the primary point of reference
for protecting women and guaranteeing their rights
during conflict.
Such a balanced approach was reflected in
resolution 1882 (2009), on children and armed conflict,
which the Security Council adopted three days ago. In
that resolution, the killing and maiming of children and
sexual violence committed against them are
highlighted as crimes requiring priority attention.
Against that background, a number of the
Secretary-General’s
practical
proposals
on
strengthening the efforts of the United Nations system
to combat sexual violence are of interest. However, the
question arises of whether, for example, it would be
fair to establish a commission of inquiry or special
Security Council mechanisms on the single issue of
sexual violence. Is that not an excessively narrow way
of looking at this issue? Should there not be a
comprehensive and all-encompassing approach to the
issue of violence and violations of the rights of
civilians during armed conflict? Should we really turn
a blind eye to other grievous crimes against civilians,
including women and children? In that connection, the
proposals of the Secretary-General merit careful study,
perhaps in a broader context.
On the whole, such issues should be considered
without isolating them from the entire range of
problems of conflict settlement and gender equality. It
should be recalled that an important precondition for
overcoming violence against women is full
participation by women themselves in peace processes
and in post-conflict reconstruction. In such processes
there must be more consistent implementation of the
provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and other specialized
human rights instruments.
The Russian Federation is confident that through
joint efforts we cannot only reduce the incidence of

14

sexual violence during conflict but also make
significant progress towards gender equality and the
advancement of women, in the spirit of the decisions
taken at the fourth World Conference on Women and
the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the initiative of your delegation,
Mr. President, to hold this open debate on the topic of
women and peace and security. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for introducing his report
(S/2009/362) pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008) and
for his presence here today.
The Secretary-General points out in his report
that, with regard to sexual violence in conflicts and
post-conflict situations, “the majority of past abuses
remain to be accounted for” (S/2009/362, para. 9).
That is why passivity before this scourge is not an
option. The lack of action would send the wrong
message that sexual violence is permissible. The
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, must act and show unequivocally that acts
of sexual violence will not remain unpunished.
My delegation reiterates the call on Member
States that have experienced cases of sexual violence
in conflict or post-conflict situations to investigate
these crimes and to launch judicial proceedings against
those allegedly responsible for these crimes. The
brutality of sexual violence in some conflicts is
alarming. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there have been at least 200,000 cases since
1996, while today we are even seeing a trend towards
the use of sexual violence against men. We
acknowledge the decision of President Kabila to
implement a zero-tolerance policy with respect to the
use of sexual violence by the Congolese Armed Forces,
and we will follow attentively the trials of five highranking army officers who allegedly committed serious
human rights violations, including crimes involving
sexual violence.
Mexico once again reiterates the importance of
the International Criminal Court in prosecuting, when
appropriate, those responsible for certain acts of sexual
violence that, in accordance with the Rome Statute,
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity, for
which there is no room for consideration of rank or
privilege.

09-44842

S/PV.6180

The recent adoption of resolution 1882 (2009),
although it refers to children, represents a significant
step towards tackling sexual violence, since it broadens
the criteria for including, in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s reports, parties to armed conflicts
who, in violation of relevant international law, commit
acts that cause the deaths and mutilation of children,
rape and other forms of sexual violence. The resolution
also calls for improved communication between the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the sanctions committees of the Security Council
through an exchange of information on violations and
abuses committed against children.
The Secretary-General’s report clearly illustrates
the complexity of the task of collecting information on
sexual violence, given its inhuman nature, the
psychological and physical trauma that it inflicts, and
the fear, shame and stigma that it entails for its victims.
That is why my Government welcomes the
recommendation to establish a commission to
investigate violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and to report on
these violations, focusing in particular on cases of
sexual violence in the situations in Chad, Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. We also
welcome the possibility of establishing such
commissions for other conflicts in which sexual
violence is perpetrated. The commission of enquiry
should also identify those responsible for crimes of
sexual violence and report on the measures that States
and other parties to the conflict may take or fail to
take. Such information will be extremely useful to the
work of the various sanctions committees.
My delegation also takes note of the other
recommendations of the Secretary-General, and agrees
that Security Council resolutions establishing or
renewing mandates or imposing measures under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter must
include provisions to prevent and, most importantly, to
respond to sexual violence, and on the obligation to
report the Council.
With respect to the possibility of appointing a
senior person with responsibility to attend to the
prevention and response to sexual violence across the
United Nations system, Mexico believes that a very
careful consideration of the matter will be necessary, in
particular with regard to whether this option would
truly be the best response the United Nations system

09-44842

could provide in addressing the scourge of sexual
violence.
We welcome the actions of the Secretary-General
to strengthen coordination within the United Nations
system in order to work jointly to prevent and respond
to sexual violence, and we invite him to continue to
update this coordination, in particular among the teams
on the ground, since that is where the victims of sexual
violence are to be found.
With respect to political leadership, Mexico
supports the Secretary-General’s request for high-level
officials of the Secretariat and the heads of the relevant
organizations, funds and programmes to play a greater
role in raising awareness on sexual violence. The
United Nations response to this scourge must be
multisectoral, organized and coherent. We need a
thorough analysis of the work undertaken by the
various agencies and United Nations teams in this area,
with a view to avoiding duplication of efforts and to
promoting a more effective exchange of information.
This would require a major but justified effort to
address sexual violence.
Finally, I would like to stress the need for a full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
importance of incorporating the gender perspective in
efforts to deal with situations of armed conflict.
Women’s participation in police and armed forces and
peacekeeping operations must be a priority in conflict
situations where there is sexual violence in order to
contribute to its eradication. Similarly, the inclusion of
women in mediation processes is crucial to
guaranteeing lasting peace.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
first report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) on
the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008). I am
also thankful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report and his highly focused briefing
today.
More than a year ago, following the Security
Council’s open debate on widespread and systematic
rape and other forms of sexual violence against women
and girls in armed conflict, this Council adopted
resolution 1820 (2008), leading to visibly improved
awareness of sexual violence across the United Nations
system, the international community and many conflict
areas. Since then, sexual violence has been dealt with
in many reports of the Secretary-General and outcome

15

S/PV.6180

documents of the Security Council, as well as many
other United Nations forums.
The adoption of resolution 1882 (2009) on
children and armed conflict early this week, with
criteria expanded to include in the annex lists of the
Secretary-General’s reports parties that engage in
patterns of killing, maiming and sexual violence
against children, once again reaffirmed the Council’s
resolve to halt those violations.
Given the increasing sexual abuse and violence in
many parts of the world, which we categorically
condemn, Viet Nam supports efforts to fully translate
into practice the 2007 United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative and other
measures aimed at preventing and responding to sexual
violence in armed conflict in the areas of humanitarian
assistance, awareness-raising, advocacy, capacitybuilding and training, legal, judicial and institutional
reforms, and the provision of services to victims, and
so on. We support the ongoing efforts of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and other
agencies to integrate sexual violence into protection of
civilians mandates and to develop important materials,
such as gender guidelines for military personnel in
peacekeeping operations and the Analytical Inventory
of Responses by Peacekeeping Personnel to WarRelated Violence against Women.
Much remains to be done in the struggle against
sexual violence in armed conflict. Greater efforts
should be made to promote the empowerment of
women and to improve women’s participation in the
early stages of peace processes, particularly in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Along that line, we
support a more proactive engagement of the United
Nations in increasing women’s participation in peace
negotiations, as well as in political and peacekeeping
missions, as an effective way to better support women
and girl victims on the ground, while helping to foster
women’s empowerment in societies emerging from
conflict.
Measures to protect women and girls from sexual
violence in conflict situations should be designed and
implemented as part of a broader strategic framework
that covers social, economic and development issues.
As such, one of the best ways to prevent and respond
to sexual violence is to further mainstream gender in

16

early recovery planning and financing at the national
level. The United Nations, particularly the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations
Development Programme and donors, should further
assist national Governments in building gender-related
capacity and developing gender-sensitive programmes
to help survivors of sexual violence with a wide range
of services — from access to justice, relief from stigma
and ostracism, and provision of mental and
psychological health care to support for greater
physical, economic and social security through
employment and income generation, and involvement
in decision-making.
Underlining the high importance of international
assistance and cooperation, we remain of the view that
States bear the primary responsibility to protect their
populations from all types of violations, including
sexual violence. At the same time, my delegation
believes that, in order to ensure the best possible costeffective performance of the whole system, it is
imperative to promote more efficient use and better
coordination of existing mechanisms and structures,
while giving initiatives on creating new ones serious
and comprehensive consideration.
Finally, members may rest assured of Viet Nam’s
resolute determination to work constructively, together
with all international partners, towards the strict
implementation of all relevant international laws and
Security Council resolutions, most directly resolution
1820 (2008), to put an end to sexual violence and to
ensure a worthy place for women and girls in the life of
humanity.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
under the United Kingdom presidency, on women,
peace and security, with a focus on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008). Croatia
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later on
behalf of the European Union.
We also express our deep appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his first progress report pursuant
to that resolution (S/2009/362). We view it as an
important initial road map for our future work on that
issue. We further perceive the Secretary-General’s
leadership on that issue as vital to ensure that political
momentum is further galvanized on behalf of
resolution 1820 (2008), with a view to urgently
addressing outstanding key challenges that continue to

09-44842

S/PV.6180

hinder progress in combating sexual violence in
conflict-affected situations.
The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008)
represented a significant follow-up to the Council’s
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Under resolution
1820 (2008), we expressed our political will to further
advance efforts to prevent and respond to the use of
sexual violence in conflict-related situations. Croatia
was an ardent supporter of resolution 1820 (2008) from
its conceptual phase to its ultimate adoption, and we
continue to reiterate our full support for the
resolution’s unequivocal implementation. In that
respect, we reiterate our call on all parties to armed
conflict to strictly adhere to relevant international law.
Despite the wide-scale support shown for
resolution 1820 (2008) last year, the SecretaryGeneral’s report serves as an important reminder that
its overall implementation remains weak and that the
deliberate and targeted use of sexual violence against
women and girls in conflict-affected situations
continues to be a key challenge of our time.
Furthermore, in certain parts of the world, such as the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, widespread
and systematic sexual violations are being perpetrated
systematically and at levels of such brutality that they
defy belief. Also disturbing to us is the increasing trend
of unrestrained accompanying violations against
victims, such as their abduction, enforced prostitution
and enslavement.
Croatia, too, bears its own painful reminders that
sexual violence in conflict-related situations is not a
relic of the distant past. Indeed, as the SecretaryGeneral points out in his report, we, too, experienced
first-hand the infliction of widespread and systematic
rape and sexual violence as a tactic of war to terrorize
and displace civilian populations in the 1990s. In that
respect, the particularity of the conflict in our region is
partially evidenced in the case law of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Croatia
therefore supports the systematic referral of serious
crimes, such as crimes against humanity, to the
International Criminal Court.
As part of our deliberations today, aimed at
strengthening the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008), we view the report of the Secretary-General as
having raised some significant implications for our
future work. It highlights important hurdles and gaps
that are keeping effective protection elusive and

09-44842

preventing genuine change on the ground. In that
respect, we appreciate the Secretary-General’s candour
as to the limitations of certain aspects of his report,
especially with regard to his specific concerns
regarding the collection of information on sexual
violence, as requested under resolution 1820 (2008).
Today’s debate, and any possible future outcome,
will serve as an important litmus test as to the level of
our political determination to strengthen existing
efforts, including the elimination of prevailing
impunity in many conflict-affected situations.
The Secretary-General, in pointing to the urgency
and magnitude of the problem, has correctly
underscored the need for a mutually reinforcing
multisectoral response by the United Nations system
that must address this problem decisively in order to
ensure more effective protection and assistance for
victims. Here, the Security Council has an important
role to play. While we welcome measures already taken
to date by the United Nations towards the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008), we see the
need for a wider focus within the Council’s own
agenda on issues related to the resolution than has so
far been the case.
Furthermore, the establishment of a regular
reporting cycle by the Secretary-General on resolution
1820 (2008) will be crucial to that process. Improving
the added value of such inputs will require the further
development of United Nations capacities in the
strategic collection and analysis of violations against
women and girls in conflict situations. Calls for the
establishment of a commission of inquiry, as outlined
in the report, warrant our serious consideration.
The monitoring of sexual violence can be further
strengthened by closer synergies with other existing
monitoring mechanisms. In this context, Croatia
strongly welcomes the adoption this week of resolution
1882 (2009), on children and armed conflict,
expanding the monitoring and reporting mechanism
trigger to include rape and other forms of sexual
violence. This will not only serve as an important
milestone for the children-and-armed-conflict agenda,
but also as a valuable complementary mechanism for
monitoring implementation of resolution 1820 (2008),
especially for young women up to the age of 18.
Croatia also believes that the revised aidemémoire (S/PRST/2009/1, annex) adopted in January
on the protection of civilians, including women and

17

S/PV.6180

girls, affected by armed conflict will also facilitate our
future
efforts
towards
achieving
effective
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).
We also join others who call for more to be done
at the field operation level to fill existing gaps,
especially through better integration of the gender
perspective in the peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
humanitarian arenas to strengthen mandates for the
protection of women. We continue to urge strengthened
female leadership in the field, with more female
engagement at all levels. Furthermore, gender equality
and respect for women’s human rights must be at the
centre of all United Nations missions, with strict
adherence to the Organization’s zero-tolerance policy
on sexual violence.
While Croatia will be looking to the United
Nations system to step up its efforts to implement the
relevant recommendations in the report, Member States
will also have to do their part. More needs to be done
to ensure full implementation of Member States’
commitments pursuant to resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1325 (2000).
Functioning national legal institutions need to be
established, underpinned by a strong normative
framework ensuring full gender equality and
inclusiveness, as well as endorsing women’s political,
economic and human rights, in line with the United
Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, which marks its
thirtieth anniversary this year. Of paramount
importance is the elimination of existing climates of
impunity by enabling the rule of law to prevail.
Together, all of these elements will serve as strong
deterrents for future perpetrators.
Greater cooperation between the United Nations
and regional mechanisms can be further built upon to
support national efforts in this respect. Drawing on
previous peacebuilding experience and increasing the
number of deployable civilian experts, particularly
from affected regions and who possess the relevant
gender-perspective expertise and appropriate training,
could significantly contribute to overall efforts.
Furthermore, we must not overlook the value of the
capacity of local women to play a role as powerful
advocates for protection by changing attitudes on the
ground.
For hundreds of thousands of women and girls
worldwide, time is of the essence. Now is not the time

18

for us to be complacent in our efforts. Croatia hopes
that today’s debate will pave the way for further timely
and concrete measures aimed at bringing about
effective implementation of the 1820 agenda, with the
ultimate aim of ending sexual violence in conflictaffected and related situations.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for Costa Rica to speak today in its capacity
as Chair of the Human Security Network, consisting of
the following countries: Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Thailand, and South Africa as an
observer.
To begin, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his presentation. We welcome the
submission of his report (S/2009/362), which contains
valuable recommendations on combating sexual
violence.
In the past 10 years, the Security Council has
increasingly considered security issues with a genderequality perspective and has enshrined its commitment
in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). Those
resolutions place women at the centre of consideration
of security issues, recognizing them not merely as
victims but also as important actors in building
sustainable peace and security and in fostering
development in societies experiencing or emerging
from armed conflict. Furthermore, resolution 1612
(2005) and the recently adopted resolution 1882
(2009), both on children and armed conflict, along with
resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, strengthen and expand the Security
Council protection framework in the area of sexual
violence.
We commend the progress the Security Council
has made in thematic discussions on this issue and the
positive developments stemming from it. We also
welcome the active interest and the commitment on
gender-related issues seen in the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council, the United Nations funds and programmes
and the relevant human-rights treaty bodies, especially
the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
Unfortunately, progress towards implementation
of cross-cutting gender commitments, with regard to

09-44842

S/PV.6180

curbing, punishing and protecting against sexual
violence in armed conflict situations, has been slow
and uneven. This is the result of a number of factors,
including weak coordination and fragmented responses
within the United Nations system, insufficient funding
and human resources, inefficient accountability
measures and a lack of firm political will. The
Secretary-General’s report highlights the challenges
posed by inadequate preventive measures, the failure to
end impunity and persistent discrimination against
women and girls in law and in practice, and the
insufficient and inadequate access to assistance and
treatment for victims.
In the light of those challenges, we believe that a
more comprehensive and strategic approach is needed,
focused on six critical areas: prevention, protection,
women’s participation, accountability, assistance to
victims and data collection.
The first area is prevention, which is essential in
combating sexual violence and which must be tailored
to the specific circumstances of each situation. Genderbased violence, discrimination and inequality
contribute to exacerbating sexual violence when the
rule of law breaks down. Efforts must be made to
eliminate prejudice, discriminatory social patterns,
historically rooted inequalities and harmful traditional
and cultural practices that condone sexual violence. In
addition, these measures should be aimed at raising
community awareness and eliciting more direct
engagement by traditional and religious leaders.
The second focus is on the need to strengthen the
protection capacity not only of States but also of
United Nations personnel on the ground. Security
sector reform and the rule of law can play a vital role
in this process. International cooperation should
increase resources to improve policing and civilian
capacities, as well as providing technical assistance
and mentoring to help train military, police and other
security forces to deal with cases of sexual violence.
Without question, this can result in an increased
awareness of human-rights standards and obligations
under international law.
In dealing with peacekeeping operations and
protection mandates, we need to develop clear gendersensitive operational guidelines in order to effectively
tackle sexual violence. Enhanced coordination,
integrated strategic frameworks and united priorities
among the various United Nations actors on the ground

09-44842

are fundamental to producing a more effective response
to this problem. Such a response, combined with the
contributions of the Peacebuilding Commission, would,
we believe, result in a more strategic approach and
more effective engagement.
The third area concerns participation. Despite the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) nine years ago, the
participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding remains minimal. As reaffirmed in
resolution 1820 (2008), we must continue to strive to
encourage the empowerment of women and their
systematic and effective participation at all levels in
peacekeeping and political missions. We should also
increase the number of female heads of mission,
military observers, civilian police and United Nations
mediators. Women also have a critical role to play in
the long-term prevention of conflicts. At the same time,
we must also study and understand the obstacles to
promoting women’s participation in these fields if we
are to reverse that trend.
The fourth area of interest is accountability,
which, through justice, fosters the promotion and
sustainability of peace. In this regard, we consider that
amnesties should exclude crimes of sexual violence.
All parties, State and non-State, must always refrain
from committing and tolerating sexual violence. All
necessary steps should be taken to protect individuals,
punish perpetrators and provide remedy to victims.
Zero-tolerance policies and the principle of command
responsibility are also important measures to enforce
accountability.
In this context, the genuine commitment of
civilian and military leaders is important to reducing
sexual violence. International cooperation must support
efforts to hold perpetrators accountable and to ensure
equal and effective access to justice under
internationally agreed standards. The complementary
role of international justice mechanisms, such as the
International Criminal Court, inter alia, can also play a
relevant role in supporting national efforts to fight
impunity, as appropriate.
The Security Council has recognized that sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict may, under
some circumstances, constitute a threat to international
peace and security. Therefore, we believe that the
Security Council should include gender equality
concerns as well as provisions to prevent and respond
to sexual violence when establishing or renewing

19

S/PV.6180

peacekeeping mandates. The Security Council should
consider targeted and effective means to ensure
compliance. In addition, the Council should improve
the communication and exchange of information
among its subsidiary bodies in order to ensure a more
coherent approach to combating sexual violence.
The fifth area that deserves our attention is
assistance to victims. In addition to the aforementioned
measures, there must be a multisectoral approach to the
assistance and social protection of victims, in
particular to ensure their access to medical care,
psychological and psycho-social support, legal
assistance, education and sustainable socio-economic
reintegration. Assistance measures must focus on
avoiding the marginalization and stigmatization of
victims, and facilitate victims’ social reintegration to
prevent further trauma. Initiatives such as the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
should be complemented by efforts to address the root
causes of violence. In the case of refugees and
displaced persons, the special needs of women and
girls, including medical care during repatriation and
resettlement, should also be taken into account.

1820 (2008). We also welcome the presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General at this meeting.
Ten years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In June last year, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1820 (2008) on combating sexual violence.
The two resolutions laid the foundation for the Security
Council’s response to questions relating to women in
the field of peace and security. In recent years, with the
joint efforts of the United Nations, Member States,
regional organizations and civil society, concepts such
as gender equality, the empowerment of women and
the prevention of and fight against sexual violence
have steadily gained ground, and work in these areas
has made remarkable progress.

Lastly, timely, objective, accurate and reliable
data collection is important to enhancing our
understanding of the various forms of sexual violence
in armed conflict situations and their aftermath so as to
ensure the appropriate responses and to move forward
in the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008).

However, the cruel reality is that women remain
the primary victims in many current conflicts, and
sexual violence against women remains a big problem.
The international community still has a lot of work to
do in protecting women and defending their rights and
interests. China condemns all acts of violence against
women in armed conflict, including sexual violence.
We urge parties to conflicts to comply with
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
call on the Governments of countries concerned to
investigate and bring to justice the perpetrators of
crimes against women in armed conflicts. We urge the
parties that have not done so to accede to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women as soon as possible.

We also encourage donors, researchers and others
to support ethical investigation and data collection
efforts in post-conflict settings that improve our ability
to prevent and respond to this problem. Furthermore, in
collecting data, it is important to ensure the
disaggregation by age and sex of victims and
perpetrators alike in order to target prevention and
response activities.

We join the Secretary-General in endorsing a
policy of zero tolerance for acts of sexual exploitation
committed by peacekeeping personnel in the hope that
troop-contributing countries will strengthen the
training and supervision of such personnel and their
accountability in this regard, in order to ensure that the
relevant United Nations code of conduct will be
effectively observed.

We need to improve the effectiveness of
monitoring and reporting to facilitate strategic planning
and assessment of progress. We will revisit this
important matter once the Secretary-General submits
the recommendations in his next report.

I would like to make a few comments on the
work under way to strengthen the protection of women
in armed conflict. First, the Security Council can play a
unique role, and the relevant bodies of the United
Nations should perform their respective functions and
strengthen coordination and cooperation. In his report,
the Secretary-General analyses many characteristics of
the question of sexual violence, the most salient of
which is its close connection to armed conflict. As the
primary organ responsible for maintaining international

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
presence and his statement. I also thank him for his
report (S/2009/362), submitted pursuant to resolution

20

09-44842

S/PV.6180

peace and security, the Security Council should address
this issue in the context of relevant political situations
and peace processes, focusing on effective conflict
prevention, the maintenance of peace and post-conflict
reconstruction, so as to create a political, security and
legal environment conducive to alleviating and
eliminating sexual violence.
The General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Human Rights Council, the Secretariat
and the relevant treaty bodies should play their due
roles by focusing on aspects within the purview of their
respective functions. The Security Council should
strengthen communication and cooperation with the
aforementioned bodies to create synergy when
addressing this issue. We are not in favour of the
Security Council’s all-too-frequent use of sanctions or
the threat of sanctions. The Council should exercise
caution in applying sanctions in the context of fighting
sexual violence.
Secondly, at all stages of peace processes, greater
attention should be paid to the status and role of
women, and efforts made to raise awareness of
women’s issues and to nurture a culture of greater
respect for women. It is necessary to place great value
on women’s special needs and concerns in the areas of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in
order to enable them to fully enjoy their rights to
participate and make decisions in peace processes and
to create a favourable environment for women’s lives
and development. All that will contribute to
fundamentally changing the vulnerable condition of
women and effectively safeguard their rights and
interests.
Thirdly, Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting the women of their
respective countries. The international community
should offer constructive assistance. The responsibility
for implementing relevant Security Council resolutions
on the protection of women rests primarily with
Governments. Situations vary from country to country,
and the international community should respect the
Governments of the countries concerned in formulating
and implementing measures in the light of those
countries’ specific circumstances so as to ensure full
national ownership.
It should be stressed that whether a country is in
the midst of or emerging from conflict, it is often faced
with a number of challenges. The international

09-44842

community should support countries’ capacity-building
efforts on the basis of the principles of the United
Nations Charter and in respect for their desires.
Fourthly, efforts to encourage and support the
participation of civil society in protecting women
should be pursued. Many male and female staff
members of non-governmental organizations are
working hard, in difficult circumstances on the ground,
to protect the rights and interests of women. Their
work deserves our appreciation. China supports their
ongoing constructive role in protecting women in
armed conflict and encourages them to remain in
contact with relevant United Nations entities and
agencies, especially those directly involved in women’s
issues, and to submit appropriate proposals.
We note the Secretary-General’s proposal for the
establishment of a commission of inquiry to investigate
sexual violence in the Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Chad and to make recommendations
to the Security Council on effective ways to fight
impunity. We suggest that the Secretary-General
communicate and coordinate extensively with the
countries concerned with respect to the issues and that
it seek their prior consent. At the same time, in
addressing issues related to sexual violence, we must
distinguish acts committed by Governments from those
committed by rebel groups. We urge all parties
concerned to address every aspect of violence against
women in armed conflict in a comprehensive and
balanced manner.
In addressing the issue of women and peace and
security, the Security Council should not only regard
women as the victims of armed conflict, but also
consider the important role they can play in the peace
process. In October 2008, under China’s presidency,
the Security Council held a serious debate on the role
of women in the peace process (see S/PV.6005) and
achieved desirable results. We hope that the Council
will continue to attach importance to this issue in the
future.
The Chinese Government has always attached
great importance to protecting the rights and interests
of women and to advancing their status. We will
continue to work with the international community to
further combat sexual violence, enhance the status of
women in the peace processes of countries concerned,
and meet all our goals in the field of women and peace
and security.

21

S/PV.6180

Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): We thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s
debate on such an important issue. We also thank the
Secretary-General for introducing his first report
(S/2009/362) pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008), and
welcome the relevant analyses and recommendations it
contains.
Sexual violence is among the most heinous
crimes committed in armed conflict and has become a
veritable weapon of war, in which women and girls pay
a very heavy price. Several initiatives have been
undertaken to put a halt to this phenomenon, including
the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), whereby the Security Council took an
important step in its efforts to combat sexual violence
in armed conflict. Unfortunately, it must be noted that
such acts continue, in flagrant violation of the
fundamental principles of human rights, international
humanitarian law and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
Sexual violence is committed deliberately, in
various ways and to different ends by all categories of
parties to conflicts, including members of armed forces
and State police, despite the fact that the latter’s
primary duty is to protect the civilian population. In
addition to its direct physical and psychological impact
on victims and their families, such violence goes hand
in hand with insecurity and with restrictions on the
enjoyment of human rights and victims’ full
participation in conflict settlement and reconstruction.
Unfortunately, social and cultural factors remain
obstacles to assessing the extent and gravity of the
phenomenon and its consequences, and they must be
addressed.
The responsibility for eradicating this scourge
and protecting its victims belongs primarily to States
and all the parties to a conflict. From preventive
measures to punishment to the ratification of relevant
international instruments, every means are available to
States to act effectively. It is important in particular to
create a sustainable security environment and to
establish independent and accessible justice systems
capable of repairing the damage and combating
impunity. Medical, psychological and economic care is
also essential to victims.
Unfortunately, and in spite of everything, no form
of reparation or treatment, howsoever effective, can
permanently erase the scars borne by victims and their

22

loved ones. It is therefore necessary to focus our efforts
on prevention, strengthening the rule of law, respect for
human rights, good governance and, where appropriate,
reform of the security and justice sectors.
My delegation welcomes United Nations
activities on this issue, in particular the SecretaryGeneral’s global awareness-raising campaign. The
gravity of the situation requires a comprehensive and
sustainable response through a common strategy. The
United Nations should continue to build its capacity for
action and coordination in order to better assist actors
in the field, with the involvement at all levels of all
members of the United Nations family. The
appointment of a senior official on this issue would
help the process, and we also take note of other
initiatives of the Secretary-General to strengthen the
contribution of the United Nations system.
With respect to peacekeeping operations, it is
essential to design and implement an appropriate
training programme on international humanitarian law,
human rights, international criminal law and relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Moreover, the
effectiveness of a policy of zero tolerance, the
integration of women into the staff of peacekeeping
operations, and the identification of measures to
prevent sexual violence in resolutions establishing or
renewing peacekeeping mandates should remain among
our priorities. These are the challenges that Member
States, troop-contributing countries and the Security
Council should take up.
Sexual violence is a pernicious evil that has a
deep impact on the enduring restoration of stability and
peace. It is therefore essential that peace agreements
take sexual violence into account, in particular in the
course of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and security sector reform. We welcome the
concerted activities of the United Nations to integrate
concerns about sexual violence into mediation processes
and to increase the number of women mediators, who
undoubtedly add value to peace and ceasefire agreements.
For all these reasons, my delegation welcomes
the convening in June, under the auspices of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, of a
colloquium on the theme “Conflict Related Sexual
Violence in Peace Negotiations: Implementing Security
Council Resolution 1820 (2008)”. Its conclusions
represent important options for consideration.

09-44842

S/PV.6180

The Security Council has an important role to
play in this collective effort, as it demonstrated yet
again this week with its adoption of resolution 1882
(2009), extending the criteria for triggering the
reporting and monitoring mechanism to include sexual
violence against children. Moreover, the Council
should establish a participatory process for collecting
information in order to better gauge the scale and
consequences of the phenomenon.
The challenges to be faced before the scourge of
sexual violence in conflict zones can be definitively
eradicated are still numerous. Mobilization for the full
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) must
therefore remain strong at all levels.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s contribution
to our debate today and the continuing presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General this morning. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/362) highlights the challenges
that we face in coming to grips with the issue of sexual
violence in conflict zones, and it confirms and clarifies
much of what we suspected about the extent of the
problem. If we are serious about preventing and
resolving conflict, then we need to be serious about
addressing conflict-related sexual violence.
There is no shortage of will to take forward the
Council’s work in this area, as Tuesday’s adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009) on children and armed conflict
showed. There are still gaps that we need to bridge in
information, capacity, coordination and imagination,
and the Secretary-General’s report draws these out
clearly.
The proliferation of sexual violence against
women and girls is in part aimed at marginalizing their
contribution to society. It deliberately degrades the role
that they can play in restoring the fabric of peaceful
communities. The Arria formula meeting that the
United Kingdom hosted in June highlighted the critical
importance of enhancing women’s contribution to
peace processes.
Short-term measures to improve protection and
enhance women’s participation in decision-making
have to be accompanied by longer-term efforts to
establish accountability and the rule of law. More
effective monitoring of patterns of sexual violence in

09-44842

situations of armed conflict should allow the Council
to identify and mandate the action necessary to prevent
it.
We therefore welcome further reports from the
Secretary-General. We support his recommendation
that better use be made of commissions of inquiry, and
the Council should ensure that conflict-related sexual
violence gets the attention it deserves in the informal
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians and in the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Let me add on a personal note that I share
completely Ambassador Rice’s conviction that the time
to act is now. For those of us who took part in the
Security Council mission in May, it was impossible not
to be moved and angered by what we saw and heard.
The perpetrators of these appalling crimes want to
diminish women and exclude them from their role in
building peace. If I took any encouragement from our
meetings with those who have suffered, it was from
their determination not to just remain victims, but to
play their full part in finding and securing a lasting
peace in which their rights will be respected and their
security assured. That is what we must support – the
courage and determination of women who want to
make their unique contribution to peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Last week, CNN ran a
story of an 8-year old Liberian girl who had been gangraped by four boys. This happened here in the United
States, in Arizona, and thus aroused reaction and
became global news. However, when such atrocities
happen in conflict-ridden parts of Africa and
elsewhere, apathy and indifference are all too
prevalent.
Daily, there is violence, molesting and suffering.
Lives are ruined. We hear about villages where every
single female is raped and where a girl’s capacity to
have children is taken away from her while she is still
a child herself. We see the destruction of families and
entire communities.
With the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
building on resolution 1325 (2000) and this week
supplemented by resolution 1882 (2009), we now have

23

S/PV.6180

a comprehensive set of norms addressing these
gruesome realities.

organizations and departments to ensure coordinated
action, not least at field level.

We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/362), with its comprehensive and direct policy
recommendations. In today’s meeting, I would like to
make the following points on what we believe, in
particular, needs to be done.

We therefore support the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General on women,
peace and security to provide a strong and visible hand
in the United Nations to drive and coordinate systemwide prevention of and response to sexual violence in
conflict and to front the broader agenda of women’s
equal participation at all levels of peacebuilding and
conflict resolution.

First, impunity must end. Rapists and perpetrators
of sexual violence must be held accountable, tried and
convicted, irrespective of rank or status, by they
soldier or civilian. The responsibility lies with
Governments and military leaders who too often have
turned a blind eye to this.
The report rightly calls for comprehensive legal
and judicial reform, in conformity with international
standards, without delay and with a view to bringing
perpetrators to justice and to ensuring that victims are
treated with dignity throughout the judicial process and
that they are protected and receive remedy.
Second, while collecting evidence is difficult, it
must be given the highest priority, and reporting
methods must be improved. Unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance for victims of violence would
help, as would security sector reform whereby the
number of trained women police officers should be
increased. We thus share the Secretary-General’s call
for increased funding to enable humanitarian
programmes to prevent and respond to sexual violence.
We appreciate the assurance that United Nationsmanaged funds will pilot a system to allow decisionmakers to track gender-related actions.
Third, victims should be given better medical and
psycho-social assistance. They should be ensured
socio-economic rehabilitation and empowerment, as
well as economic compensation and support when
taking their cases to court. We would support a
proposal to establish a fund to address these issues.
Fourth, expertise and capacity to address sexual
violence in the field must be strengthened through
systematic training of personnel.
Fifth, while United Nations organizations make
important contributions to all these ends — and we
commend the work done by United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Gender
Standby Capacity project in this regard — we clearly
see the need for stronger and more proactive ownership
of this issue in the leadership of United Nations

24

Sixth, we would welcome the establishment of a
commission of inquiry to investigate and report on
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, with a particular focus on Chad, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. The
commission would present recommendations to the
Security Council on the need for improved or new
mechanisms to ensure maximum accountability.
Seventh, we support the establishment of a
mechanism of the Security Council to monitor how
parties to armed conflict comply with obligations under
international law, including addressing rape and other
forms of sexual violence.
Lastly, resolution 1882 (2009) on children and
armed conflict highlights and condemns rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children. The
possibility of listing the parties in conflict that commit
rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children is the right step to take, but if it is to fulfil its
mandate, the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict will need increased
support and resources.
Before closing, let me underscore that the
challenges presented by the issues of women, peace
and security and of the fight against sexual violence in
armed conflict are among my Government’s highest
priorities. Our policy benefits greatly from the valuable
input of humanitarian and civil society organizations,
which often provide the most relevant experience and
policy recommendations.
Sexual violence in situations of armed conflict is
also a political and security question. It requires a
political and security response. Members of the
Security Council should therefore make sure that the
issue remains prominent on the Council’s agenda, and
Norway would welcome a resolution to this effect. We
look forward to the Secretary-General’s annual

09-44842

S/PV.6180

reporting on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Montenegro,
Ukraine, Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
One year ago the Security Council, in adopting
resolution 1820 (2008), recognized that conflict-related
sexual violence can constitute a threat to international
peace and security. Resolution 1820 (2008) is a
landmark resolution and a vital complement to
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. The European Union views its effective
implementation as pivotal.
Allow me to start by saying that the European
Union commends the Secretary-General for his report
on this urgent and important subject (S/2009/362). We
encourage the Secretary-General to report annually to
the Security Council on developments concerning the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).
The General Assembly has recognized that sexual
violence is a well-established method of torture and
warfare. It is deeply dehumanizing and must be
addressed at all levels, locally and internationally. The
European Union condemns sexual violence in all its
forms, including its use as a tool to advance political
and military objectives. We call on leaders of all
countries and organizations to take firm action to
combat sexual violence.
The issue of conflict-related sexual violence has
to be dealt with in a coordinated manner by the United
Nations system. All branches of the United Nations
should come together behind the vision that resolution
1820 (2008) proposed and that the Secretary-General’s
report echoes. Gaps in efforts need to be identified and
addressed, and accountability must be established. The
United Nations needs to develop a better capacity to
gather information about cases of sexual violence and
to address the needs of the victims.
The European Union takes note of the idea of
appointing a senior representative with responsibility
to integrate the United Nations response to conflictrelated sexual violence. We would also welcome a
follow-up mechanism on sexual violence, and we

09-44842

express our support for all efforts to create synergies
among resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 1612
(2005).
We need to improve the way in which we
integrate women and gender aspects into broader
humanitarian and peacemaking strategies. Women must
be represented at every stage and level of peace
negotiations. Civil society actors involved in women’s
issues should be consulted throughout those processes.
Peacekeeping missions can do more to address
conflict-related sexual violence by supporting national
efforts and by preparing themselves for the task in
advance. Issues of sexual violence, gender equality and
respect for human rights must be an integral part of the
concept of operations for peacekeeping missions,
including the predeployment training of peacekeepers.
There should be no alternative to a policy of zero
tolerance on this issue. The sexual crimes currently
being committed by parties in such situations as the
conflicts in Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan are unacceptable. Sexual crimes
committed by military personnel should fall under the
jurisdiction of civilian courts.
Short-term measures to improve protection must
be accompanied by long-term efforts to establish the
rule of law. We must ensure that respect for human
rights and gender justice is reflected in national
legislation and upheld in practice. Much more can be
done to ensure the effective implementation of Member
States’ commitments on this issue. Impunity for
atrocities against civilian populations must end.
Institutions must be built to bring perpetrators to
justice and address discrimination against women and
children. The European Union supports the
development of a comprehensive United Nations
strategy to combat impunity for sexual violence.
The European Union will continue to implement
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) by
mainstreaming a gender-sensitive approach in all its
policies and activities, especially those relating to
crisis management and long-term development
cooperation, and through targeted measures to protect
and support women and children.
At a more general level, the European Union will
integrate issues related to women and peace and
security into its development strategies and its dialogue
with partnership countries. A strong focus will be

25

S/PV.6180

placed on the rule of law and the responsibility to build
effective, gender-sensitive justice systems. Such
systems should aim to deliver justice to victims of
sexual violence and help bring an end to impunity.
The Security Council and the General Assembly
have recognized the destabilizing and dehumanizing
effects of sexual violence. We, the Member States,
recognize our obligations under international law to
refrain from violating human rights and to protect our
populations from such violence.
Backed by a consensus among Member States on
the gravity of this matter, the Secretary-General’s
report provides us with a basis on which to move
forward collectively on the issue of conflict-related
sexual violence, through the United Nations. The
European Union will be an active partner of the
Organization in that endeavour.
Finally, with regard to another issue, let me add
that the European Union welcomes resolution 1882
(2009) on children and armed conflict, which was
adopted on Tuesday, 11 August. The resolution is an
important step forward that will contribute to an
improved situation for children worldwide.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): I too thank you,
Mr. President, for your leadership in holding this very
important meeting. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for honouring us with his presence
this morning as we discuss the important issue of
sexual violence in conflict areas.
As a sponsor of resolution 1820 (2008), Israel
closely follows developments around the world
concerning its implementation. Since the resolution’s
adoption last year, and in the nine years since the
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), we have seen
some progress on issues concerning women, peace and
security.
We welcome the increased deployment of gender
advisers, the routine inclusion in peacekeeping
mandates of provisions for the protection of women
and girls from sexual violence, and the growing
awareness of the need to include women in any peace
process. While all those measures are steps forward, it
is clear that we still have a very long way to go.

26

Israel welcomes the Secretary-General’s initial
report on the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008)
(S/2009/362), which sets out a number of serious
challenges facing the international community in
addressing crimes of sexual violence. One example
from the report conveys the scale of the problem: there
have been a staggering 200,000 cases of sexual
violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
since the outset of hostilities. Elsewhere, in one third
of the cases tried before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, sexual violence
was found to be part of a widespread and systematic
attack against civilians.
The tactical use of sexual violence lies at the
heart of resolution 1820 (2008), for, while rape and
sexual violence are first and foremost crimes against
individual women and girls, such acts are often
designed to deliberately and systematically destroy the
tenuous social fabric that exists during periods of
conflict. The intention is to inflict suffering and instil
fear. Families — and societies — bear the scars of
these acts long after hostilities have ceased.
The use of sexual violence as a tool of war is
surely a form of terrorism. Israel condemns it and
strongly urges the Council to strengthen its tools for
protecting women and girls. The Secretary-General’s
recent report points to a number of useful actions that
Member States and the Organization can pursue. Israel
supports the immediate deployment of a commission of
inquiry to investigate crimes of sexual violence to
several areas plagued by such crimes.
Israel also looks forward to the joint study by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
protection of civilian mandates. We must ensure that
mandates for peacekeeping missions in areas racked by
sexual violence contain explicit and unambiguous
provisions for the protection of civilians from such
acts. Moreover, before the renewal of such mandates,
there should be a candid assessment of results, with
mandates or strategies revised as necessary.
Increasing the deployment of women and gender
advisers would further increase the ability of missions
to effectively protect civilians from sexual abuse.
Regrettably, there have been accusations of sexual
misconduct committed by United Nations personnel
themselves. Whenever this occurs, the reputation of all
peacekeepers may be tarnished. We must be certain

09-44842

S/PV.6180

that all mission personnel have been properly trained in
appropriate conduct, with transparent investigation of
all allegations and swift prosecution of those who
abuse their position of authority. The zero-tolerance
policy must be strictly enforced.
In the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Women’s Equal Rights Law in Israel has been amended
to mandate the inclusion of women in any group
appointed to peacebuilding negotiations or working
towards conflict resolution. Allow me to also share
that, through Israel’s international aid agency, my
Government organizes programmes in women’s
leadership and capacity-building for women’s
non-governmental organizations. We believe that the
skills learned in these programmes can make a real
difference on the ground in post-conflict recovery.
The
international
community
has
been
challenged. All States must, individually and
collectively, answer this challenge. Israel pledges itself
to this clear international consensus, and it extends its
hand to any partner in this important endeavour. We are
speaking not of statistics but of devastated lives, and
we should commit ourselves to getting the job done. As
you yourself, Sir, and Ambassador Rice mentioned
earlier this morning, if ever there was the global
resolve to do it, it is now.
The President: I
representative of Brazil.

give

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for holding this open debate on women and peace and
security. The gravity of the challenge posed by sexual
violence against civilians in situations of armed
conflict requires involving the whole membership in
the discussion on ways to address the problem. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and his
briefing.
The report before us today (S/2009/362) is deeply
disturbing. The persistence of widespread or systematic
rape and other forms of sexual abuse of civilians in
armed conflict is simply unacceptable. As noted in that
document, sexual violence is dehumanizing, inflicts
intense mental and physical trauma, and is often
accompanied by fear, shame and stigma. It can prolong
conflict by creating a cycle of attack and counterattack,
as also indicated in the report. This is all the more
deplorable when perpetrators are officials, who must
lead by example and fulfil clear legal and moral
obligations.

09-44842

Our collective indignation must go beyond
statements and translate into concerted action by the
international community. The several parts of the
United Nations system must come together to address a
problem that, although simple in its cruelty, is complex
in its root causes and therefore demands a multisectoral
approach.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the agreed
conclusions of the Commission on the Status of
Women and the Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict provide a clear framework for effective action.
The General Assembly, the Commission on the Status
of Women, the Division for the Advancement of
Women, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women together have
done a lot and should continue their valuable work in a
manner that is as coordinated as possible.
The principle of national ownership and the need
for the active participation of civil society in this
process cannot be overemphasized. In situations of
armed conflict, where sexual violence is used or
commissioned as a tactic of war in order to deliberately
target civilians or as part of a widespread or systematic
attack against civilian populations, the Security
Council has an important role to play.
The recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report deserve careful consideration, as
they may help to prevent, monitor, report on and
remedy instances of sexual violence. It is crucial that
the proposed measures fully respect the functions and
powers of the Security Council under the Charter and
conform to the scope of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). In other words, the object of those
measures must be widespread or systematic sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. In all other
cases, the fight against this atrocity should be led by
the relevant actors within the United Nations system.
Nevertheless, we must actively seek synergies
and stimulate cooperation among all stakeholders.
Information-gathering is a good example. My
delegation supports the enhanced collection of data by
peacekeeping missions on widespread or systematic
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. Such
data should be shared with other relevant principal

27

S/PV.6180

organs, the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Commission
on the Status of Women as appropriate, since it would
help to ensure that international action is not merely
punitive but transformative as well.
Widespread or systematic sexual violence in
armed conflict should not be fought only by means of
vigorous law enforcement, prosecution, military
discipline or sanctions. If these measures are to be
effective in the long run, they should be accompanied
by serious efforts to address some of the causes of the
problem, such as discrimination, prejudice, poor
education, institutional fragility and lack of resources.
We trust that, together, national Governments, the
competent parts of the United Nations system and
donors can achieve a lot in this area.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Brazil’s
political and practical commitment to international
efforts to combat all forms of violence against women,
especially sexual violence against women and girls. We
also support the Council in its implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). My
delegation hopes that this debate will lead to improved
action by Member States and the United Nations as a
whole.
The President: I give
representative of Switzerland.

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the subject of women and peace and security.
We commend the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive
report
(S/2009/362)
on
the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) and for his
recommendations.
Last year’s adoption of resolution 1820 (2008)
was a major achievement. The resolution focuses on
sexual violence during and after conflicts, which is one
of the three pillars of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Secretary-General’s report describes the measures
taken by the international community to prevent and
combat gender-based human rights violations. In this
regard, Switzerland has supported various multilateral
initiatives, such as the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
It is deplorable that sexual violence continues to
be perpetrated on a widespread basis, in particular as a
tactic of war. Women and girls are particularly at risk

28

and represent the majority of victims. We urge the
Security Council to call on all parties to armed conflict
to strictly comply with their obligations under
international
law,
in
particular
international
humanitarian law. We call on the Council to use the
instruments at its disposal, such as targeted sanctions
and the mandates of peacekeeping operations, to
combat sexual violence in armed conflict.
Switzerland supports the establishment of an
appropriate mechanism within the Security Council.
That would facilitate consideration and action in line
with the measures taken by parties to armed conflict to
comply with their obligations under international law.
In order to ensure a consistent approach, that
mechanism should provide for interaction with the
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and its informal expert group on the
protection of civilians.
In that context, Switzerland welcomes the
adoption three days ago of resolution 1882 (2009), on
children and armed conflict. It makes sexual violence
an additional criterion for listing parties to an armed
conflict in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
reports. That resolution is a major decision in
strengthening the protection agenda of the Council.
That is why my country decided to join in sponsoring
it. However, it is regrettable that that protection
formula no longer applies once the victims reach
18 years of age.
International law obliges States not only to
refrain from committing violations. It also requires
them to take concrete measures to protect individuals
from sexual violence, bring to justice the perpetrators
and provide reparations for the victims. Yet, the
implementation of those measures remains weak.
States should do more to reform their legal systems in
order to bring perpetrators to justice and to protect
victims and treat them with respect at hearings. The
continued support of the international community is
necessary to help States to develop and to strengthen
their national capacities in that area.
In a broader context, today’s debate emphasizes
one key aspect of resolution 1325 (2000). For
resolution 1820 (2008) to have a sustainable impact, an
integrated approach must be adopted. Greater
participation of women in peacekeeping missions
would render the protection and support of victims of
sexual violence more effective. It is also of great

09-44842

S/PV.6180

importance for the prevention and combating of sexual
violence that women be more often involved in peace
processes as mediators, representatives of the parties to
the conflict or civil society partners.
Consequently, with a view to the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
I wish to highlight the importance of implementing
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) in tandem.
The President: Our last speaker for this
morning’s session of our meeting is the representative
of South Africa, to whom I now give the floor.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to express its appreciation for the Secretary-General’s
briefing and welcomes his report, contained in
document S/2009/362, on the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008). Last year, we were a sponsor
of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008) because of
our principled resolve resolutely to address sexual
violence against women and girls in conflict-affected
situations and to ensure more effective protection and
assistance for survivors.
This first report of the Secretary-General, which
addresses widespread and systematic sexual violence in
armed conflicts, provides yet another opportunity for
us to assess the concrete and specific efforts made in
the implementation of both resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008) and the role of the United Nations in
such efforts.
We remain convinced that women are active
agents of change and play a meaningful role in the
recovery and reintegration of their families and
communities. Women are central in promoting
democracy, good governance and reconciliation and in
building peace and development after the guns fall
silent. Their participation should thus be promoted in
the whole continuum of the resolution of conflicts,
from early warning, mediation, peace talks and
peacekeeping
to
post-conflict
recovery
and
peacebuilding. The United Nations therefore should be
encouraged to promote the effective participation of
women in decision-making, peace talks and other
processes towards the resolution of conflicts.
The present reality, though, is that women and
girls are the first casualties of war. From the beginning
of a war, women and girls are besieged not only by
combatants and other armed elements, but also by new
societal pressures and expectations brought about by

09-44842

the new conflict environments. Sexual violence in
conflict areas is inextricably linked to gender
inequality, and it is imperative that we strongly
advocate for the equal participation and full
involvement of women in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.
In South Africa, August is Women’s Month.
During this month, we celebrate and commemorate the
role of women in the struggle for a free, non-racial and
non-sexist South Africa. Specifically, on 9 August we
celebrate the heroic contribution of women in the
struggle against the oppressive laws of the apartheid
regime, marked by the march by women of all races to
the Union Buildings 53 years ago. Our democratic
Government has made big and serious strides in
advancing the cause of the development of women.
Furthermore, during this Women’s Month, South Africa
will strengthen its partnership in the 365 Days of
Activism campaign for no violence against women and
children. South Africa’s legislative framework gives
impetus to our international commitment to gender
equality and our commitment to conflict management
and resolution.
South Africa’s ratification of Southern African
Development Community, African Union and
international gender mainstreaming instruments is a
strong indicator of our country’s commitment to gender
equality in general and, in particular, to gender
mainstreaming in conflict prevention, resolution and
management and in post-conflict reconstruction and
development.
Consistent with those efforts and in order to
promote effective participation of women in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and security, the African
Union has declared the period 2010 to 2020 as the
African Women’s Decade. It further committed that the
organs of the African Union, the regional economic
communities and member States should use the
frameworks of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) to integrate their gender policies, programmes
and activities on conflict resolution processes. It
further calls for the creation of regional consultative
platforms for information and knowledge exchange and
harmonization of strategies.
Consequently, it is our view that United Nations
Member States should develop enhanced policies and
strategies for local ownership and implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), with the

29

S/PV.6180

objective of empowering women at various stages of
conflict and its aftermath, as recommended in the
Secretary-General’s report. Related to that is the
importance of ensuring that the institutional structures
at the United Nations have the capacity to monitor
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). In that regard, South Africa would like to
commend the establishment of the coordination group,
which includes all relevant organizations and agencies,
to pay special attention to those issues so that
momentum is not lost. We also commend the Office of
the Secretary-General for its global campaign “Unite to
end violence against women”.
Sexual violence is deeply dehumanizing and
inflicts intense mental and physical trauma; victims
always find it very difficult to easily disclose their
experiences. The impunity associated with sexual
violence is of great concern to my delegation. In that
regard, urgent intervention is required that will
prioritize the promotion of sound systems in the areas
of transitional justice, the rule of law and reform of the
judiciary so as to ensure that countries put an end to
impunity and prosecute those accused of all forms of
sexual violence and violence against women and
children in armed conflicts.
My delegation advocates the strengthening of
existing mechanisms in order to make them effective
and credible and the investigation of sexual violence
and crime in conflict situations, including reviewing
the effectiveness of programmes and prevention

strategies. South Africa supports the recommendations
by the Secretary-General on the need to establish more
and better data collection systems in order to enhance
the understanding of various forms of sexual violence
in conflict situations and their aftermath.
South Africa remains deeply concerned at the
plight of children caught in armed conflict. We
welcomed and associated ourselves with the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1882 (2009) on
4 August 2009, which, in paragraph 3, requests the
Secretary-General to expand the criteria of the triggers
to “killing and maiming of children and/or rape and
other sexual violence against children”.
In conclusion, South Africa remains committed to
the full implementation of Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). The international
community has an obligation to ensure that the rights
of women and children are protected, especially in
conflict-affected areas. The equal and effective
participation of women and their full involvement in
decision-making and peace processes will contribute to
the promotion and maintenance of peace and security.
Only through the concerted efforts of all stakeholders,
including the United Nations, can sexual violence
against vulnerable groups be stopped.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of members of the Council, to suspend the
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

30

09-44842
