S/2020/105

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 February 2020
Original: English

Developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2458
(2019), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until 28 February 2020 and
requested that I report every six months on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and on
progress made in the implementation of the resolution. The report also provides an
update on key political, security, human rights, gender and socioeconomic
developments in Guinea-Bissau since my report of 19 August 2019 (S/2019/664), as
well as on progress in the United Nations transition process ahead of the drawdown
and closure of UNIOGBIS.
2.
During the reporting period, I appointed Rosine Sori-Coulibaly (Burkina Faso)
as my Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS, effective
25 August. She assumed her duties in Bissau on 5 September. I also appointed
Mamadou Diallo (Guinea) as my Deputy Special Representative for Guinea -Bissau
and Resident Coordinator, effective 14 October. He assumed his duties in Bissau on
9 November.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
3.
Since my previous report, Guinea-Bissau has experienced positive political
developments, with direct implications for long-term stability. Most notably,
notwithstanding initial delays marked by political divisions within the National
Assembly, the Government’s programme was approved in mid-October. In addition,
the presidential election was held peacefully within the legally mandated time frame
in 2019, despite taking place in an atmosphere of deep mistrust and polarized
positions among political actors. Recurrent political tensions highlighted by the
opposition’s endeavours to derail the electoral calendar and the attempt by the
President, José Mário Vaz, to install a new government in late October threatened the
country’s stability and the unity of the governing alliance. The united response under

20-01274 (E)

100220

*2001274*

S/2020/105

the leadership of the Economic Community for West African States (ECOWAS) and
the good offices of the international community were crucial in preventing a
protracted political crisis and ensuring the conclusion of the electoral cycle. While
the presidential election should represent a step towards stability, uncertainty still
plagues the country and substantial challenges persist in the aftermath.
4.
On 27 August, the Government submitted its programme to t he National
Assembly for consideration. Tensions between the majority coalition and the
opposition began to rise steadily over the approval of the programme. The opposition
also opposed the idea of the Government, led by the Partido Africano para a
Independência da Guiné e Cabo Verde (African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cabo Verde, PAIGC), organizing the election, and challenged the legality of the
exercise to correct the voters’ register. Against this backdrop, an ECOWAS high -level
ministerial delegation was deployed to Bissau on 9 September to assess the
implementation of the decisions taken at the fifty-fifth ordinary summit of its
Authority of Heads of State and Government, held in Abuja on 29 June. In its final
communiqué, the delegation stressed, inter alia, that the Government must remain in
place until the presidential election was held and that, in the absence of consensus,
the voters’ register used for the legislative elections should be maintained for the
presidential poll.
5.
Similarly, a delegation from the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
visited Bissau from 12 to 14 September to urge all political actors to maintain the date
of the presidential election and ensure a peaceful process. On 7 October, a joint
mission of ECOWAS, the African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and the United Nations to Bissau issued a joint communiqué, reiterating
the need to maintain the current Government and the electoral calendar. In response,
the Movimento de Alternância Democrática (Movement for Democratic Change,
MADEM-G15) party held a press conference on 8 October, stating that the decision
by ECOWAS to keep the Government in office until the presidential election was
legally flawed. The Partido da Renovação Social (Party for Social Renewal, PRS)
also issued a press release, requesting the international community to respect the
sovereignty and Constitution of Guinea-Bissau.
6.
The parliamentary opposition bloc repeatedly criticized the electoral process.
On 10 September, MADEM-G15 and PRS reiterated their objection to the exercise to
correct the voters’ register. Both parties argued that the exercise lacked a legal basis
and criticized the newly established position of Secretary of State for Electoral
Management.
7.
Following unsuccessful attempts, the National Assembly eventually held a
plenary session on 15 October and approved the Government’s programme, despite
the boycott of the session by the opposition bloc.
8.
Between 3 and 25 September, in preparation for the pr esidential election, the
Supreme Court of Justice received 19 applications for candidacies, including from
one female applicant. On 16 October, the Supreme Court published the list of the 12
qualified candidates. There were three independent candidates (Jo sé Mário Vaz
(incumbent President), Carlos Gomes Júnior and Mutaro Intai Djabi) and nine
candidates backed by political parties, namely Domingos Simões Pereira (PAIGC),
Umaro Sissoco Embaló (MADEM-G15), Nuno Gomes Nabiam (Assambleia do Povo
Unido – Partido Democrático da Guiné-Bissau (United People’s Assembly –
Democratic Party of Guinea-Bissau, APU-PDGB)), Idrissa Djaló (Partido da Unidade
Nacional (Party for National Unity, PUN)), Mamadú Iaia Djaló (Partido da Nova
Democracia (New Democracy Party, PND)), António Afonso Té (Partido
Republicano para a Independência e Desenvolvimento (Independent Republican
Party for Development, PRID)), Gabriel Fernando Indi (Partido Unido Social
2/17

20-01274

S/2020/105

Democrático (United Social Democratic Party, PUSD)), Vicente Fernandes (Partido
da Convergência Democrática (Democratic Convergence Party, PCD)) and Baciro Djá
(Frente Patriótica de Salvação Nacional (Patriotic Front for National Salvation,
FREPASNA)). Significantly, the main traditional opposition party, PRS, did not field
a candidate, and no qualified women candidates were approved.
9.
On 19 October, the National Electoral Commission held its first plenary session,
with the participation of candidates’ representatives, and conducted a draw to
determine the order of the candidates’ names on the ballot paper. Representatives of
Mr. Vaz, Mr. Gomes Júnior, Mr. Gomes Nabiam and Mr. Embaló boycotted the
session, citing the lack of clarity on the exercise to correct the voters’ register. On
22 October, the Commission reconvened its plenary session and decided to proceed
with the voters’ register used for the legislative elections. On 24 October, it requested
the four defaulting candidates to provide their photographs required for the ballot
paper by 26 October. All four candidates complied, following confirmation by the
Commission that the voters’ register would later be audited by ECOWAS technical
experts to guarantee its integrity.
10. With mounting tensions, in particular following the death of a protester in
unclear circumstances during an opposition demonstration on 26 October, the
President invited political parties with parliamentary representation for consultations
on the political situation on 28 October. PAIGC, PND and União para a Mudança
(Union for Change, UM) declined the invitation. Later that day, the President
convened the Council of State, a 15-member advisory organ, for further consultations,
following which he issued a decree dismissing the Prime Minister, Aristides Gomes,
citing the Constitution, in which it is stated that the President can dismiss the
Government in the event of a severe political crisis that undermines the normal
functioning of the institutions of the State.
11. On 29 October, the President appointed and swore in Faustino Fudut Imbali of
PRS as the new Prime Minister. On the same day, ECOWAS issued a communiqué in
which, inter alia, it stated that it deemed the decree dismissing Mr. Gomes from his
role as Prime Minister to be illegal, reaffirmed its support for Mr. Gomes and his
Government and stressed that all those who impeded the electoral process would be
subject to sanctions. The African Union, the Community of Portuguese -speaking
Countries and the European Union, as well as the Governments of Angola, France,
Portugal, Spain and the United States of America, issued statements in support of the
ECOWAS stance. At the national level, PAIGC, PUN and the Partido Democrático
para o Desenvolvimento (Democratic Party for Development, PDD) issued separate
statements, strongly condemning the President’s actions. Youth organizations, the
Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League, the Movement of Conscientious and
Nonconformist Citizens and the National Civil Society Movement for Peace,
Democracy and Development issued separate communiqués, echoing those
sentiments.
12. From 27 to 30 October, the Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau and Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations, Anatolio Ndong Mba,
visited Bissau to assess the political situation and the implementation of the sanctions
regime in line with Council resolution 2048 (2012). He encouraged relevant
stakeholders to continue to respect the constitutional order, ensure a peaceful election
and complete the handover of power to the future President.
13. In response to the worrying turn of events, on 29 October, the Chief of the
General Staff of the Armed Forces, General Biaguê Nan Tan, convened the Supreme
Military Council, composed of the Chiefs of Staff of the army, the navy and the air
force and the Chiefs of Divisions. On 30 October, he convened a meeting with the
20-01274

3/17

S/2020/105

leadership of all security institutions, including the public order police and national
guard. During these meetings, he reiterated his orders for the military and security
forces to refrain from all acts that violate the constitutional order.
14. Despite national and international condemnations, on 31 October, the President
swore in his new Government, composed primarily of members of MADEM -G15,
PRS and APU-PDGB. In his address, he stated that the new Government was formed
based on a new parliamentary majority and was mandated to organize the presidential
election on 24 November, without external interference, and to combat drug
trafficking and fight corruption.
15. On 2 and 3 November, an ECOWAS ministerial delegation undertook a visit to
Bissau. In its final communiqué, it reiterated its full support for the Prime Minister,
Mr. Gomes, stressed the illegality of the decree dismissing the Government led by
him, commended national security and defence forces for their neutrality and
underscored that those who had taken decisions that impeded the holding of the
presidential election would be subject to individual sanctions.
16. Nonetheless, the President convened the National Defence Council and a
meeting with the commanders of the security forces, on 4 and 5 November,
respectively, to discuss the implementation of his decision to replace the Government.
During the meetings, the military and security forces reiterated their neutrality
concerning the political crisis and advised the President against the use of force to
carry out his decree.
17. On 6 November, ECOWAS demanded the resignation of all members of the
“new government”, failing which individual sanctions would be applied. On
8 November, the new “Prime Minister”, Mr. Imbali, submitted his resignation.
Furthermore, on 8 November, the ECOWAS Authority held an extraordinary session
on Guinea-Bissau in Niamey, following which it reiterated its recognition of the
Government led by Mr. Gomes and decided to strengthen the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) to address any challenges before, during and after the
presidential election. The Authority also stated that any use of the armed or security
forces to carry out illegal action would be considered a coup d’état and would result
in the imposition of sanctions on those responsible. On the same day, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union pledged its support to ECOWAS for targeted
sanctions against individuals and entities undermining efforts to achieve a lasting
solution to the political and constitutional crisis.
18. The outcome of the ECOWAS extraordinary summit was criticized by
opposition parties and political representatives as an infringement on national
sovereignty. On 14 November, a delegation of ECOWAS Chiefs of Defence Staff
visited Bissau to assess options for the reinforcement of ECOMIB. The decision,
based on the recommendation of the Chief of the General Staff of Guinea-Bissau, was
to strengthen the police component, given its primary role in securing the election.
Subsequently, a police unit of 140 elements from Togo was dispatched to Bissau in
batches ahead of the election, to reinforce the capacity of ECOMIB to implement
electoral security tasks.
19. The first round of the presidential election was held on 24 November, without
any major incident. The poll targeted 761,676 registered voters in the nine regions.
Voter turnout was 74.37 per cent. The election was observed by international missions
from the African Union, ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the International Organization of La Francophonie, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, Nigeria, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States, and was also monitored by several civil society
organizations, which all deemed the process to be credible and transparent. On
27 November, the National Electoral Commission released the provisional results for
4/17

20-01274

S/2020/105

the first round, with Mr. Pereira (PAIGC) and Mr. Embaló (MADEM-G15) as the lead
contenders, with 40.13 and 27.65 per cent of votes, respectively; the resu lts were
confirmed as final on 2 December. Several candidates issued statements accepting the
results.
20. Ahead of the second round, political alliances were formed in support of the two
candidates. Mr. Pereira succeeded in gaining the support of small p olitical parties and
allies and of most of the candidates who had been unsuccessful in the first round.
Meanwhile, Mr. Embaló received the support of Mr. Vaz, Mr. Nabiam of APU -PDGB,
Mr. Gomes Júnior and the leader of PRS, Alberto Nambia.
21. The campaign for the second round was conducted from 13 to 27 December.
Although it was devoid of any security incidents, it was characterized by a rise in
inflammatory rhetoric that contributed to tensions and divisions across the country
along ethno-religious lines. The second round of the election was held peacefully on
29 December, with voter turnout of 72.67 per cent.
22. The second round was observed by international missions from the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
International Organization of La Francophonie, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, Nigeria, the United Kingdom and the United States, as well as African
civil society groups, which issued statements, indicating that the electoral process had
been carried out in a free, fair and credible manner. The process was also monitored
by several national civil society organizations, which issued similar statements,
affirming that it had been peaceful and credible without major incidents.
23. On 1 January 2020, the National Electoral Commission announced the
provisional results, indicating that Mr. Embaló was the winner with 53.55 per cent of
the votes cast, while Mr. Pereira obtained 46.45 per cent. On 3 January, the PAIGC
candidate filed a complaint with the Supreme Court of Justice, challenging the results,
claiming electoral fraud and requesting a recount. On 11 January, the Supreme Court
stated that it could not rule on the “merits of the case” in the absence of the official
minutes of the Commission’s plenary session, a document that contains the national
tabulation and electoral operations, as well as protests and counter-protests presented
by party representatives and the Commission’s decisions. The official minutes are
considered a legal procedural requirement for completion of the electoral process, in
accordance with the electoral law. On 14 January, the Commission convened a plenary
session, which included candidates’ representatives, to consider the minutes and the
national results tally. However, given the lack of consensus at the session, the
Commission’s executive secretariat exercised its powers under the electoral law and
approved the minutes. These were subsequently submitted to the Supreme Court and
the two candidates. On 17 January, the Commission issued a press statement,
outlining the steps taken to implement the Court’s decision and indicating its
compliance with the legal requirements, having considered the provisional results as
final. However, on the same day, the Supreme Court clarified its rul ing, at the request
of PAIGC, stating that compliance with the electoral procedures required the
Commission to redo the national tabulation, with cumulative regional tabulations,
prior to the announcement of the provisional results. On 24 January, the Supr eme
Court reiterated its directive to the Commission to redo the tabulation of the national
results. On 30 January, an ECOWAS ministerial visit to Bissau recommended that the
Commission verify the national tabulation of the second round by the regional
electoral commissions, under the aegis of ECOWAS, in the presence of the
candidates’ representatives, and that minutes of the verification process be prepared.
It was specified that this verification process must be carried out no later than
7 February. The date for the handover ceremony to the future President is yet to be
determined.

20-01274

5/17

S/2020/105

B.

Security situation
24. Although the overall security situation remained relatively stable during the
reporting period, it was overshadowed by persistent political tension s among political
stakeholders, against the backdrop of worsening socioeconomic conditions that
provoked frequent strikes by aggrieved workers in the education and public health
sectors. A demonstration by opposition parties on 26 October allegedly led to the
death of an opposition supporter.
25. To ensure the security of the presidential election, a joint command was
established, composed of the police, the national guard, the armed forces and
ECOMIB, with defined roles and activities. The armed forces served as the third line
of security, after the police and the national guard. The reinforced ECOMIB forces
continued to provide support to secure the electoral process.

C.

Human rights situation
26. Notwithstanding sustained advocacy within the context of the United Nations
transition plan in the country, Guinea-Bissau has yet to address past human rights
violations and establish a national human rights institution compliant with the
principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights (the Paris Principles).
27. The reporting period was characterized by concerns regarding the right to
freedom of expression, including the use of inflammatory speech, and freedom of
assembly, including the use of excessive force by law enforcement agencies to
disperse demonstrations. On 26 October, the police used force and tear gas to disperse
an attempted protest called for by opposition groups, namely APU-PDGB, MADEM-G15
and PRS, leading to six verified injuries. The circumstances surrounding the death of
an individual that same day are being investigated by the Prosecutor General. The
Government has also requested an inquiry and expert opinion to be carried out by
international experts, under the auspices of the United Nations, into the death.
28. Inflammatory language in the media, including on social media, sometimes
amounting to hate speech and appeals to divisive religious sentiments, remained a
concern during the electoral period.

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
29. Guinea-Bissau fell from 177 to 178 in the ranking of the 2019 edition of the
Human Development Report, published by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), based on data drawn since 2018. Poverty levels have stagnated
in terms of education, income and health, with a life expectancy of 58 years. Gross
domestic product per capita stood at $622.10 in 2018, with a poverty rate of 69 per
cent. Almost one third of children between the ages of 6 and 11 years have never been
to school.
30. The economic situation in Guinea-Bissau remains fragile. The political
environment has hampered the Government’s ability to focus on the country’s
economic performance and on improving the living conditions of the population. The
economy continues to rely heavily on the production of cashew nuts, which
constitutes more than 90 per cent of its exports. Farm -gate prices fell below the 2019
reference price of 500 West African CFA francs ($0.85) per kg.
31. The deterioration of public finances, on account of falling revenues and an
increase in public spending, exacerbated the State’s inability to meet its financial

6/17

20-01274

S/2020/105

obligations. In line with the criteria required for a new programme supported by th e
International Monetary Fund, the Government issued treasury bonds in October,
which helped to clear the accumulated debt service arrears and support current
expenditure.
32. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) and the World Food Programme (WFP) have focused efforts on
strengthening the Ministry of Public Health and the delivery of nutrition services to
vulnerable populations, including women, children and people living with HIV/AIDS.
The Ministry of Public Health, supported by UNFPA and UNICEF, also addressed
institutional weaknesses through the validation of a revised national policy on
reproductive, maternal, neonatal, child and adolescent health on 12 September and of
the strategic national HIV plan on 17 December.
33. Food insecurity and chronic malnutrition remain a challenge. It was revealed
following a survey on food security and nutrition conducted by the Government in
September, with WFP support, that 34.2 per cent of the rural population was fo odinsecure, showing a deterioration in the situation compared with 2016 (30 per cent),
partly due to falling income from cashew nut sales. WFP continued to provide meals
in over 850 primary schools in 2019, reaching 180,000 children, representing 10 per
cent of the population. The Government, with technical assistance from WFP,
published a law on school meals at the end of August 2019.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
34. UNIOGBIS continued to implement its mandate in line with Security Council
resolution 2458 (2019), focusing on the reprioritization of its tasks and planning for
its phased drawdown, including through the implementation of joint programmatic
activities with national partners and the United Nations country team, supported by
the Peacebuilding Fund.

A.

Implementation of the Conakry Agreement, the ECOWAS road
map, political dialogue and a national reconciliation process, and
strengthening of democratic governance, including through
urgent reforms
35. UNIOGBIS continued its engagement with key national and international
partners in Guinea-Bissau to foster political dialogue and national reconciliat ion, lay
the groundwork for the implementation of the institutional reforms envisaged in the
Conakry Agreement and inform the United Nations transition plan. In this regard, my
Special Representative held regular consultations with a wide range of stakehol ders,
including the President of Guinea-Bissau, the Prime Minister, the President of the
National Assembly, the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces, leaders of
political parties, presidential candidates and representatives of civil society,
highlighting their respective roles and responsibilities in ensuring social cohesion,
stability and peacebuilding.
36. Furthermore, UNIOGBIS encouraged religious leaders to actively participate in
peace dialogue initiatives. On 21 October, religious leaders di scussed the political
situation in the country and strategized on joint initiatives to facilitate dialogue among
political stakeholders. On 31 October, they issued a joint statement, appealing for
tolerance, respect for the rule of law, media professionali sm and the collective

20-01274

7/17

S/2020/105

responsibility to ensure peace and social cohesion. In December, they also convened
an ecumenical vigil, while undertaking quiet diplomacy initiatives with presidential
candidates, to promote peace and stability throughout the campaig n period.
37. As part of its efforts in support of political and institutional stabilization, and
with financial assistance from the Peacebuilding Fund, UNIOGBIS provided support
to the Organizing Commission of the National Conference towards the
implementation of its mandate on peace and development in Guinea -Bissau. From
2 to 13 September, the Organizing Commission encouraged presidential candidates
to commit themselves to reconciliation and the holding of the National Conference
within the first year of their mandate.
38. The Peacebuilding Commission continued to serve as a platform to sustain
international attention and mobilize support for development and peacebuilding
priorities in Guinea-Bissau. Between 22 and 24 October, the Chair of the GuineaBissau country configuration of the Commission, Mauro Vieira (Brazil), visited
Bissau to explore avenues to support the national peace and development agenda, as
well as the implementation of key reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement. He
met with the President, the Prime Minister, senior government officials and political
party and civil society representatives.
39. A network of civil society organizations, supported by UNIOGBIS with funding
from the Peacebuilding Fund, held regional consultations and presented the results in
December, articulating the common agenda of civil society on the reforms and the
way forward for their implementation. A manual, in which indicators for monitoring
reforms were defined, was also produced. These efforts contrib uted to the creation of
conditions conducive to the implementation of the reforms after the electoral period.

B.

2019 presidential election
40. Joint international mediation efforts led by ECOWAS were critical in keeping
the electoral calendar and process on track. An ECOWAS delegation conducted a
pre-electoral assessment mission from 19 to 23 August to evaluate progress and assess
challenges in the organization of the election. ECOWAS was particularly concerned
with the deep distrust among national actors and the objections raised regarding the
exercise to correct the voters’ register. Furthermore, following the decision of the
National Electoral Commission at its reconvened plenary session held on 22 October
to use the same voters’ register used for the legislative elections for the presidential
poll, ECOWAS experts carried out an audit and reported that the voters’ register was
“intact and unaltered”.
41. The Government developed a consolidated electoral budget of $5.19 million to
cover the activities of all State entities involved in the organization of the presidential
election. In support of mobilizing funding for the electoral basket fund managed by
UNDP for the 2018–2019 electoral cycle, UNIOGBIS and UNDP undertook several
fundraising efforts with representatives of the international community in Bissau and
Dakar. Guinea-Bissau contributed over $700,000. The international community,
namely Brazil, China, Japan and Portugal, as well as ECOWAS, the European Union,
the West African Economic and Monetary Union and UNDP, responded positively by
contributing $3.59 million, in cash and in kind. Italy, Nigeria and the African Union
have yet to disburse their pledges.
42. Between August 2019 and January 2020, my Special Representative and th e
President of the National Electoral Commission co-chaired eight meetings of the
High-level Steering Committee on Elections, with the participation of the
international community and electoral management bodies, to monitor progress of the
electoral process. These meetings resulted in the strengthening of national

8/17

20-01274

S/2020/105

coordination and the harmonization of international partners’ assistance, as well as in
overcoming challenges affecting the smooth conduct of the election.
43. The United Nations integrated electoral team provided technical assistance and
strategic advice to the national electoral management bodies, focusing on operations
and logistical planning, budget preparation and management, and procurement. The
United Nations regional electoral advisers supported the regional election
commissions in implementing their operational activities and ensuring the effective
use of donor resources.
44. UNIOGBIS provided technical assistance to the working group on women and
social inclusion of the National Electoral Commission, to mainstream gender in the
electoral process. This resulted, for the first time, in the adoption by the Commission
on 18 October of a new gender policy to integrate gender into all programmes. The
policy is aimed at identifying and reducing discrimination and barriers to the
participation of women in all electoral operations and increasing their participation
as voters, candidates, observers, representatives of political parties and Commission
staff.
45. UNIOGBIS, with resourcing from the Peacebuilding Fund, supported the
National Media Council in developing a code of conduct for the media coverage of
elections. On 30 October, the code was signed by 20 media outlets and media
associations. In addition, a media monitoring and fact-checking team was established
within the Council to monitor media coverage of the elections, with technical support
from UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), with funding from the Peacebuilding Fund.
46. On 28 and 29 October, UNIOGBIS, UNFPA and UN-Women, with funding from
the Peacebuilding Fund, organized a workshop for election campaign managers,
candidates’ representatives and communications officers, National Electoral
Commission officials, the media and civil society actors, including women and youth
representatives. In the workshop, guidance was provided on electoral campaign
conduct and messaging, the electoral legal framework, campaign financing, political
communication and conflict prevention during elections. Stakeholders’ ability to
strategize, encourage peaceful conduct during the campaign, promote gender
mainstreaming and refrain from using hate speech was enhanced. By way of
follow-up, UNIOGBIS and UNFPA, with funding from the Peacebuilding Fund,
supported the radio and television broadcast of three live presidential debates, with
the active participation of a group of 15 women and young people. These
unprecedented interactive programmes with presidential candidates were lauded as a
tangible step towards strengthening the democratic process, inclusivity and issue based campaigns.
47. Six networks of civil society organizations, supported by UNIOGBIS, UNFPA,
UN-Women and the European Union, with funding from the Peacebuilding Fund,
developed an electoral code of conduct for the presidential election and established a
civil society electoral monitoring cell to identify risks and threats to the electoral
process. In this regard, 422 monitors were deployed across the country, including 181
women. The cell operated from 23 to 25 November for the first round of the election
and from 28 to 30 December for the second round. Supported by UNIOGBIS, the
national human rights defenders network (comprising 41 members, including 19
women) also monitored the human rights aspects of the electoral process. National
and international stakeholders commended civil society initiatives for their
significant contribution to a peaceful electoral environment.

20-01274

9/17

S/2020/105

C.

Review of the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau
48. Recurrent political tensions linked to the electoral preparations dominated the
political sphere, effectively stalling the activities of the National Assembly. The
unresolved impasse within the Assembly hampered its ability to focus on the review
of the Constitution, among other activities. The investiture of new members of the
parliament required the restructuring of the ad hoc commission for the revision of the
Constitution for the development of a technical draft. Nonetheless, the UNIOGBIS
team of experts charged with providing technical support for the revision of the
Constitution continued to engage with members of the ad hoc commission.
49. Work on the annotated version of the Constitution, elaborated by the Faculty of
Law of Bissau in 2018, continued with the support of the Peacebuilding Fund. The
annotated Constitution was discussed by civil society organizations, experts from the
Faculty of Law and representatives of the National Assembly ad hoc commission, to
develop synergies and establish a common agenda on the review. UNIOGBIS
supported the development and publication of the annotated Constitution, as well as
the printing of an illustrated poster about the Constitution. These efforts also
contributed to defining a common strategy for a future inclusive pro cess for
consultations on the constitutional review.

D.

Promotion and protection of human rights
50. Targeted training of trainers on human rights for the armed forces was conducted
from 20 to 23 August for 30 officers, including 14 female officers, and trainers from
the Ministry of Defence and the National Defence Institute.
51. UNIOGBIS also provided technical assistance to the Government, through the
National Commission on Human Rights, for the elaboration of the State report to the
third cycle of the universal periodic review, which was submitted on 1 October. In the
final quarter of 2019, UNIOGBIS issued a report on the right to participate in political
and public affairs, covering the period from January 2018 to July 2019.
52. In November, UNIOGBIS finalized a manual on human rights and elections and
disseminated 300 copies to national monitors, international election observers, civil
society organizations and the human rights defenders network as a tool for monitoring
and observing the election. UNIOGBIS continued to enhance the early warning
capacities of human rights defenders to identify and addr ess possible human rights
violations within the electoral context.
53. As a measure to mainstream human rights in key sectors and State institutions,
in November, UNIOGBIS supported the National Institute of Education Development
in finalizing pedagogical tools on education for global citizenship, human rights and
peace in primary education. From 6 to 19 December, six trainers and 125 teachers
were trained across the country.

E.

Combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
54. In line with the UNIOGBIS mandate and the United Nations transition process,
joint advocacy efforts by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and UNIOGBIS resulted in the Government’s renewed commitment to enhancing the
national response mechanisms to combat drug trafficking and related crimes. Efforts
to establish a case progression and management database in the country were
accompanied by capacity-building activities for the Prosecutor General’s office, the

10/17

20-01274

S/2020/105

judiciary police, the Attorney General’s office and the courts, including the Supreme
Court of Justice.
55. The study on the prevalence of drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime in Guinea-Bissau, jointly commissioned by UNODC, UNDP and UNIOGBIS
as part of the Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime, was finalized
on 16 November. The scope of the study encompasses the origins, transit routes and
destinations of the illicit drug trade, to inform strategic decision -making at the
national and subregional levels. With direct support from UNODC and UNIOGBIS,
national authorities entered into bilateral intelligence-sharing and operational
agreements with Brazil and Portugal, in addition to agreements signed in 2019 with
the Gambia and Senegal.
56. The successful development of a strategic national action plan on drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, as the road map for the justice, security
and judicial institutions of Guinea-Bissau, demonstrated the country’s commitment
to national appropriation. In this regard, UNODC and UNIOGBIS provided the
requisite technical and financial support for the development of the plan, the conduct
of an assessment and the identification of vulnerable communities. The draft strategic
plan was validated on 9 December by national stakeholders, under the auspices of the
Ministry of Justice and Human Rights.
57. UNODC and UNIOGBIS also continued to provide technical guidance to
relevant law enforcement agencies to enhance their capacities to combat drug
trafficking. Between 31 August and 2 September, United Nations technical support
was provided to the judiciary police in the conduct of operation “Navara”, which
resulted in the seizure of 1,869 kg of cocaine, the arrest of 10 suspects (with 2 still at
large) and the confiscation of vehicles, equipment and financial resources, as well as
the freezing of bank accounts. The seizure is the largest so far in Guinea -Bissau,
exceeding the 789 kg of cocaine seized during a previous operation on 9 March.
58. In order to enhance national capacities in drug trafficking surveillance at the
seaport of Bissau, from 2 to 12 December, UNIOGBIS and UNODC, in collaboration
with the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre, facilitated a course
on maritime security and transnational organized crime for law enforcement officers.
59. UNODC and UNIOGBIS continued to strengthen the capacity of national law
enforcement agencies and security institutions on border control and management by
assisting with the deployment of a Mobile INTERPOL Network Da tabase device and
equipment, resulting in the enhanced capacity of key border posts in the detection of
illegal trafficking. On 4 and 5 December, UNODC and UNIOGBIS facilitated
simulation exercises with the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) at the regional border post in the northern town of Djegue, for the
detection of trafficking in drugs and human beings, stolen vehicles and illegal
migration.
60. UNODC and UNIOGBIS support for the Airport Communication Project, in
collaboration with INTERPOL, on enhanced intelligence-gathering, resulting in an
increased number of drug seizures (a total of 2.67 tons of cocaine seized and 23 arrests
made in 2019, compared with 33.678 kg seized and 23 arrests made in 2018), the
prosecution of 14 cases and conviction and sentencing in 8 cases, with five trials still
ongoing. In September, UNODC offered specialized training on countering drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime for the judiciary police, the
Transnational Crime Unit, the joint airport interdiction task force, the National Guard,
the public order police, the Office of the Prosecutor General and the judiciary, with
support from UNIOGBIS and the federal police of Brazil.

20-01274

11/17

S/2020/105

61. In December, with UNIOGBIS support, UNODC, in close cooperation with the
Embassy of Brazil in Bissau, facilitated capacity-building by a judge from Brazil
specialized in the adjudication of drug trafficking cases, to strengthen the capacity of
the Office of the Prosecutor General and the judiciary in dealing with h igh-profile
cases.

F.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding
62. During the reporting period, key achievements included the high level of
participation by women in the electoral process, the implementation by the National
Electoral Commission of its gender policy for the presidential election, the
reactivation of the Institute for Women and Children of the Ministry of Women,
Family and Social Protection and the increasing engagement of government entities
in gender policy and the women and peace and security agenda. The parity law of
2018 played a critical part in generating such momentum.
63. With the support of UNIOGBIS, UN-Women and UNFPA, and with funding
from the Peacebuilding Fund, the Ministry of Women, Family and Social Protection
organized six conferences in October and November on the theme of the female face
of government. The initiative brought together several women in ministerial and
leadership positions, civil society, professionals, young people and students,
showcasing the unprecedented participation of women in Government. Strategies for
empowering women and combating all forms of discrimination and gender-based
violence were formulated, with key policy points addressed to women in ministerial
positions. The conference series was broadcast by national and community radio
stations and widely disseminated on social media.
64. UNIOGBIS, in coordination with UNFPA, UNICEF and UN-Women, and with
funding from the Peacebuilding Fund, provided technical support to the Institute for
Women and Children for the development of an inter-institutional mechanism with
the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, the Ministry
of Women, Family and Social Protection, the Ministry of Public Health and the
Ministry of Public Administration, to coordinate the response to sexual and gender based violence and provide integrated support to victims.
65. Supported by UNIOGBIS, UNFPA and UNDP, with funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Women Mediators Network engaged in conflict resolution
efforts to address a long-standing land dispute between five villages in the São
Domingos sector of the Cacheu Region. Between September and December, the
Network and civil society partners conducted training programmes on peacebuilding
with the communities and their leaders. National authorities worked in partnership
with the dialogue. From 15 to 18 November, UNIOGBIS provided technical support
for a training course for 20 local women leaders on the role of women in conflict
management organized by the Network. Some 75 traditional leaders and
representatives from the five villages met on 9 December to reach an agreement on
the land dispute through traditional peacemaking mechanisms.

G.

Mobilization, harmonization and coordination of
international assistance
66. UNIOGBIS leadership convened and chaired regular meeting s of international
partners on the evolving political situation and to harmonize strategies, common
messages and advocacy responses in support of the country’s political stability before,
during and after the presidential election. The international commun ity’s harmonized
messaging and concerted responses reinforced the mediation efforts led by ECOWAS

12/17

20-01274

S/2020/105

to successfully de-escalate tensions. In particular, the group of five international
partners in Bissau (ECOWAS, the African Union, the European Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the United Nations) coordinated
their actions through joint initiatives and advocacy efforts to address political tensions
and impress upon political actors the need to abide by the Conakry Agreement and
respect the electoral calendar. Moreover, regular meetings of the High -level Steering
Committee on Elections, co-chaired by my Special Representative and the President
of the National Electoral Commission, were instrumental in maintaining a focus on
the electoral process.
67. My Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel, Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, engaged with regional stakeholders and participated in the joint mission of
ECOWAS, the African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the United Nations to Bissau on 7 October. He also travelled to Bissau for the first
and second rounds of the presidential election in support of the good offices efforts
of my Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau.
68. On 27 September, my Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau briefed the
Regional United Nations Sustainable Development Group for West and Central
Africa, in Dakar, on the political situation in Guinea -Bissau and explored areas for
collaboration within the framework of the UNIOGBIS transition and drawdown in
2020. Follow-up action is being coordinated to discuss technical collaboration and
joint planning in the elaboration of the upcoming United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework for Guinea-Bissau.
69. On 14 January 2020, the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo, travelled to Guinea-Bissau, where she met
the outgoing President, the Speaker of Parliament, the two presidential candidates,
the group of five and other partners to assess th e political situation in the aftermath
of the presidential election. During her meetings with national stakeholders, she
appealed for calm, underscoring the need to accept the electoral outcome in
accordance with the law, in the interest of national stability. She also called for
political dialogue, national reconciliation and the urgent implementation of reforms
outlined in the Conakry Agreement.

H.

United Nations transition plan and drawdown arrangements
70. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2458 (2019), based on a three-phase
drawdown, the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau established the minimum
requirements and goals to be achieved before the pro spective closure of UNIOGBIS
before the end of December 2020, namely: (a) the completion of elections within the
legally mandated time frame in 2019; (b) the creation of conditions conducive to the
implementation of the reform agenda and the integration of peacebuilding priorities
into the new United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework; and
(c) the gradual drawdown and the transfer of tasks to the United Nations country team,
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and other
partners.
71. The United Nations in Guinea-Bissau developed an integrated transition road
map and calendar with benchmarks identified for the three goals, conducted a conflict
analysis and identified a number of peacebuilding priorities and res idual mandated
tasks to be assumed by the United Nations country team, UNOWAS and other
partners. UNIOGBIS engaged with the country team in the development of a conflict
analysis and the Common Country Assessment to ensure the integration of
peacebuilding priorities into the new United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework for the period 2021–2025 and to advance implementation of

20-01274

13/17

S/2020/105

the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development
Goals in Guinea-Bissau. These actions were undertaken to guarantee the adoption of
coherent perspectives in developing a common United Nations vision on the way
forward.
72. In order to support the United Nations transition and facilitate the seamless
transfer of UNIOGBIS residual mandated tasks to partners, the Peacebuilding Fund
mobilized $4 million. The projects will be aimed at strengthening: (a) the United
Nations country team’s capacity to continue to support the reform agenda outlined in
the Conakry Agreement, including the revision of the Constitution; (b) the capacities
of UNODC in combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime; (c) the
capacity of ECOWAS in Bissau to lead confidence-building measures and national
dialogue with UNOWAS political facilitation and coordinati on of international action
to support mediation efforts; (d) the rule of law capacity of UNDP to continue
institutional capacity-building; and (e) national capacity on gender mainstreaming
and on the subject of women and peace and security. These projects began in 2020
and will run for 24 months.
73. In order to ensure the involvement of regional organizations and international
partners throughout the transition planning and implementation, my Special
Representative conducted regional outreach visits to Abu ja, Accra, Conakry, Dakar
and Niamey to brief ECOWAS leaders, non-resident embassies accredited to GuineaBissau and the broader international community. The visits resulted in broader
attention being given to the UNIOGBIS drawdown, while highlighting the need for
continued strategic and political engagement, the continuation of peacebuilding and
the sustaining of the peace agenda through development efforts in Guinea -Bissau.
74. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2458 (2019), in which the Council
requested the closure of the four UNIOGBIS regional offices by 31 December 2019,
the drawdown continued with the closure of the Buba, Bafatá and São Domingos
regional offices in December 2019. The electoral phase having concluded, with the
completion of the presidential election, UNIOGBIS will end the services of the
electoral staff. Meanwhile, UNDP and other partners will continue to provide
electoral support to the relevant electoral management bodies.
75. With a view to its prospective closure by December 2020, UNIOGBIS
developed a drawdown plan, outlining key milestones for asset disposal, site closure,
archives and records management and human resources reduction. The mission has
also undertaken a physical inventory of its assets and preliminary steps to develop an
asset disposal plan, including consultation with the United Nations country team on
medical and security equipment. A procurement process is under way for outsourced
waste management services to ensure responsible and sustainable disposal.
UNIOGBIS also developed a provisional staff drawdown plan, indicating the phased
departures of national and international personnel in July, October and December
2020.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration within the United Nations system
76. During the second half of 2019, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country
team continued to work in a coherent and integrated manner. The Strategic Policy
Group, composed of the Heads of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
and UNIOGBIS Section Chiefs, agreed on strategies and modalities to advance the
transition, including by identifying residual peacebuilding priorities and mapping the
capacities of the country team against those tasks that UNI OGBIS will leave behind

14/17

20-01274

S/2020/105

at the various stages of the transition. The integrated transition task team, comprising
UNIOGBIS, UNOWAS and the country team, held three meetings during the
reporting period. It specifically focused on transition activities and va lidation, the
formulation of the transition plan and calendar, the drawdown plan, the transfer of
residual tasks and the preparation of the Peacebuilding Fund transition projects.
77. A United Nations integrated policy framework was developed to ensure th at the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework incorporates
peacebuilding priorities into the planning cycle for the period 2021 –2025. A
Programme Management Team was also established in mid-December under the
leadership of my Deputy Special Representative and Resident Coordinator to
strengthen the integrated efforts leading to the establishment of the Cooperation
Framework.

B.

Public information
78. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS produced eight radio programmes,
reaching at least 100,000 people (data obtained through a media prevalence study).
These programmes were focused on providing information about the reconfiguration
of the United Nations presence and its new leadership, on the participation of women
and young people participation in democracy and on informing the population about
the electoral process, as well as on countering misinformation and misperceptions
generated through media and social platforms.
79. UNIOGBIS assisted the National Council for Social Communication, with
funding from the Peacebuilding Fund, in drafting a code of conduct for media
coverage of the presidential election and in re-establishing a media monitoring team
to oversee its implementation by media outlets, including online media.
80. Between Democracy Day on 15 September and International Day of Peace on
21 September, UNIOGBIS organized meetings on democracy, elections and the rule of
law with 200 members of the youth wings of political parties and university students.
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team launched the My World global survey
in Guinea-Bissau, with over 20,000 responses collected by early December. Results
indicate that peace and justice, education and health rank as the top three priorities.
Targeted meetings with traditional leaders, businesses and other focus groups are being
organized to collect results and provide a space for awareness-raising.
81. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS issued seven press statements,
organized one press conference and published 10 articles on its website and over 100
posts on Facebook, with 10,000 people reached on average by each post.

C.

Staff safety and security
82. The overall security situation for United Nations personnel in Guinea -Bissau
remained stable. Except for a few minor road traffic accidents and some reported
cases of harassment and intimidation affecting some United Nations security
management system personnel. No serious incidents involving staff injury or death
were recorded during the reporting period. Security Management Team and United
Nations country team meetings were held regularly to discuss security and safety and
related issues.
83. In line with regulatory requirements, including on programme criticality and
business continuity, efforts have continued to ensure that the overall United Nations
security management system and related frameworks are in place for a proper
assessment of mandated activities against levels of risks, with appropriate preventive

20-01274

15/17

S/2020/105

or remedial responses. During the reporting period, security simulation exercises
were conducted based on possible security threat scenarios, in order to test the
robustness of existing United Nations security plans and ensure the readiness of
United Nations management and staff to respond in the event of an actual security
threat. Training was provided to 295 United Nations personnel. UNIOGBIS also
strengthened its relationship with national security forces and ECOMIB.

V. Observations and recommendations
84. The completion of the electoral cycle is a critical benchmark in the political and
peace process in Guinea-Bissau. I congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau, the
authorities, the political leadership, the electoral management bodies and civil society
for ensuring a peaceful electoral process that will hopefully set the country on a path
towards stability and socioeconomic development. I would like to commend the
parties for resorting to legal means to resolve the dispute over the election results. I
acknowledge that Mr. Vaz has completed his full term in office. I wish to commend
the joint command for the provision of security during the presidential election and
their efforts to ensure a peaceful environment.
85. I commend members of the international community for their generous support
for the electoral process. Most importantly, I would like to highlight the critical role
played by ECOWAS, through its successful mediation efforts, in supp orting the
aspirations of the people of Guinea-Bissau.
86. I urge the future President of Guinea-Bissau, members of parliament and all
political stakeholders to work in a collaborative manner to enact the critical reforms
envisioned in the ECOWAS road map, the Conakry Agreement and the stability pact.
Renewed efforts should be focused on the implementation of the reform agenda in
line with the communiqué issued at the ECOWAS extraordinary summit held on
8 November, in which the need to accelerate implementation of the constitutional
reforms was stressed.
87. Notwithstanding the progress achieved, the situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
unpredictable. The uncertainty about the majority coalition in the parliament and the
persistent mistrust among the political actors will pose challenges to stability and the
advancement of a non-partisan approach to the reform agenda. I reiterate my appeal to all
political actors in Guinea-Bissau to put their country and the people’s interests first and
resolve their differences through constructive dialogue and respect for the rule of law.
88. The achievement of durable peace and development in Guinea-Bissau requires
a transformative approach based on gender equality, youth engagement and respect
for human rights. I encourage national authorities to renew efforts to build a culture
of accountability at all levels of the State. Priority must be given to the establishment
of an independent national human rights institution, in compliance with the Paris
Principles, for the promotion and protection of human rights. Progress in human rights
and gender mainstreaming represents a key component across the peacebuilding
priorities identified in the framework of the United Nations transition in Guinea Bissau. I call upon relevant national authorities and political stakeholders to promote
and safeguard public and political participation, with special attention given to
women and young people.
89. Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime continue to pose existential
threats to long-term stability in Guinea-Bissau. The strengthening of land, maritime
and air border control is critical in confronting this threat. The development and
validation of the national action plan, as a road map for justice, security and judicial
institutions in the fight against drug trafficking, is an important and welcome step

16/17

20-01274

S/2020/105

forward. The increase in drug seizures, arrests and the prosecution of drug-related
cases, and the strengthened bilateral cooperation with the United Nations and other
partners, demonstrate the national authorities’ commitment to addressing this
scourge. Consolidating the gains achieved thus far will require political will at the
highest level and reinforced collaboration among relevant actors.
90. At the request of national authorities, the United Nations will continue to
provide technical assistance for the implementation of the national action plan on
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. Further international and regional
support for relevant judicial, justice and security institutions will be required. I urge
the international community to intensify its support for the Government of Guinea Bissau in its fight against drug trafficking and organized crime.
91. The conclusion of the electoral cycle represents the completion of the first of
the three phases of the UNIOGBIS drawdown outlined in Security Council resolution
2458 (2019). Full attention will now be directed towards the completion of subsequent
phases, leading to the transfer of the mission’s residual peacebuilding activities and
its gradual drawdown and planned closure by 31 December 2020. In this context,
national engagement and close collaboration with United Nations country team,
UNOWAS and international partners remain critical.
92. To further bolster the integrated planning on transition, I recommend that
UNIOGBIS and the Office of the United Nations Resident Coordinator conduct
comprehensive capacity mapping of the United Nations country tea m, including
non-resident country team members, which will be complemented by a vision and
plan for its footprint after the closure of the mission. In that context, the finalization
of the resource mobilization strategy and the deployment of staff based on the
capacity gaps already identified remain a priority.
93. As the United Nations embarks upon transforming its presence in Guinea-Bissau,
bearing in mind the need for a flexible approach to ensure a seamless transfer of
responsibilities, I encourage closer cooperation between the Government and the United
Nations to ensure national ownership of the process. For the closure of UNIOGBIS, I
recommend that its liquidation start immediately following the mandate completion
date of 31 December 2020, once all substantive staff have left the mission. It is
important to align the timelines for the liquidation and for the United Nations country
team in its decision-making related to assets and premises. UNIOGBIS will also
continue its efforts to reduce the impact of its closure on the host country environment,
in line with international and national laws and United Nations rules and regulations,
ensuring the implementation of an environmental assessment of the remaining closing
sites to ensure that all considerations are addressed.
94. I would like to commend the ECOWAS leadership, in particular the President of
the Niger, Mahamadou Issoufou, in his capacity as Chairperson of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government, and all international partners for th eir
tireless efforts to achieve long-term peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. Sustained
international engagement is crucial for peacebuilding and reforms in the post-electoral
period. I also wish to commend the group of five international partners for th eir longstanding commitment to Guinea-Bissau, and to bilateral, regional and international
partners for their substantial contribution to peacebuilding in the country.
95. Finally, I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and the
United Nations country team, under the leadership of my Special Representative,
Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, for their commitment and hard work, as well as for the
progress made thus far in the reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in
Guinea-Bissau.

20-01274

17/17
