S/2020/1159

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 December 2020
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 21 August to 19 November
2020, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and
extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2530 (2020).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was generally maintained, despite several violations of the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of 1974. While the overall security
situation in the UNDOF area of operation remained relatively stable, there was
continued military activity both across the ceasefire line and in the areas of separation
and limitation, in violation of relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2530 (2020).
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing of the ceasefire line by
individuals, aircraft and drones, constitute violations of the Agreement. In its regular
interactions with both sides, the leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon the
parties to exercise restraint and avoid any activities that might lead to an escalation
of the situation between the parties.
4.
Several explosions were heard and observed in the area of limitation on the
Bravo side late on 31 August. United Nations personnel at positions 68, 80 and 85
observed several jet aircraft flying over the area of separation and crossing from the
Bravo side to the Alpha side (Israeli-occupied Golan) at various locations. Open
sources reported alleged Israel Defense Forces air strikes on 31 August on targets in
southern Damascus and eastern Dar‘a.
5.
Late on 20 October, United Nations personnel at positions 22 and 27 and
observation post 51 heard four explosions south-east of position 27, in the vicinity of

20-16046 (E)

041220

*2016046*

S/2020/1159

Qunaytirah, in the area of separation. The first two explosions created a smokescreen
that covered position 27 for approximately 15 minutes, forcing the peacekeepers at
the position to take shelter in the bunkers for approximately one ho ur. While in their
bunkers, the peacekeepers heard two more explosions. Later that night, the Israel
Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had conducted a strike because they
believed that the activities of Iran and proxies in the area had endangered Isr ael, and
that Israel had acted accurately and responsibly in a precision strike against
infrastructures that allowed that entrenchment. On 21 October, UNDOF personnel
confirmed that an observation post at the “old” hospital in Qunaytirah, in the vicinity
of position 27, had been destroyed and that shrapnel and other debris had landed
within the position. The Syrian authorities have since reconstructed the post.
6.
On the night of 22 October, United Nations personnel at Camp Ziouani, at
position 37 and observation post 73, heard and observed the firing of anti-aircraft
tracer rounds from the area of separation, which UNDOF assessed to be related to the
presence of a drone that was flying in the vicinity of those positions at the same time.
7.
Military violations on the Alpha side included the presence of Iron Dome and
artillery systems within 10 kilometres of the ceasefire line and, on nine occasions, a
multiple-launch rocket system within the area of limitation, which are considered
unauthorized military equipment in the area of limitation, pursuant to the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On 13 October, UNDOF personnel observed an
Israel Defense Forces patrol operating east of the technical fence, crossing the
ceasefire line by five metres.
8.
Sporadic heavy explosions and bursts of heavy machine gun and small arms fire
persisted throughout the reporting period in the areas of separation and limitation on
the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that that military activity was related to controlled
detonations of unexploded ordnance as part of clearance and training by the Syrian
armed forces. UNDOF observed the continuous presence of the Syrian armed forces,
some of whom were armed, staffing a number of checkpoints within the area of
separation, as well as, on several occasions, the presence of Syrian anti-aircraft guns
within the area of limitation.
9.
During the reporting period, UNDOF continued to observe drones in the area of
separation, crossing the ceasefire line from both the Alpha and Bravo sides. UNDOF
was not in a position to determine the points of origin of the drones or to attribute
responsibility for them to either party.
10. UNDOF continued to observe daily crossings of the ceasefire line by
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that the individuals
were shepherds and farmers from the surrounding areas, tending livestock. The Israel
Defense Forces continued to express its deep concern about the crossings, which they
stated were a threat to the safety and security of Israel Defense Forces personnel
operating in proximity to the ceasefire line. On a number of occasions during the
reporting period, the Israel Defense Forces fired warning shots to discourage
individuals from approaching the technical fence.
11. On 14 September, Syrian armed forces notified UNDOF that the Israel Defense
Forces had crossed the gate of the Israeli technical fence and apprehended a
17-year-old Syrian shepherd. Later, the Israel Defense Forces confirmed that a Syrian
individual had been identified while crossing the ceasefire line and had been
apprehended for questioning. Syrian authorities expressed their deep concern to
UNDOF about the detention of the minor. On the same day, UNDOF assisted the
International Committee of the Red Cross in facilita ting the crossing of the minor to
the Bravo side through the Qunaytirah crossing.

2/8

20-16046

S/2020/1159

12. On 26 October, United Nations personnel at observation post 73 observed 15
Israel Defense Forces soldiers with two dogs east of the technical fence, detaining two
civilians, a 17-year-old boy and an elderly man from the Bravo side, who had been
restrained and blindfolded. The Israel Defense Forces subsequently informed UNDOF
that the minor had later been released to the Bravo side at the same point along the
ceasefire line from which he had crossed to the Alpha side. The elderly man remained
in the custody of the Israel Defense Forces until 27 October, when UNDOF assisted
the International Committee of the Red Cross in facilitating his return to the Bravo
side through the Qunaytirah crossing. He had suffered a “mild” heart attack and a dog
bite on his arm and had been admitted to a hospital on the Alpha side before his transfer
to the Bravo side. The Syrian authorities expressed their deep concern regarding the
detention of the two civilians and their treatment by the Israel Defense Forces.
13. On 17 November, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had
discovered several improvised explosive devices in the vicinity of an unmanned Israel
Defense Forces position east of the technical fence. On the same day, the Israel
Defense Forces showed UNDOF personnel three improvised explosive devices that
they had removed and disarmed, as well as footage of the detection of the devices
using a drone. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that the devices had been
discovered in the same general area of separation in the vicinity of position 85 where
they had found improvised explosive devices on 2 August 2020 (see S/2020/945,
para. 7). On the same day, United Nations personnel at position 85 had observed a
drone flying north-west of their position. Early on 18 November, the Israel Defense
Forces informed UNDOF that they had carried out a retaliatory operation against
targets used by the Iranians and their proxies or those that assisted them in their
activities in the area and that they held the Syrian Government responsible for every
action that had occurred in their territory. On that day, UNDOF personnel were not
able to observe any aircraft or missile activity in the UNDOF area of operation.
Earlier on 18 November, open sources had reported air strikes targeting locations in
Damascus, with the Syrian Arab News Agency reporting three Syrian armed forces
soldiers killed by the strike and that air defence systems had struck down a number
of missiles. UNDOF engaged with both parties, urging them to exercise maximum
restraint and prevent escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line.
14. UNDOF protested to the parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it had observed, including the firing into and from the area of
separation and across the ceasefire line, the crossing of the ceasefire line by aircraft
and drones, the presence of unauthorized equipment and personnel in the areas of
separation and limitation and the crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians from the
Bravo side. UNDOF communicated closely with the parties, including during periods
of heightened tension, to de-escalate the situation.
15. On 23 September, United Nations personnel at observation post 53 observed
Israel Defense Forces soldiers with two bulldozers and three main battle tanks,
constructing defensive tank positions east of the Israeli technical fence, close to the
ceasefire line. During the construction, the gun of one of the main battle tanks was
aimed directly at observation post 53, resulting in UNDOF engaging with the Israel
Defense Forces to cease pointing the gun at the observation post.
16. On 24 September, UNDOF observed one large silver balloon approximately
600 metres from the ceasefire line, north-west of an Israel Defense Forces position.
The balloon was tethered, and equipment was attached to the middle section of its
rope, which was assessed as likely to be surveillance equipment observing the area of
separation.
17. During the reporting period, United Nations personnel observed a number of
movements of unidentified individuals, some of whom were armed, between Lebanon
20-16046

3/8

S/2020/1159

and the Syrian Arab Republic, mostly through Mount Hermon, in the northern part of
the area of separation.
18. The security situation in the southern part of the area of limitation on the Bravo
side continues to be volatile, with open sources reporting attacks, including
assassinations, carried out against Syrian security forces, other government
authorities and former members of armed opposition groups, in addition to
increasingly violent clashes resulting from local disputes. Such security incidents
have been occurring increasingly closer to the UNDO F area of operations, namely in
the areas of Jasim, Nawa, Tafas and Tasil, in Dar‘a Governorate. Low -intensity
violence in Dar‘a Governorate, which periodically escalates into larger armed clashes,
continues to be reported. Although UNDOF personnel are not directly threatened, the
risk of collateral damage cannot be ruled out.
19. UNDOF continues to implement its mandate in the context of the measures
adopted by the authorities of Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to control the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, including limits on the movement of
United Nations personnel and their mandatory testing and quarantine after any
cross-border movement. Since early March, the Alpha side has continued to restrict
the movement of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan personnel through the
Qunaytirah crossing, which it opens only on a case-by-case basis, affecting the
operational capacity of UNDOF. UNDOF has continued to communicate with the
Israel Defense Forces with regard to their facilitation of the crossing of U NDOF and
Observer Group Golan personnel at the Qunaytirah crossing, in particular the need
for United Nations personnel to cross using only documents issued by UNDOF at the
Alpha gate and to return to established crossing procedures.
20. Since March, UNDOF has implemented an action plan aimed at maintaining
operational capability and limiting the potential spread of COVID -19 in the Force.
The plan incorporates the screening of personnel entering positions, restrictions on
movement between positions and telecommuting arrangements for national and
international civilian personnel.
21. Both parties continued to suspend inspections conducted by Observer Group
Golan in the areas of limitation, citing COVID-19 as the reason for the suspension.
Neither party agreed to the inspection mechanisms, including social distancing, that
UNDOF and Observer Group Golan had recommended in order to resume inspections.
22. As part of the return to full mandate implementation, UNDOF had resumed the
restoration, including repainting and refurbishment, of the barrels marking the
ceasefire line, which had ceased for security reasons and continues to be suspended
temporarily owing to COVID-19-related restrictions.
23. Progress in the incremental return of UNDOF to the Bravo side had been slowed
by the restriction on construction on that side owing to COVID -19-related control
measures. With the easing of some restrictions, UNDOF completed the reconstruction
of position 10A. A UNDOF-mechanized company reoccupied the position on
12 November. Additional work to extend position 60 has commenced. The
reconstruction of observation post 71, which is continuing, is estimated to be
completed at the end of March 2021.
24. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the military observers of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Observer Group Golan, who are
under the operational control of UNDOF and maintain seven fixed and one temporary
observation posts along the ceasefire line. Observer Group Golan remained focused
on continuous static observation and situational awareness.
25. During the reporting period, UNDOF rotated four contingents while adhering to the
requirements of the United Nations and host nations with regard to COVID-19-related
4/8

20-16046

S/2020/1159

measures. UNDOF had to place the contingents in quarantine for 14 days while ensuring
adequate safety and security throughout the rotation and quarantine periods.
26. UNDOF monthly operational patrols continued on routes in the areas of separation
and limitation, with 831 patrols completed in August, 657 completed in September and
694 completed in October. The requirement that rotating contingents quarantine for two
weeks upon arrival in the Force affected the ability of UNDOF to patrol at previous
levels during the quarantine periods. UNDOF continued to enhance its operational
capability and reach on the Bravo side by opening new patrol routes progressively in the
areas of separation and limitation. UNDOF patrol routes covered approximately 95 per
cent of the area of separation and some 55 per cent of the area of limitation.
27. The movement of UNDOF personnel through Lebanon continued to be restricted
owing to measures related to COVID-19. However, the route between Beirut and
Damascus, through the Judaydah and Masna’a border crossing, wh ich is a primary
resupply route for UNDOF, remained open for the commercial movement of goods.
28. UNDOF continued to engage with the Israel Defense Forces with a view to
addressing restrictions on movement and access from the Alpha side to United
Nations positions in the area of separation.
29. UNDOF assessed that there continued to be a significant threat to United
Nations personnel in the UNDOF area of operations from explosive remnants of war,
including unexploded ordnance and mines, as well as a probable threat from the
possible presence of sleeper cells of armed groups.
30. UNDOF continued to carry out and update its contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of positions and observation posts on both the Alpha
and Bravo sides, in addition to conducting regular rehearsals, exercises and training
for identified contingencies. Risk mitigation measures, including force protection
measures, continued to be developed at positions and observation posts and at the
operational base at Camp Ziouani and headquarters at Camp Faouar.
31. As at 12 November, UNDOF comprised 1,104 troops, including 57 women
peacekeepers. Troops are deployed from Bhutan (3), Czechia (3), Fiji (137),
Ghana (3), India (196), Ireland (139), Nepal (408), the Netherlan ds (1) and
Uruguay (214). In addition, 60 military observers from Observer Group Golan,
including 10 women, assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
32. In its resolution 2530 (2020), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to implement immediately its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months, until 31 December 2020, and
requested the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the
situation and the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for
a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made
at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on
the situation in the Middle East (A/73/322), submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 72/15 on Jerusalem and 72/16 on the Syrian Golan.
33. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict further reduces the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.
20-16046

5/8

S/2020/1159

IV. Financial aspects
34. The General Assembly, by its resolution 74/291, appropriated the amount of
$63.3 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2020 to
30 June 2021.
35. As at 12 November 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNDOF amounted to $22.8 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,655.1 million.
36. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 30 June 2020,
while reimbursement of the cost of contingent-owned equipment has been made for
the period up to 31 March 2020, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

V. Observations
37. I am concerned about the continued violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement during the reporting period, at a particularly volatile time for the region,
including the breach of the ceasefire that occurred on 20 October, which also posed a
significant risk to UNDOF personnel. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from
firing across the ceasefire line. I remain concerned about the continued presence of the
Syrian Armed Forces in the area of separation. There should be no military forces in the
area of separation other than those of UNDOF. The continued presence of unauthorized
weapons and equipment in the area of limitation on both the Alpha and the Bravo sides,
as well as the flying of aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles across the ceasefire line ,
is also of concern. Those actions are in violation of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. I urge the parties to the Agreement to exercise utmost restraint and comply
with the Agreement. I continue to encourage members of the Security Council to support
efforts to raise the awareness of both parties of the risk of escalation and the need to
preserve the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic.
38. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF. All
violations of the ceasefire line increase tensions between the signatories to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and contribute to undermining stability in the
area. The continued liaison by UNDOF with the parties has contributed to
de-escalation during times of heightened tension.
39. The continued commitment of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF remain
essential. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation continues to be a prio rity
for the Force. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to facilitate the
advancement of the Force’s plans for an incremental return to operations and positions
in the area of separation, as well as to ensure that the Force can implement i ts mandate,
including the conducting of inspections on both sides, fully. At the same time, the parties
must continue to support the enhancement of the liaison function of UNDOF.
40. Given the worrying trend of continued violations of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement, the safety and security of military and civilian personnel in
UNDOF and Observer Group Golan are of particular concern. It is therefore of
particular importance that the Security Council continue to bring to bear its infl uence
on the concerned parties to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to operate in a
safe and secure manner and is allowed to operate freely, in accordance with the
Agreement. It also remains important that the parties continue to facilitate the
deployment of all personnel to UNDOF for effective mandate implementation.
41. The continued support of Member States, in particular the confidence and
commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF, remains a key factor in the
6/8

20-16046

S/2020/1159

Force’s ability to carry out its mandate. I am grateful to the Governments of Bhutan,
Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Ireland, Nepal, the Netherlands and Uruguay for their
contributions, as well as for the commitment, resolve and consummate
professionalism of their military personnel in UNDOF. I am thankful for the Member
States that have contributed military observers to the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization.
42. I consider the continued presence of UNDOF in the area to be essential. I
therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of the Force for a
period of six months, to 30 June 2021. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
has given its assent to the proposed extension. The Government of Israel has also
expressed its agreement.
43. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Ishwar Hamal, and to the military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership in UNDOF, as well as to the military observers
in Observer Group Golan, who continue to perform the important tasks assigned to
them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under extremely
challenging circumstances.

20-16046

7/8

S/2020/1159

8/8

20-16046
