S/2017/565

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 52 of Security Council
resolution 2348 (2017). It covers major developments that have occurred in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since my report of 10 March 2017 ( S/2017/206).
The report describes progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and provides an overview of political developments since my
report on the implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016 in that
country (S/2017/435) of 17 May.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
During the reporting period, the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016 was slow, incomplete and marked persistently by disagreements
between the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales de la République
démocratique du Congo acquises au changement, an opposition platform, and the
Majorité présidentielle over whether developments were in line with the letter and
spirit of the agreement.
3.
On 16 May 2017, five months after the signing of the agreement and five
weeks after the appointment of a new Prime Minister, a 59 -member transitional
Government was sworn in before the National Assembly. This followed the signing,
in late April, of the Arrangements particuliers for the implementation of the
agreement by most political actors, with the exception of the Rassemblement. In his
address at the swearing-in ceremony, the Prime Minister, Bruno Tshibala, stated that
his Government would focus on organizing credible, free, transp arent and peaceful
elections by the end of the year, as envisaged under the Agreement; addressing the
economic crisis; improving socioeconomic conditions; and restoring peace across
the country. He also announced that his Government would consider options for
reducing the cost of elections, possibly by modifying voting modalities.
4.
The Rassemblement denounced the formation and inauguration of the new
Government as constituting an infringement of the agreement. The Secretary -

17-10502 (E)

050717

*1710502*

S/2017/565

General of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS), Jean-Marc
Kabund-a-Kabund, and the President of the Rassemblement, Félix Tshisekedi, who
have long insisted that the agreement stipulates that the new Prime Minister should
have been a member of the Rassemblement, called upon all Congolese to remain
mobilized in support of the full implementation of the accord.
5.
On 20 May, at an extraordinary meeting of the Council of Ministers, the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila, noting that the
swift organization of elections is the first objective of the Government, instructed
the new cabinet to provide support to the Independent National Electoral
Commission. He stressed the need to consolidate peace and security throughout the
country as a prerequisite for credible elections. Mr. Kabila also urged the
Government to work towards improving the socioeconomic conditions of the
Congolese people, and to act swiftly in regard to presenting a draft 2017 budget for
adoption by the parliament.
6.
By mid-June, the conseil national de suivi de l’accord, an oversight
mechanism for the implementation of the agreement, had yet to be established. No
significant progress was noted in the implementation of the confidence -building
measures foreseen in the agreement. Meanwhile, plans to repatriate and bury the
remains of Étienne Tshisekedi, the former leader of UDPS who had passed away on
1 February, remained at an impasse, as disagreement persisted between the party
and the Government on various modalities, fuelling tense stand-offs between
security services and supporters of UDPS at the headquarters of the party in
Kinshasa during the month of April.
7.
On 30 April, the voter registration process was completed in 13 provinces and
launched in 10 others; and on 28 May, the process was launched in Kinshasa. In the
two remaining provinces, Kasaï and Kasaï Central, registration has not yet
commenced owing to insecurity. Registration of the members of the Congolese
diaspora has also not yet commenced. According to the Ind ependent National
Electoral Commission, as of 21 June, over 28 million potential voters had been
registered, representing 69.3 per cent of the estimated electorate nationwide, in
which the proportion of women is 48 per cent.
8.
While the Independent National Electoral Commission maintains 31 July as
the official deadline for the completion of the voter registration process, a measure
of uncertainty persists, including as a result of the insecurity in Kasaï and Kasaï
Central provinces. Also, the Government faces an increasingly difficult budgetary
situation. This affects its ability to fund the electoral process, which the
Commission estimates would cost $1.3 billion. The multi-partner basket support
fund for the Projet d’appui au cycle électoral au Congo, which is managed by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), remains funded at the level of
only 6 per cent of the required amount of $123.3 million, owing partly to donor
concerns regarding uncertainties surrounding the political transition.
Regional and other developments
9.
At the regional level, from 19 to 21 April, the ministerial -level troika of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), chaired by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania, Augustine Ma higa, conducted a
series of consultations in Kinshasa with Mr. Kabila, members of the Government,
representatives of the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, political and civil society stakeholders, and officials of the Independen t
National Electoral Commission. The troika affirmed its continuing commitment to
working with the United Nations, the African Union, the International Organization

2/17

17-10502

S/2017/565

of la Francophonie and other partners in the search for sustainable solutions to the
current political crisis, including with respect to its security-related ramifications.
10. On 12 May, the Government of Angola called upon all Congolese actors to
“immediately cease violence, acts of extremism and political intolerance ”, citing the
continued influx of Congolese refugees from the Kasaï provinces into the northern
provinces of Angola. That country’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Manuel
Domingos Augusto, met with Mr. Kabila in Kinshasa on 15 April. That visit was
followed by the visit to Luanda on 19 May of the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Léonard She Okitundu, to discuss, with his Angolan counterparts, options
for addressing the presence of Congolese refugees and other bilateral issues.
11. From 28 to 31 May, a delegation of the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, representing the
United Nations, the African Union, SADC and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where they
exchanged views with Mr. Kabila and leaders of the Majorité présidentielle as well
as members of various opposition parties, including Félix Tshisekedi, President of
the Rassemblement, in an attempt to narrow differences and catalyse progress on the
implementation of the agreement.
12. On 29 May, the European Council adopted restrictive measures directed
against nine individuals who hold positions of responsibility, mostly in the State
administration and in the security forces, for contributing to serious human rights
violations and for undermining a consensual and peaceful solution to issues
associated with the holding of elections. Those measures include a ban on entering
the European Union and an asset freeze. On 1 June, the United States Department of
the Treasury sanctioned the head of the Maison militaire under Mr. Kabila for his
alleged role in activities that threaten the peace, security and stabili ty.
13. During the reporting period, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo continued its diplomatic efforts to broaden support across the region,
which resulted in emission of generally positive signals from countries of the region
vis-à-vis steps taken by Mr. Kabila. These efforts included State visits to Egypt and
Gabon of Mr. Kabila, as well as visits and engagement of the Vice -Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration with the Presidents of
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo, Equatorial Guinea,
Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zambia. The Vice-Prime Minister also met in Addis Ababa with the Chair of the
African Union Commission, who urged the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to take concrete steps towards the implementation of the 31 December
2016 agreement.
14. My Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Maman
Sambo Sidikou, has continued to work closely with national stakeholders, regional
actors (in conjunction with my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region), Sa їd
Djinnit, and other key international partners in support of the implementation of the
agreement. He also continued to engage with political stakeholders, notably the
Majorité présidentielle and the Rassemblement, on, inter alia, the important goal of
organizing elections by December 2017. He advocated with national authorities for
the prompt implementation of confidence-building measures aimed at creating an
environment conducive to peaceful, free, fair and credible elections. Similar
political engagement efforts were also carried out at the provincial level.

17-10502

3/17

S/2017/565

B.

Security situation
15. The major shift observed over the first three months of 2017 across the
security landscape of the country persisted during the reporting period, as violence
and threats to civilians continued to spread in the west, and instability continued to
prevail in the east. In the western Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in
the three Kasaï provinces, in addition to clashes between the Kamuina Nsapu militia
and security forces — which resulted in numerous human rights violations,
including targeted killings by the militia as well as summary exe cutions and acts of
rape perpetrated by security forces, as described in paragraphs 39 -45 and 49 below,
there was an increase in violence among ethnic communities. Foreign and
Congolese armed groups remained active in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, mostly in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri. Insecurity also persisted in the
border areas, specifically along the borders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with Angola, the Central African Republic and South Sudan. At the same
time, MONUSCO has further intensified civilian, military and police efforts to
deliver on the mandates of protection of civilians and the neutralization of armed
groups. In situations where community alert networks were active, over 85 per cent
of protection-of-civilians alerts were responded to by either the Government and/or
MONUSCO.
Western Democratic Republic of the Congo
16. In Kasaï Central, despite a relative improvement of the security situation in
Kananga, the provincial capital, and its surrounding areas, violence persisted across
the province and spread into neighbouring Kasaï province and towards the border
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola. In both provinces,
attacks by Kamuina Nsapu militia groups continued, targeting security forces,
public institutions, voter registration centres, religious institutions, community
leaders and civilians. Authorities reported that on 24 March, the Kamuina Nsapu
militia ambushed a truck belonging to the Police Nationale Congolaise (PNC) and
beheaded 39 police officers in Kamuesha, Kasaï province. Between 8 and 15 April,
the militia reportedly killed at least 13 customary chiefs in Kamonia territory for
refusing to align with the militia; and between 5 and 10 May, killed four more
customary chiefs in Kazumba, Luiza, Kasaї Central and Kamonia territory. On
8 June, the militia reportedly killed five civilians who were travelling from Kalala
Diboko to Masuika and whose aim was to encourage militia members to demobilize.
Also, from 25 to 28 April, in Kazumba territory, the Kamuina Nsapu militia clashed
with the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces a rmées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)), which reportedly led to the
killing of 41 militia members and 12 soldiers. In the same territory, on 30 April, the
attack of the Kamuina Nsapu militia on a truck delivering educational examination
materials resulted in the killing of three school inspectors.
17. The ongoing violence has exacerbated intercommunal tensions and divisions.
Between 13 and 25 April, in Kamonia territory, Kasaï province, violence between
Pende and Tshokwe communities, reportedly aligned with the Government, and
Luba and Lulua communities, reportedly associated with the Kamuina Nsapu
militia, led to the killing of 38 people, including eight women and eight children.
Sporadic incidences of violence have also been reported in fou r neighbouring
provinces, namely, Kasaï Oriental, Sankuru, Lomami and Lualaba.
18. In response to the escalating situation, the Government restructured its
military presence in the Kasaï region. This led to substantial reinforcements of the
armed forces with troops formally based in North Kivu, which arrived in Kananga
on 27 March and had been deployed throughout Kasaï province by 11 April.

4/17

17-10502

S/2017/565

Additional FARDC reinforcements from Kinshasa arrived in Kananga on 3 May.
Subsequently, MONUSCO received reports of the killing of militia members and
civilians during operations by the security forces. Between 28 and 30 March, for
example, during operations in the Katoka and Nganza communes of Kananga,
53 civilians and members of the Kamuina Nsapu militia were reported ly killed,
including at least 15 women and 14 children. On 15 May, the armed forces
announced that since the end of March, 390 militia members and 124 members of
the national security forces had been killed during operations in Kasaï and Kasaï
Central provinces.
19. On 12 March, Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp, two members of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the four Congolese nationals
who accompanied them went missing in Kasaï Central province. On 27 March, after
a 15-day intensive search-and-rescue operation conducted by MONUSCO, the
remains of those two members of the Group of Experts were found in a shallow
grave near Bukonde, south of Kananga, the provincial capital. A video of their
murder was circulated on social media, allegedly by members of the Kamuina
Nsapu militia. On 20 May, at a press conference, authorities stated that the
investigation into the killing of the two members of the Group of Experts had been
closed and the judicial file transmitted to the military garrison tribunal of Kananga.
On 5 June, the trial of 2 of the 16 suspects in the killing began in Kananga. The
14 others, who reportedly remain at large, are being tried in absentia.
20. In Tanganyika province, violence persisted among communities and b etween
armed groups and security forces despite a lull following a peace forum held in
Kalemie, the provincial capital, in February. In March and April, nine clashes were
reported between Luba and Twa militias, causing population displacements. From
27 to 29 April, Luba and Twa militias in Kalemie territory clashed following
allegations that some Twa had conducted raids on crops and cattle of the Luba
community. Four people were killed and hundreds of homes were burned near the
village of Tabac. Violence erupted in the Bendera area, northern Kalemie territory,
between Bafuliro, Banyamulenge and Twa cattle herders. In late March, a woman
from the Bafuliro community was allegedly killed by Twa militiamen. This incident
sparked retaliatory actions by members of the Bafuliro and Banyamulenge
communities, who reportedly killed five Twa civilians, including a local chief.
Clashes also took place between militias and national security forces. On 21 April,
militia associated with the Twa community ambushed FARDC forc es near Kalemie,
taking six weapons. On the same day, Twa militias targeted a FARDC position in the
village of Kataki, Kalemie territory. In response, authorities arrested four Twa
leaders and FARDC reinforced its presence along the Kalemie-Bendera and
Kalemie-Nyunzu axes.
21. The security situation in Haut Katanga and Lualaba provinces has to a large
extent been calm during the reporting period, despite sporadic incursions of
Kamuina Nsapu militia from the south-eastern area of Kasai Central province into
Kapanga territory, northern Lualaba province, particularly in March and early April.
The incursions triggered ethnic tensions in Lualaba, notably between the local Rund
community and those perceived as not being indigenous, including internally
displaced persons from the greater Kasaï region. Security-related incidents have
decreased in the Mitwaba area, Haut Katanga province, since the surrender in
October 2016 of Gédéon Kyungu Mutanga, the leader of the Mayi -Mayi Kata
Katanga armed group.
22. In respect of a response by MONUSCO to the deteriorating situation across
the Kasaï region during the reporting period, while there has been neither
involvement in, nor the provision of support to, operations conducted by FARDC,
the Mission did significantly reinforce the presence of its civilian components
17-10502

5/17

S/2017/565

across the three Kasaï provinces in order to protect civilians and monitor and report
on human rights violations, as well as support the implementation of the agreement,
the voter registration process and humanitarian access. In May, MONUSCO
deployed 240 troops in three standing combat deployments in Bulungu, Luiza, and
Tshimbulu, Kasaï Central. Across the Kasaï provinces, the Force is adjusting its
posture and will deploy additional companies in the months ahead t o provide
assistance to the Mission’s civilian components and humanitarian actors.
MONUSCO has also expanded community alert networks for these areas and
improved early warning mechanisms.
23. The deployment of the standing combat deployment in Tshimbulu has
contributed to the return of people displaced as a result of the insecurity of the
situation. Over 65 per cent of the population has now returned and all 36 schools
and churches have reopened. The Mission has also supported mediation efforts with
a view to protecting civilians. On 10 and 11 May, the Mission supported a capacity building exercise for representatives of the Direction générale des affaires
coutumières, a consultative committee newly established to address customary
conflicts. Last, MONUSCO evacuated 26 religious figures and 80 children who had
been threatened by militias and increased the number of security patrols in areas
under threat.
24. The Mission upgraded its antenna in Kananga into a field office, and
reinforced its office in Mbuji Mayi, with the deployment of 70 civilian staff and
30 police officers; and it now has one full company in Kananga and three standing
combat deployments in Kasaï Central. By the Mission’s assessment, these
deployments need to be maintained and possibly expanded, since they appear to
have an important stabilizing effect, including by containing human rights
violations and encouraging the local population to return and schools to open.
MONUSCO plans to open an office in Tshikapa, the provincial capital of Kas ai
province, with an appropriate military deployment to assist in protecting civilians
and support local authorities in addressing the growing intercommunal violence.
25. MONUSCO continued to monitor threats against the civilian population in
Kinshasa. Between 9 and 11 April, during a period of heightened political tension
following the nomination of the new Prime Minister, the Mission enhanced its
patrolling of the city. The heightened presence of MONUSCO in the city and its
continuing advocacy contributed to the release of 42 civilians arbitrarily arrested by
the national police in connection with a march on 10 April planned by the
Rassemblement.
Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
26. In North Kivu, the year-old split within the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR) continues to contribute to a deterioration of the security
environment. On 26 April, fighting between the Conseil national pour le renouveau
et la démocratie (CNRD), a splinter faction of FDLR, and Mayi -Mayi Nyatura
elements, supported by another faction of the same FDLR known as FDLR/Forces
combattantes abacunguzi (FDLR-FOCA), in Kivuye and Bweru villages, resulted in
the death of 29 people. Clashes between ethnically based militias also continued,
including in Rutshuru territory between Hutu and Nande militias, and between
Mayi-Mayi Nyatura and FDLR coalitions against Mayi-Mayi Mazembe, leading to
displacements of population. On 12 and 13 April, an attack by the Alliance des
patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain ( APCLS), supported by Mayi-Mayi
Kifuafua elements, against Forces de défense congolaise (FDC) positions in Ngulu
and Lutanda villages resulted in the burning of several houses and the displacement
of civilians. The situation around Lake Edward remained volatile as various MayiMayi groups attempted to exert control over the lucrative fishing trade. During the
6/17

17-10502

S/2017/565

period from 22 April to 1 May, 50 fishermen were abducted by Mayi Mayi Charles
elements. In Masisi territory, the situation remained volatile as well, with the
continued activities of ethnically based Congolese armed groups and the ongoing
activities of FDLR. On the other hand, the Beni area has seen a sustained period of
relative calm, due mainly to the limited activities of the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) during the reporting period.
27. In South Kivu, Congolese armed groups continue to pose a security threat,
especially in Fizi, Kalehe, Shabunda and Uvira territories. Their involvement in
customary succession issues as well as in intercommunal and transhumance-related
disputes in Kabare, Kalehe, Fizi, and Uvira territories, has markedly increased.
Uvira territory was particularly affected by a rise in intercommunal conflicts and the
spillover of the crisis in Burundi. On 9 April, confrontations betw een members of
the Bafuliru and Banyamulenge communities seeking to control a local chieftaincy
enflamed tensions in Bijombo, Uvira territory. A growing number of civilians have
been displaced to surrounding areas, including Tanganyika and North Kivu. In e arly
May, a Twa delegation from Tanganyika arrived in Fizi territory to warn Bafuliru
and Banyamulenge community members against incursions on their lands.
MONUSCO received reports of recruitment of Burundi nationals by Congolese
armed groups in the area; and in response, in late April, FARDC reinforced its
presence near Bijombo.
28. In Ituri, the Forces de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) continued to pose
the single greatest security threat to civilians. During the month of May alone, the
group was involved in 31 instances of human rights abuses, including one summary
execution and six rapes. From 11 to 16 March, MONUSCO and FARDC conducted
a coordinated operation against FRPI, resulting in the destruction of three camps. In
addition, Djugu and Mahagi territories have seen a rising number of violent disputes
and conflicts over land and local power structures. In March, a land dispute in
Djugu led to the death of one person and the destruction of 280 houses and two
schools. In April, a conflict over customary chieftaincy in Mahagi resulted in the
deaths of two people and the burning down of 250 houses. In Mambasa territory,
FARDC has continued operations against Mayi-Mayi groups, aimed particularly at
dislodging them from gold-mining sites. Instability also persisted along the border
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan, in Ituri province.
On 16 March, armed men attacked a FARDC post at Edipi.
29. In Haut-Uélé, attacks by elements of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and
reported crossings of armed elements from South Sudan continue to impact the
security situation. Within the context of the drawdown of the regional task force
conducting the operation against LRA (including, notably, the United States Africa
Command and the Ugandan People’s Defense Force), isolated splinter groups of
LRA have continued attacks and abduction of civilians in remote areas of north western Haut-Uélé and in the northern part of Bas-Uélé, along the border with the
Central African Republic. Attacks by LRA have been aimed primarily at furthering
their efforts to poach and obtain supplies by raiding local communities.
30. On 11 June, when the main prison in Beni was attacked by unidentified armed
elements, at least 900 prisoners escaped and 11 persons were killed. On 22 June, a
series of coordinated attacks aimed at freeing high -profile prisoners in Beni was
repelled by FARDC with the support of MONUSCO troops and police. At least nine
people were killed as a result. These incidents are part of a series of incidents which
started on 17 May when the Makala central prison in Kinshasa was attacked,
allegedly by sympathizers of the Bundu Dia Mayala political party. The leader of
the party, Ne Muanda Nsemi, escaped along with thousands of prisoners. Other
prison breaks have occurred across the country in recent weeks, prompting some
members of parliament to call for the resignation of key government ministers.
17-10502

7/17

S/2017/565

31. In its efforts to protect civilians and neutralize armed groups, MONUSCO was
involved in two coordinated operations with FARDC against FRPI in Ituri, using a
combination of framework brigade elements and special forces. The operations
resulted in a rise in FRPI surrenders. In Haut-Uélé, from March to June, MONUSCO
supported a FARDC operation against LRA. MONUSCO also strengthened the early
warning network along the border with South Sudan by facilitating capacity -building
workshops and donating solar-powered communication equipment to local protection
committees in the most vulnerable areas. In addition, the Mission continued to
provide logistical and tactical support to FARDC within the framework of Operation
Red Kite, and donated 53 solar-powered kits and 800 water purifiers to enhance the
anti-LRA response in very remote areas, in compliance with the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United Nations security forces.
32. In South Kivu and Tanganyika provinces, MONUSCO continued to support
efforts to promote peaceful coexistence between communities. From 10 to 12 April,
MONUSCO facilitated an interprovincial conference which was held to address
conflicts related to transhumance in South Kivu, Maniema and Tanganyika. In North
Kivu, between 20 and 27 March, the Mission supported a series of dialogues among
local authorities in order to address rising intercommunal tensions between Nande
and Hutu communities in Rutshuru territory. The Mission also established a
standing combat deployment in Munguli in the period from 21 to 26 May to protect
a camp of internally displaced persons within the context of clashes between MayiMayi Mazembe and Mayi-Mayi Nyatura militia.
33. In North Kivu, in collaboration with FARDC, the Mine Action Service of the
United Nations supported the destruction of explosive items and ammunition from a
recently discovered ammunition cache belonging to the former Mouvement du
23 mars (M23) armed group in Rutshuru territory. This was the fourth M23
ammunition cache found in North Kivu since 2016. Over 6,000 explosive items,
including projectiles, mortars and rockets, have been destroyed to date. Response by
the Mine Action Service to 43 requests to remove explosive ordnance across the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo resulted in the destruction of 577
weapons and over 7,600 explosive items. Despite these efforts, during the reporting
period, 16 people were reportedly killed by explosive remnants of war in North
Kivu.
Disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion, and related activities
34. From 10 March to 31 May, MONUSCO received 163 male and five female
Congolese combatants across the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Fifty seven per cent were combatants of FDLR and Mayi-Mayi Nyatura, 18 per cent were
members of other Mayi-Mayi groups and 16 per cent were members of Raia
Mutomboki. The majority of those former combatants opted to enter the Programme
national de désarmement, démobilisation et réintégration phase III (PNDDR III). In
addition, MONUSCO received and repatriated to R wanda 79 foreign combatants
(78 male and 1 female), the majority from FDLR-FOCA. Most notably, on 12 March,
18 members of FDLR, including the second in command of FDLR Grand -Nord,
surrendered with 17 weapons.
35. MONUSCO continued to provide reinsertion support to the PNDDR III camps
in Kamina and Kitona where, as of 31 May, 904 male and 13 female former
combatants were receiving vocational training. In addition, in the period from 18 to
27 April, MONUSCO supported the transfer of 107 Kata Katanga elements, who
had surrendered to the Government in Haut Katanga in 2016, from Lubumbashi to
the Kamina camp. MONUSCO also continued to provide support to 297 FDLR
elements, including one woman and 1,067 dependants (13 men, 242 women,
415 boys and 397 girls), in the FDLR voluntary disarmament programme camps of
8/17

17-10502

S/2017/565

Kanyabayonga and Walungu, as well as to the Government-managed camp in
Kisangani. In addition, MONUSCO continued to provide support to 610 elements of
the South Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A -IO),
including one woman, accommodated by MONUSCO in Dungu and Goma.
Stabilization
36. MONUSCO continued to support area-based stabilization efforts under the
aegis of the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy (ISSSS),
facilitating coordination among the Government, internatio nal partners, civil society
and the United Nations country team. The Mission supported the launch of five
additional stabilization programmes in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri, targeting
root causes of conflict through in-depth gender-sensitive conflict analyses and
mitigation measures, while fostering political engagement through the development
of the first compact by the Mission with the provincial government of South Kivu.
MONUSCO also continues to advocate for the revision and effective application o f
the 2005 legal framework for election security, in line with the 31 December 2016
agreement.
Regional developments
37. Countries of the region pursued efforts to address political and security
challenges, particularly the continued threat posed by armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The seventeenth meeting and retreat of the
Technical Support Committee of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was held in Naivasha, Kenya, on 4 and 5 May 2017. The focus of the retreat was on
means for improving the efficiency and performance of the Committee.
Recommendations centred on strengthening confidence among countries and
ensuring effective follow-up of progress in the delivery of Framework
commitments, notably through good offices initiatives by the guarantors, bilateral
engagement among regional leaders and enhanced cooperation at the technical level.
38. There was some modest progress in relation to SPLM/A-IO in MONUSCO
premises. On 14 April, eight SPLM/A-IO elements in MONUSCO premises
voluntarily repatriated to Juba, in the presence of the Vice -Minister of Defence of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Ambassador of South Sudan to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, representatives of the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism and officials of MONUSCO.

C.

Human rights situation
39. MONUSCO documented the continuing deterioration of the human rights
situation, with 1,444 human rights violations committed from March to May, in
comparison with 888 violations recorded in January and February. Of those,
287 human rights violations occurred in the three Kasaï provinces, Tanganyika, and
Kongo Central. Armed groups perpetrated 574 human rights violations, while State
agents were responsible for 870, with 23 per cent of violations perpetrated by
FARDC and 26 per cent by the national police. At least 437 victims of extrajudicial
and arbitrary killings, including 43 women and 67 children, were regi stered during
the period under review. Of those 437 victims, 304, including 27 women and
64 children, were killed by State agents; and 133, including 16 women and three
children, by armed groups.
40. The trend towards maintaining a restricted democratic space persisted, with
increasing violations of civil and political rights, particularly freedom of peaceful

17-10502

9/17

S/2017/565

assembly, of opinion and of expression. Political opponents, civil society activists
and journalists were the main targets. During the period under review, MONUSCO
documented 245 cases of human rights violations linked to restrictions of
democratic space throughout the country, as compared with 99 such violations in the
first two months of 2017. While a general ban on public demonstrations was
maintained, pursuant, reportedly, to the instructions of the Minister of the Interior, it
was imposed differentially based on political affiliation.
41. MONUSCO documented 148 cases of human rights violations in the three
Kasaï provinces, resulting in at least 292 civilian casualties, including 21 women
and 63 children, of which 249 killings were reportedly perpetrated by FARDC.
There have been continuing reports of massive recruitment of children by the
Kamuina Nsapu militia, as well as killings, destruction of property and looting.
Those reports also indicate the use of disproportionate force by State agents in the
conduct of military operations against the militia. A total of 42 alleged mass graves
were identified in the area. MONUSCO transmitted Global Positioning System
(GPS) coordinates of their presumed locations to military justice, which has yet to
initiate an investigation.
42. To date, national authorities have yet to launch investigations related to
allegations of serious human rights violations communicated to them by
MONUSCO. On 22 May, a modest first step was taken, as represented by a joint
mission led by military justice in coordination with MONUSCO in the Nganza
commune of Kananga, where MONUSCO had previously documented human rights
violations and abuses reportedly perpetrated by law enforcement and security
forces. The main objective of the mission was to assess the situation and contribu te
support to the opening of a military judicial investigation. One of the only trials
related to developments in the Kasaï provinces was held from 16 to 19 May, in
Bilomba, Kazumba territory, Kasaї Central, where the Kananga military court held a
mobile hearing related to prosecution of 10 FARDC soldiers from the 2101 regiment
and two national police officers accused of robbery, fraudulent concealment and
violation of instructions. While one national police agent was acquitted by the court,
the other defendants were convicted and sentenced to prison terms ranging from
45 days to seven years. Also during this period, in Mbuji-Mayi, the military court of
Kasaї Oriental commenced the trial of nine FARDC soldiers on charges of having
committed war crimes in Mwanza Lomba.
43. On 9 June, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights called
upon the Human Rights Council to launch an international investigation into the
grave human rights violations and abuses that had been perpetrated in Kasaï Central
and Kasaï Oriental provinces, noting that their nature and scale, as well as the
consistently inadequate responses of the domestic authorities, had obliged him to
call for an international investigation as a complement to national efforts. On
23 June, the Human Rights Council adopted a resolution in which the Council
requested the High Commissioner to appoint a team of international experts to
investigate these allegations, in cooperation with the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
44. A total of 178 people are being detained at the Kananga central prison for their
alleged affiliation to Kamuina Nsapu militias. Among them are 152 civilians,
including one woman, 25 national police agents and one FARDC soldier. Further,
18 civilians, including 10 women and two national police agents, also arrested for
their alleged affiliation with the militia, were reportedly released.
45. There continued to be strict adherence to the human rights due diligence
policy with regard to all support provided by MONU SCO to Congolese security and
defence forces.
10/17

17-10502

S/2017/565

Sexual violence
46. Seventy-five adults were reported to have been victims of conflict -related
sexual violence, including one man, during the period under review, which
represented a decrease compared with the first two months of 2017, during which at
least 111 women and girls had been victims of such violence. Armed groups were
responsible for 72 per cent of those incidents, while State agents were responsible
for 28 per cent. During the period under revie w, Twa militia members (responsible,
with 17 victims, for 23 per cent of violations) were the main perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence. Among State actors, members of FARDC remained
the main perpetrator, with 17 per cent of violations attribut able to them. Other
perpetrators included FRPI combatants (20 per cent) and various Mayi -Mayi groups
(10 per cent). Most of the cases were registered in North Kivu and Tanganyika
provinces ((39 per cent and more than 25 per cent, respectively).
Child protection
47. During the reporting period, MONUSCO documented 527 cases of grave
violations of child rights. At least 269 children were separated or escaped from
armed groups, including 14 girls. The main armed groups that recruited and used
children were Kamuina Nsapu, Raia Mutomboki, Nyatura, FRPI and Union des
patriotes pour la libération du Congo (UPLC).
48. In the Kasaï provinces, militia groups, including Kamuina Nsapu, have
systematically recruited and used children in combat against FARDC. MONUSC O
documented 28 new cases of child recruitment by Kamuina Nsapu militia, including
eight girls, over the reporting period. MONUSCO also documented the killing of at
least 59 children, including 25 girls, and the maiming of 44, including four girls,
amidst the violence perpetrated since March. In addition, eight girls were subjected
to sexual violence: in two cases, the perpetrators were members of armed groups
and in six, the perpetrators were State agents. Since September 2016, MONUSCO
has documented 646 attacks on schools in the Kasaї provinces by Kamuina Nsapu
militia. FARDC used four schools for military purposes; but the schools were
vacated following advocacy by MONUSCO. In addition, in Kananga, MONUSCO
advocated (with FARDC) the designation of focal points for child protection and
(with the military prosecutor) the bringing of perpetrators of grave child rights
violations to justice. Following these efforts, MONUSCO screened and secured the
release from detention of over 100 children, including one gir l.

D.

Humanitarian and economic situations
49. The humanitarian situation in the Kasaï region deteriorated significantly
during the period owing to intensifying clashes between FARDC and the Kamuina
Nsapu militia. A total of 1.3 million people were internally displaced as of early
June, representing a 26 per cent increase in the course of month. On 25 April,
humanitarian actors launched a flash appeal for $64.5 million to enable a response
to the most pressing needs of some 731,000 extremely vulnerab le people during the
following six months. The number of Congolese refugees entering Angola in their
flight from the violence in the Kasaï provinces had reached some 30,000 people by
mid-June, with new refugees arriving daily. As of early June, there were
467,473 refugees in the country, mostly from Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Rwanda and South Sudan. By mid-June, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had registered 77,356 South Sudanese
refugees, with the majority settled close to the border with South Sudan in the
Dungu and Faradje territories, Haut-Uélé province.

17-10502

11/17

S/2017/565

50. Insecurity continues to hamper humanitarian access in parts of Ituri, North
Kivu, South Kivu, Kasaï, Kasaï Central and Lomami. Funding for aid fai led to keep
pace with growing humanitarian needs. As at 19 May, the Humanitarian Response
Plan was funded at slightly less than 20 per cent ($155 million out of the $812 million
needed). In consequence, several non-governmental organizations were compelled
to suspend their provision of assistance.
51. On 11 May, national health authorities reported a new outbreak of Ebola virus
disease in Likati, Bas-Uélé province, to the World Health Organization. As of
mid-June, a total of five confirmed and three probable cases had been reported. Four
of the victims survived and four died. MONUSCO and the United Nations system
are providing support to the Government, including through the establishment of a
logistical support bridge into the remote Likati territory. Prev entive measures have
been taken to reduce the risk of the spread of the disease across the border with the
Central African Republic, from which approximately 7,000 people have fled into the
northern Democratic Republic of the Congo. MONUSCO also developed its own
contingency plans.
52. The macroeconomic trend continued, and amid concerns about low foreign
reserves, the Congolese franc has rapidly depreciated, by 17 per cent, since January
2017. The deteriorating socioeconomic situation contributed to the h olding of a
general strike of civil servants and public companies on 5 April, with moderate
participation observed in Kinshasa and some provincial capitals. On 12 April, the
International Monetary Fund decided to condition financial support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the stabilization of the political situation. On
16 May, the Prime Minister, Bruno Tshibala, pledged to stabilize the country’s
economic situation and improve the business climate, develop the agricultural
sector, create employment opportunities, especially for women and youth, and
improve delivery of social services. On 26 May, the forecast for growth in 2017 of
gross domestic product (GDP) was revised downward to 3.5 per cent from the
previous figure of 4.9 per cent. On 15 June, the National Assembly adopted the
country’s budget for 2017-2018 in the amount of $7.9 billion.

III. Deployment of MONUSCO and implementation of
its mandate
53. As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2348 (2017),
MONUSCO has taken steps to reduce the number of its military personnel to
16,215. This objective will be attained with the repatriation, by 31 August, of an
infantry battalion of the North Kivu brigade and the additional repatriation of
76 staff officers and military observers. Similarly, in line with the request of the
Council, there is a continuation of efforts to transform the MONUSCO Force. The
Mission’s second rapidly deployable battalion became operational during the
reporting period, allowing the Force in North Kivu to minimize its static footprint
and increase its agility and responsiveness. In addition, MONUSCO is actively
pursuing the deployment of a military threat assessment unit, which will provide
significantly improved information and situational awareness. Efforts to increase the
Mission’s formed police units through inter-mission cooperation, as requested by
the Council, are ongoing. Issues regarding the specific conditions under which such
an increase could be achieved are being examined before a formal request for
support is submitted to the Council. Further adjustments of the military and civilian
components of MONUSCO will be undertaken during the strategic review requested
by the Council, which would pave the way for the phased and progressive exit of
the Mission.

12/17

17-10502

S/2017/565

54. MONUSCO continued to prepare for and proactively address risks linked to
the electoral process. Contingency plans, including at field office level, remain in
place. The Mission continues to maintain three military companies and two formed
police units in Kinshasa in order to provide a patrolling capacity and contribute to
the protection of civilians and United Nations staff, as well as premises. Moreover,
with the arrival of two rapidly deployable companies in Kananga, Kasaï Central, the
Uruguay battalion, which constitutes the Force reserve and which was deployed to
the area temporarily, has been relieved by a Pakistan battalion. As a result, the Force
reserve in Goma has now been reconstituted so as to allow for future redeployment
to areas of emerging threats. The MONUSCO police component continues to
provide training to the national police on public order management and respect for
human rights. It is also developing plans for the training of key units of the national
police, including the Légion nationale d’intervention and the Groupe mobile
d’intervention, which could contribute significantly to electoral security, the
protection of civilians and respect for human rights and political spa ce.
55. The Mission continued its efforts to reinforce the capacity of its partners to
promote and protect fundamental freedoms and monitor human rights violations and
restrictions on political space. Since March, MONUSCO has organized or
participated in at least 53 capacity-building activities for more than 2,000 persons,
mainly civil society activists, journalists, politico -administrative authorities, national
police officers and political actors, throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

IV. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
56. MONUSCO continued to implement strong prevention actions, including
training programmes for personnel, risk assessments of bases and camps, military
police deterrent patrols, and enforcement of strict curfew and out-of-bounds
regimes. The Mission is establishing further community-based complaint
mechanisms to improve its prevention and enforcement capacities, notably in
locations at a pronounced risk for sexual exploitation and abuse. Twel ve allegations
of perpetration of acts of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded during the
reporting period. Efforts are ongoing to broaden assistance and support to victims,
including through engagement with national authorities and organizations.

V. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
57. In addition to the killing of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, our two
colleagues of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, some
142 security and safety-related incidents affecting 13 female and 63 male United
Nations personnel were reported, compared with75 in the previous reporting period.
These included 59 criminal incidents involving the targeting of both national and
international personnel, 16 cases linked to civil unrest, 58 hazard-related cases and
nine incidents related to armed conflict. The heightened political tensions and
MONUSCO support to FARDC operations against armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo could lead to threats to United Natio ns personnel
and installations.

VI. Observations
58. Six months ago, when Mr. Kabila’s second and final term came to an end, the
signing by all key Congolese stakeholders of the 31 December 2016 agreement
helped to avert a potentially serious crisis. Beyond that initial and positive step,
17-10502

13/17

S/2017/565

however, months of follow-up discussions among political actors have delivered
neither the speedy implementation of the agreement the Congolese people had
hoped for, nor the all-inclusive transitional arrangements they had the right to
expect. In addition, a new Government has been inaugurated without the
participation of the Rassemblement opposition platform, which was among the main
signatories of the agreement. As violence worsens in the once peaceful western par t
of the country, while long-standing instability remains in areas of the eastern part, I
am increasingly concerned that the volatility associated with this combination of
political hurdles and security threats in the midst of a difficult economic situatio n
could derail the plans to hold elections in six months. This possibility, in turn,
would put the entire political transition at risk, fuelling discontent, frustration and
possibly violence. Unless political actors demonstrate renewed good faith and
political will to deliver on the promises they made to their people on New Year ’s
Eve, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is set to enter yet another highly
uncertain and potentially precarious period.
59. Halfway through the transition period, which began o n 1 January, I once again
strongly urge all stakeholders to adopt — as they have agreed to do — a
collaborative and consensual approach to the full implementation of the agreement,
with the aim of holding free, fair, peaceful and credible elections by Dece mber
2017. This entails intensifying efforts to ensure the inclusivity of all signatories of
the agreement in respect of its implementation, and especially in the process leading
to the appointment of the Chair of the National Council for Overseeing the El ectoral
Agreement and Process. However, dialogue among political actors must not become
an end in itself but rather a means for translating the agreements reached into
concrete and meaningful actions aimed at delivering peace and stability for the
country.
60. I further call upon partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
continue to support genuine efforts by national stakeholders towards achieving the
full implementation of the Agreement. I reiterate my call to countries that four years
ago signed the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to work towards the goal of achieving durable peace and
stability across their region. I urge international partners, including members of the
Security Council, to remain united and committed in sending clear messages on the
need for the expeditious implementation of the 31 December agreement and the
holding of elections. While preserving the stability of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is first and foremost the responsibility of its leaders and people, the
international community should continue play an active role as well.
61. I commend the Independent National Electoral Commission for the progress
made, with the active support of MONUSCO and other partners, in respect of the
voter registration process. The registration so far of over half of the eligible voters
is a welcome development. These efforts must continue and the process must remain
on track, including through ensuring that no eligible voters are disenf ranchised
through an incomplete process, notably in the Kasaї Central and Kasaї provinces
where the process has not yet commenced. I further encourage the Commission to
issue the long-awaited electoral calendar, which would provide clarity on the steps
ahead and allow partners, including the United Nations, to better determine the type
of support they need to provide. I strongly encourage the Congolese authorities to
fully implement without further delay the confidence -building measures agreed
upon months ago. These will contribute greatly to the establishment of conditions
conducive to the holding of credible and peaceful elections. I take note of the
authorities’ repeated commitment over the past months to funding the upcoming
electoral cycle, which it is estimated by the Commission will cost $1.3 billion.
Despite the budgetary difficulties facing the Government, it remains crucial that the
14/17

17-10502

S/2017/565

promised funds be disbursed as scheduled so as to ensure that the electoral process
proceeds as planned. Along the same lines, I call upon external partners to provide
the technical and financial support for the holding of these important elections.
62. I remain seriously concerned by the spread of insecurity in the western
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly across the Kasaï region, and the
persisting instability across numerous areas of the eastern part of the country. This
new landscape of instability poses serious threats to a growing number of civilians.
Many are once again being forced into a situation of displacement, including in
areas that had experienced a measure of stability in recent years. The spreading
violence continues to stretch the operational capacity of national security and
defence forces, notably in areas where challenges to State authorit y have been
rapidly increasing. I call upon all actors involved in the continuing violence to lay
down their arms and find a peaceful solution to the crisis.
63. I am deeply troubled by the continued increase in human rights violations,
including reports that 42 alleged mass graves have been identified in the Kasaï
provinces, coupled with a lack of progress in combating impunity. The situation is
such that the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has called for
the establishment of an independent international investigation on the human rights
situation in the Kasaï provinces. The Government is bound by the international
human rights and humanitarian treaties and norms that it has adhered to voluntary,
including those related to the conduct of military operations against armed groups.
It must hold its security forces to the highest standards in this regard. I strongly
condemn attacks by the Kamuina Nsapu militia against civilians, electoral workers,
government institutions, traditional authorities and security forces. I am concerned
by the lack of tangible progress regarding the investigations into the alleged grave
violations of human rights in the Kasaï provinces involving members of the security
forces as well as the Kamuina Nsapu militia. I call upon the Congolese authorities
to act with swiftness in regard to conducting investigations and judicial proceedings
so as to bring the perpetrators of human rights violations to justice and combat
impunity. There can be no sustainable solution to violence without accountability.
64. On 12 March, amid the deteriorating situation in Kasaï Central, the United
Nations lost two of its own, Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp, our colleagues of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Zaida and Michael
were killed while seeking to deepen our common knowledge of the tragedy
unfolding in that region and across the country. Their aim was to help bring peace to
its people. My thoughts and those of the entire United Nations family go out to their
families and loved ones. I urge the Congolese authorities to complete a thorough
and credible investigation into their killing, and to bring to justice all those who
share responsibility for this crime. I am determined to do the utmost in this regard.
Already, in line with the Organization’s policies, a Board of Inquiry is currently
investigating the circumstances of the killing of our colleagues.
65. MONUSCO has made progress in adjusting its priorities and posture with
respect to supporting the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement and improving its response to existing and emerging security challenges.
The strategic review requested by the Security Council will provide MONUSCO
with further recommendations, including on how to adapt the Mission’s mandate to
specific needs in the post-elections phase. With a strong focus on the political
process, MONUSCO, in coordination with the United Nations country team and the
international community, will continue to support the implementation of the
agreement, which still charts the clearest path towards both the holding of elections
and stability. My Special Representative, supported by my Special Envoy for the
Great Lakes Region, will continue through his good offices to garner national,

17-10502

15/17

S/2017/565

regional and international support for the advance towards credible, inclusive and
peaceful elections in the shortest time frame possible.
66. I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my Special Representative,
Maman Sambo Sidikou, for his tireless efforts in support of the achievement of
peace and stability in the country. I pay tribute to the women and men of
MONUSCO, the United Nations country team and troop- and police-contributing
countries for their dedicated service in often difficult conditions. Their dedication
and sacrifice are crucial in helping to make a difference for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am also grateful to my Special Representative
for the Great Lakes Region, Saïd Djinnit, for his role in the subregion wit h respect
to supporting the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My appreciation is also
extended to the African Union, the Southern African Development Community, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the European Union, as
well as other international and regional partners, including donors, and
non-governmental organizations, for their invaluable support to the Demo cratic
Republic of the Congo.

16/17

17-10502

S/2017/565

17-10502

17/17
