asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6888

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6888th meeting
Thursday, 13 December 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Zhang Junan
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-64730 (E)

*1264730*

S/PV.6888

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to present to the Council the 90-day report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of that
resolution.
(spoke in English)
The report covers the period from 13 September
to 4 December 2012. During that time, the Committee
held two meetings and conducted additional work using
the non-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph
15 of the guidelines for the conduct of its work.
At the informal consultations of 23 October, the
Committee continued its discussion of the Panel’s final
report of 12 June 2012 (S/2012/395), which is available on
the Committee’s website. Several delegations proposed
that the Committee adopt a series of implementation
assistance notices that could aid Member States in
implementing the Security Council measures, taking
into account the experts’ findings during their 2011 and
2012 mandates.
On 26 November, the Coordinator of the Panel
of Experts briefed the Committee on the Panel’s
midterm report of 9 November, which was submitted in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2049 (2012).
The Committee heard additional information about the
Panel’s current activities.

2

In the course of the discussion that followed the
oral briefing, members of the Committee exchanged
their views on the midterm report, as well as on the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Some members expressed concerns about
possible non-compliance with those resolutions, which
may have led to transfers of material under sanctions
from Iran to States in the region, while some members
also addressed the need to ensure that sanctions were
playing a constructive role in supporting diplomatic
efforts and dialogue. During a subsequent discussion,
some Committee members requested the Panel
assemble for the Committee’s review a compilation of
publicly available statements recently made by Iranian
officials and alleged recipients of Iranian military
assistance regarding potential violations of paragraph 5
of resolution 1747 (2007). In that regard, the Committee
intends to ensure that any work undertaken regarding
reported violations will be conducted in an impartial
and objective manner, based on verified information
and solid evidence.
The Committee also discussed the possibility
of issuing a guidance note to aide States in their
submission of national implementation reports, and
sending letters to States requesting them to provide, on
a voluntary basis, additional identifiers for individuals
subject to travel bans and asset freezes. Those issues
remain under consideration by the Committee.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received a number of communications relating to
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
measures.
In a letter dated 9 October, four Member States
submitted a report stating that the July 2012 Great
Prophet 7 exercise, during which Iran tested Shahab-1
short-range ballistic missiles and Shahab-3 mediumrange ballistic missiles, constituted a violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). That case is
currently being investigated by the Panel.
As mentioned during my previous briefing to the
Council, in September (see S/PV.6839), the Committee
sought information from several States relating to the
inspection and seizure, on 15 March 2011, of three
shipping containers of arms and arms-related materiel
onboard the ship M/V Victoria. I am pleased to inform
the Council that three States have already responded
to the Committee’s letters and offered helpful details.
I would like to take this opportunity to encourage all
States to cooperate with the Committee and its Panel
12-64730

S/PV.6888

of Experts in the investigation of possible sanctions
violations.
In response to a query from an international
organization, the Committee found that the described
project, aimed at assisting Iran develop its technical
capacity for intellectual property rights protection, did
not violate the sanctions measures.
Lastly, the Committee received three notifications:
two from a Member State with reference to paragraph 5
of resolution 1737 (2006) concerning the delivery of
items for use in the nuclear power plant in Bushehr,
Iran; and one from another State, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph
4 of resolution 1747 (2007), in connection with the
unfreezing of funds in order to make a payment due
under a contract entered into prior to the listing of an
entity.
On that note, I conclude my report. I thank again
the members of the Committee for their cooperation
and assistance and the Secretariat for its support to me.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make a statement.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, let
me thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his briefing
and to commend him and his team for two years of
intensive work leading the sanctions Committee on Iran.
Under his able leadership, the Committee managed to
advance the implementation of resolution 1929 (2010)
and contributed to the efforts of the international
community to seek clarification on the nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
Let me also thank the Panel of Experts for its
useful work in assisting the Committee. In that context,
I want to emphasize the importance of acting on the
recommendations of the Panel’s final report (S/2012/395,
annex), including the designation of specified entities
that have engaged in proliferation activities or
prohibited arms export actions. The Committee shall
continue to issue guidance to Member States. We are
convinced that one of the best ways to do so is to adopt
implementation assistance notices that would advance
compliance with Security Council resolutions.
Regrettably, the resumption of serious and credible
talks with Iran has not yet materialized, nor has Iran
fully complied with all its international obligations
12-64730

as set out in Security Council and International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors’
resolutions. In particular, Iran continues to fail to
provide the necessary cooperation to enable the Agency
to credibly assess that all nuclear material in Iran is for
peaceful purposes. Consequently, Portugal reiterates
its serious and deepening concern with the continuing
expansion of Iran’s nuclear activities as reflected in the
most recent IAEA report (GOV/2012/55) as well as with
the fact that Iran continues to deny access to the Parchin
military site. The 16 November report also stated that
Iran continued to install more centrifuges for uranium
enrichment at Fordo and Natanz sites. Despite the
intensified dialogue between the IAEA and Iran since
last January, the report also concludes that no concrete
results have been achieved in resolving outstanding
issues. Hence, without thoroughly addressing all these
pending issues in close cooperation with the IAEA,
Iran will fail to restore international confidence in the
peaceful nature of its nuclear activities.
Portugal calls on the Iranian authorities to act
responsibly and to comply with their international
obligations, thereby bringing sanctions to an end.
Portugal reaffirms its longstanding commitment to
a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue in
accordance with the dual-track approach. In support
of that approach, my country welcomes the statement
of the E3+3 foreign ministers on 27 September in New
York and fully endorses the efforts led by the High
Representative of the European Union on behalf of
the E3+3 in that regard. We sincerely hope that Iran
will commit to serious negotiation process, exercise
flexibility and reach early agreement on concrete
confidence-building steps.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank
Ambassador Osorio and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) for their continued
work, and pay tribute to Ambassador Osorio and his
team in the Mission of Colombia and to the support that
they have received from the Panel of Experts during his
two years as Chair of that important Committee of the
Security Council.
The United Kingdom, along with the international
community at large, remains deeply concerned about
Iran’s nuclear programme. The resolution adopted by
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on 13 September called on Iran
to cooperate urgently with the IAEA. The overwhelming

3

S/PV.6888

support for that resolution demonstrated the depth of
international concern.
Iran must urgently address the international
community’s serious concerns over its nuclear activity.
Assurance of Iran’s peaceful intentions has not been
forthcoming. Iran continues to expand its enrichment
capacity, in direct contravention of resolutions of the
IAEA Board of Governors and the Security Council,
and has consistently failed to cooperate with the
Agency to address the possible military dimensions of
its nuclear programme.
Despite this, the United Kingdom remains fully
committed to finding a peaceful, negotiated solution to
this issue. The E3+3 has met with Iran at the political
and expert levels on four occasions since April, and it
remains active in pursuit of further dialogue. While
the E3+3 is entering into these talks in good faith,
negotiations cannot continue indefinitely. Iran must
engage seriously with this process. Until it does, the
international community will apply increasing pressure.
Here in New York, it is the work of the 1737
Committee that remains at the forefront of that
pressure — a symbol of international support for
efforts at peacefully preventing proliferation activity.
In this regard, I welcome the work of the Committee
in preparing implementation assistance notices. This
essential work will help to ensure that Member States
are fully equipped to implement Security Council
measures against Iran.
The role of the Panel of Experts remains crucial
in making sure that United Nations sanctions are
adhered to in full. We strongly welcome its work
with international organizations and experts, and we
champion its efforts to investigate alleged sanctions
violations. We look forward to hearing the results of
the two investigations currently under way.
We remain appalled by credible information that
Iran is providing technical advice, financial support,
equipment and weapons to aid Al-Assad’s brutal and
violent repression of the Syrian people. This is in stark
contravention of the will of the Syrian people and a
reminder of Iran’s hypocrisy in claiming to support
freedom in the Arab world.
We also have serious concerns about Iranian
support for groups such as Hizbullah, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and Hamas. Iranian Majlis Speaker Ali
Larijani described the Gaza resistance as “just a small
part of Iran’s power”. Such support is unacceptable
4

and only serves to undermine regional security. Arms
supplies to Hizbullah are contrary to the United
Nations embargo on the export of weapons by Iran,
and recent confirmation by a commander of the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps of the transfer of
Iranian military technology to Hamas would indicate
a further violation of the Council’s resolutions and of
international law. We support the Committee and the
Panel of Experts in investigating these transgressions.
Iran’s leaders, if they do the right thing, can bring
all sanctions to an end and, in doing so, help Iran to
realize the benefits of a civil nuclear programme.
They have a clear choice. They can either address
international concerns through negotiation and action,
or face further pressure and isolation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
Ambassador Néstor Osorio, for his briefing on the work
of the Committee. We note the high professionalism
and effectiveness of the leadership of the Chair and the
Colombian delegation as a whole. Under the Colombian
chairmanship, the Committee has acted in a balanced
and objective manner and has not overstepped its
mandate. That must continue in the future.
We thank the Committee’s Panel of Experts for
its concrete assistance. The Russian delegation has
always believed that the Panel must work impartially
and independently and be guided in its conclusions and
evaluations only by reliable and objective information.
Russia fully upholds all Security Council
resolutions concerning Iran. We remain convinced
that the effectiveness of the sanctions regime, and of
the collective and united activities of the international
community as a whole to settle the situation of Iran’s
nuclear programme, are undermined by unilateral
restrictions applied in parallel. In a number of cases,
they are extraterritorial in nature, which is categorically
unacceptable under international law.
With respect to ensuring the implementation of
sanctions, we stress that the 1737 Committee has
received no reports recently of any implication of Iran
in the illegal trafficking of conventional weapons, as
noted in the midterm report of the Panel of Experts.
Russia has consistently called for a political and
diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue, and
believes that there is no alternative to a negotiated
solution. Efforts to that end must be undertaken on the
12-64730

S/PV.6888

basis of the principles of consistency and reciprocity and
in accordance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. We call for intensified dialogue
between Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the continuation of the Six-Party
talks. We hope that the next round of talks between Iran
and the IAEA on the so-called proposed investigation
will allow the two sides to conclude work on a document
on modalities and to begin practical activities on that
basis as soon as possible.
In cooperation with its partners, Russia shall
continue to strive to achieve progress towards a
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mr. Briens (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his quarterly briefing and
welcome the outstanding work of the Colombian
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) over the past two years.
I also wish to thank the Panel of Experts, whose
investigations and recommendations are highly useful
to the Committee and the Council.
The Chair’s quarterly report and the midterm
report of the Panel of Experts that were just presented
to us demonstrate once again that Iran continues not
to comply with its international obligations and that
it is pursuing both its illicit nuclear activities and its
efforts to circumvent sanctions. Iran disseminates its
conventional weapons and its missiles at the risk of
destabilizing the entire region.
Despite six resolutions of the Council, Iran continues
to enrich its uranium to 20 per cent and 3.5 per cent,
while at the same time quantitatively and qualitatively
increasing its production capacity, although we can
identify no credible civilian purpose therefor. At the
same time, it pursues its heavy water-related activities
without providing access to the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), as it must do.
Furthermore, it has been over a year since the
Agency’s Board of Governors addressed a very clear
demand that Iran respond to its questions concerning the
possible military dimensions of its nuclear programme.
We all expect that the meeting to be held today in
Tehran between Iranian authorities and the IAEA will
allow the Agency to obtain the responses it requires,
but we are under no illusions. We have all been able
to follow for ourselves Iran’s intensive activities in
Parchin since the Agency first requested access. The
IAEA recently deemed that those activities were of a

12-64730

nature to compromise its capacity to conduct effective
verification when it eventually gains access.
I also wish to highlight Iran’s repeated violations
of the arms embargo imposed by the Council. These
violations fuel the spiral of violence in the Near East
and Middle East. We have already expressed our
concern and firmly condemned the transfer of weapons
from the Islamic Republic of Iran to Syria — several
such cases were highlighted by the Panel of Experts in
their June report (see S/2012/395, annex).
As we mentioned in the previous debate
(see S/PV.6839), we would like the Committee to
designate Yas Air Cargo and SAD Import-Export
Company as soon as possible, as they have been
implicated in arms transfers to the regime in Damascus.
Since those revelations, we have learned that weapons
have also been transferred from Iran to Syria in aircraft
using Iraqi air space. Those activities not only violate
Security Council resolutions, but have allowed the
Damascus regime to continue to massacre its own
people.
We have also learned directly from Iranian officials
that Tehran had transferred weapons and ballistic
material to non-State groups in Gaza. A flagrant
example was the launch from Gaza of a Fajr-5 missile
that originated from the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The Panel of Experts, which has been requested to
investigate those issues, should shed light on the matter
so that the Committee is able to take all necessary
action. Those actions represent clear violations of the
arms embargo and should not remain unpunished.
I also would make note of our concern about the
Iranian ballistic programme, which has continued
despite bans agreed to by the Council. I recall that,
on 9 October, together with the United States, United
Kingdom and Germany, France notified the Committee
of the Shahab-3 missile tests carried out by the Islamic
Revolutionary Guards last summer. That was a clear
violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) that
we must therefore sanction.
It is striking to note that the North Korean launch
was the object of unanimous condemnation by the
international community, with the near sole exception
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which welcomed it. The
latter is also conducting a space programme for no other
purpose than to validate military-use technologies.
Faced with the challenge of repeated violations
by the Islamic Republic of Iran of Security Council
5

S/PV.6888

resolutions, we must remain united and firm. Dialogue
will continue and we are committed to it. The many
meetings of the E3+3 Governments with Iran in 2012
bear witness to that.
But faced with our serious proposals, Tehran has not
been constructive and will not negotiate seriously with
us. As long as Iran does not abide by its obligations, we
must ensure the full application of the sanctions. They
have a genuine impact on the ground and we believe that
such pressure is likely to lead the Iranian authorities to
eventually resume serious negotiations.
Iran must clearly recognize that dialogue is in its
best interest, rather than isolation.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We join other
delegations in thanking Ambassador Néstor Osorio
for his final 90-day report to the Council. We deeply
appreciate his able stewardship of the Committee and
his valuable contribution to its work.
We have taken note of the recent report
(GOV/2012/55) of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on the implementation of the IAEA
safeguards regime in Iran pursuant to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Ten days from now, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) will
have completed six years of existence. The Council
and the Committee have invested time and energy to
address the Iranian nuclear issue. It may be worthwhile
for the Council to reflect and review the objectives and
strategy on the subject, even as it promotes the full
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions by
all States.
In our view, the potential for confrontation over
Iran’s nuclear programme has not diminished. Any
exacerbation will further destabilize the immediate
neighbourhood of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the entire region. Given the delicate and complex
environment in the region, Pakistan does not want an
escalation of tension in an already volatile region. We
therefore reaffirm the need for dialogue and diplomacy.
We believe that a peaceful resolution of the
crisis is still possible on the basis of reciprocal
confidence-building measures, as well as the necessary
steps to ensure Iran’s right to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
As party to the NPT, Iran is obligated to fulfil its
responsibilities contained in the Treaty. Similarly, Iran,
6

as a member of the IAEA, is required to fully cooperate
with the Agency within the framework of its Safeguards
Agreement.
While Iran should fulfil its legal obligations under
the NPT and the IAEA statute, its rights under those
instruments should also be respected. We urge Iran
to extend full cooperation to the IAEA to resolve all
outstanding issues.
We encourage Iran and the group made up of the
five permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany to stay the course of meaningful engagement,
build on the talks they have already held this year
and deepen the diplomatic process for a negotiated
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue.
We continue to support the view that the work
and activities of the Panel of Experts should conform
strictly to its mandate. The Panel’s work must be guided
by the broader but interlinked objectives outlined
in the Council’s resolutions, namely, the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime and advancing
a diplomatic solution.
We take note of the midterm report of the Panel
and welcome the ongoing discussions in the Committee
on the Panel’s 2012 final report (S/2012/395, annex)
recommendations.
We look forward to further deliberations in the
weeks ahead. We reiterate our view that Security
Council sanctions should not be pursued as an end in
itself. A negotiated solution to the unresolved issues
would be facilitated if the Council, the Committee and
the Panel of Experts acted in unison and maintained a
balance between sanctions and negotiations.
Over the years, the Panel of Experts has continued
to undertake extensive outreach efforts globally, while
preparing various reports and recommendations.
There is a need to broaden the composition of the
Panel’s membership, to include in particular members
from developing countries, in order to enhance
awareness about, and ensure the implementation of, the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The method method for appointing the Panel’s
experts also needs revision. It must be harmonized
with the United Nations core values of transparency
and impartiality. We hope that the Council will
carefully examine those issues to develop the necessary
recommendations.

12-64730

S/PV.6888

Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Néstor
Osorio, of Colombia for his 90-day report. We reiterate
our full support for the work of the Committee. We
commend Ambassador Osorio and the Colombian
delegation for the manner in which the Committee has
been chaired for the past two years.
We also wish to thank the Panel of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1929
(2010) for its midterm report, which was submitted to
the Committee last month.
The work of the Panel in presenting its findings
and using accurate, verifiable information is important
to support the work of the Committee and ensure
the credibility of its actions. We hope that the good
working relationship that exists between the Panel and
the Committee and guides its direction will continue.
South Africa congratulates the Committee on its
efforts to achieve consensus on the recommendations
contained in the final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2012/395, annex). We encourage further discussion
on implementation assistance notices in a manner
that is conducive to the proper implementation of the
relevant sanctions resolutions.
The constructive spirit in the Committee is critical
to supporting the ongoing discussions between Iran and
interested parties over concerns about Iran’s nuclear
activities. The Committee’s work must reflect a holistic
approach to the sanctions resolutions and the will of the
international community. As we have stated before, our
task must be to operate within the larger international
framework of the nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation regime. The implementation of the
sanctions against the Islamic Republic of Iran should
reflect that and take into account the different priorities
of States in the implementation efforts.
We continue to encourage progress towards a
peaceful resolution of the concerns over Iran’s nuclear
activities. The central role played by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in trying to resolve
the outstanding issues regarding those activities is
indispensable. We urge Iran to comply with the relevant
decisions of the IAEA and with its obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, South Africa wishes to stress
that a sustainable solution will be one that restores
international confidence in the peaceful nature of the
12-64730

nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran
while respecting Iran’s right, consistent with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for his presentation of the
90-day report of the Committee covering the period
from 13 September to 4 December.
During the reporting period, the Committee
continued its discussion of the final report of the
Panel of Experts (see S/2012/395). We take note of
the Panel’s midterm report, which was submitted in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2049 (2012),
as well as a number of communications related to
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
measures. We also note the Panel’s visit to several
Member States and the participation of its experts
in a number of conferences and seminars during the
reporting period. It is essential that the Panel continue
its outreach activities, which play an important role
in increasing the number of national implementation
reports from Member States.
We look forward to continued discussion on the
possibility of the Committee issuing a guidance note to
aid States in their submission of national implementation
reports and the implementation assistance notice that
could assist Member States in implementing Security
Council measures.
In accordance with its international obligations,
Azerbaijan has taken all the necessary measures to
prevent the use of its territory as a transit route for
the illicit trafficking of items and materials related
to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and weapons
technology.
It is obvious that the issues concerning our immediate
neighbour Iran are of particular importance for my
country. The recent report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) of 16 November (GOV/2012/55)
has shown that outstanding issues regarding the Iranian
nuclear programme remain unresolved. We support the
right of any country to develop its nuclear industry for
peaceful purposes, in full accordance with the relevant
international obligations. It is therefore important that
all the necessary steps be taken by the Government of
Iran to build international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

7

S/PV.6888

It is encouraging that, during the reporting period,
Iran reaffirmed its commitment to dialogue with the
IAEA and invited the Agency’s delegation to visit
Tehran. We hope that the visit, which commenced today,
will help move the resolution of the problem forward. It
is essential to continue dialogue and cooperation on the
issues on which progress is urgent for regional stability.
We encourage further efforts aimed at resolving the
issues of concern peacefully and in a constructive
manner.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank Ambassador Néstor
Osorio for his presentation of the 90-day report on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). Now, at the end of
his mandate, I congratulate him and his team for having
chaired the Committee so ably over the past two years.
During the period under review, the Committee
continued to diligently carry out the tasks with which
it was charged. It did so with transparency, impartiality
and objectivity, without undermining its mandate. We
believe that it should continue to do so in the future.
In addition, we recognize the importance of
the assistance and cooperation that the Committee
provides to Member States. We welcome the work of
the Committee, which continued to consider national
reports, requests and complaints regarding alleged
violations on the part of Member States.
Concerning the work of the Panel of Experts, we
take note of its midterm report, which was issued in
November 2011. We appreciate the work that the Panel
has been doing, including its information and awarenessraising activities, and we call on it to continue to work
in strict compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
With respect to the Iranian nuclear programme,
allow us to briefly highlight three points.
First, Guatemala has always supported the right of
all States to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
in accordance with the relevant international treaties.
Iran must fully cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) in order to restore confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme.
Secondly, the Security Council has received the
most recent report of the Director General of the IAEA,
in which he once again states that Iran has continued to

8

accelerate its nuclear programme. This situation remains
a source of great concern for us. We endorse the call by
the Agency, and we urge Iran, in accordance with the
requirements in the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and of the IAEA Board of Governors, to adopt
measures for the full implementation of the safeguards
agreement and other obligations and commitments
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and, above all, to submit to inspections. In
that connection, we note with satisfaction that United
Nations inspectors arrived today in Tehran for a round
of negotiations, the first since August.
Thirdly, we are encouraged by the recent
conversations between the E3+3 Governments and
Iran. At their third round in Moscow, held last June, the
parties agreed to continue dialogue, and we therefore
encourage all those participating in that process to
work diligently for progress and a positive result, which
is what the rest of the international community expects.
We believe it is important to continue to seek a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear question,
in accordance with the dual-track strategy.
Lastly, Guatemala will continue to actively
participate in the Committee for the purpose of
contributing to a sustainable solution.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): May I join others in
thanking Ambassador Néstor Osorio, not only for his
briefing but also for his outstanding work in chairing
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) over the past two years.
As Ambassador Osorio leaves, the work of the 1737
Committee continues to be of crucial importance.
In June 2010, about two and a half years ago, the
Council adopted resolution 1929 (2010). Since then,
Iran has neither been willing to enter into negotiations
on substantial issues during various rounds of talks
with the E3+3 Governments nor taken concrete
confidence-building measures in order to convince the
international community that its nuclear programme is
exclusively peaceful in nature. Nevertheless, the E3+3
remain committed to pursuing a diplomatic solution.
The E3+3 intend to resume negotiations with Iran in
the very near future.
The Iranian nuclear programme remains, in fact,
a major threat to international peace and security.
The latest report (GOV/2012/55) of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) does not alleviate our
concerns, just the contrary. Iran continues to expand

12-64730

S/PV.6888

its enrichment capacity at Natanz and Fordow. On this
very day, talks between the IAEA and Iranian officials
are taking place in Tehran. It appears that Iran has once
more refused to grant IAEA access to Parchin. Even
if the long-overdue access should finally be granted,
extensive activities carried out by Iran on that site will
have seriously undermined the Agency’s ability to
conduct effective inspections. Of the utmost concern is
the fact that due to Iran’s persistent lack of cooperation,
no progress whatsoever has been made in clarifying the
possible military dimensions of its nuclear programme.
During the last Security Council briefing, several
members expressed their deep concern regarding
conventional arms transfers from Iran (see S/PV.6839).
The fact that the Sanctions Committee’s Panel of
Experts has not received any reports of intercepted
conventional arms transfers involving Iran in the
current reporting period should not necessarily be
interpreted as non-occurrence of such sanctions
violations. Our concerns have not been dispelled. In
fact, recent reports about illegal arms flows from Iran
to Syria via air through Iraq underscore the pressing
relevance of that issue. Moreover, those reports add
to various public statements, by both Iranian officials
and Palestinian groups such as the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and Hamas, indicating that Iran provided relevant
technical assistance for building arms and rockets
that were designed to target Israel. We strongly urge
the Committee and its Panel of Experts to follow
those preoccupying reports very closely and to act
accordingly.
We remain convinced that high vigilance on Iran’s
proliferation activities is necessary. The Committee
and its Panel of Experts have an important role to play
in promoting the overall acceptance and credibility
of this body in ensuring worldwide implementation
of the sanctions. Against that background, we are
confident that the Committee will soon conclude its
considerations on two designations recommended by
the Panel of Experts. Once again, the Iranian entities to
be designated, Yas Air cargo Airline and SAD ImportExport Company, are clearly linked to arms trafficking
with Syria.
In the same context, Germany welcomes
the valuable implementation assistance note on
conventional arms currently under consideration by
the Sanctions Committee. Its publication would be a
further step towards making the sanctions regime more
efficient. We are hopeful that other implementation

12-64730

assistance notes incorporating some more of the Panel’s
recommendations will follow suit in the near future.
The Panel of Experts submitted its midterm report to
the Committee on 9 November 2011. We have examined
it carefully and find it valuable and substantiated. We
would like to express our appreciation for the Panel’s
work and support it by sharing our experiences.
Therefore, we have invited the Panel to again visit
Germany from 17 to 20 December in order to discuss
matters relevant to its mandate.
Iran urgently needs to convince the international
community that its nuclear programme is exclusively
peaceful. We are convinced that a diplomatic solution
is possible and that negotiations with the E3+3 can
yield results. Yet the onus is on Iran, and our patience
cannot be unlimited. If Iran continues to disregard its
international obligations, it will face the increasing
costs of its continued obstruction.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today
and for his active and effective leadership of this critical
committee.
Iran’s nuclear programme continues to threaten
regional and international security. The latest news
from Vienna on Iran’s nuclear progress underscores
that threat. According to the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Iran
completed installation of all centrifuges at the Fordow
site, its previously covert hardened underground
facility. That will significantly expand Iran’s ability to
enrich uranium.
Meanwhile, Iran continues its efforts to sanitize the
Parchin site, which the IAEA has associated with highexplosives testing. Director General Amano underscores
that Iran’s actions have seriously undermined the
IAEA’s ability to conduct effective verification. He has
also said that no concrete results have been achieved to
resolve the outstanding issues. Iran’s actions continue
to contravene multiple resolutions of the Security
Council and the IAEA, and demonstrate Iran’s ongoing
defiance of the international community.
We welcome recent dialogue between Iran and
the IAEA, but those talks must produce results. IAEA
officials are meeting today on a structured approach
to resolving the outstanding questions regarding Iran’s
nuclear programme. We hope that Iran will finally
be forthcoming. But whether or not an agreement is
reached, given Iran’s existing legal obligations there
9

S/PV.6888

are no excuses for it not to cooperate immediately with
the IAEA on the substance of the Agency’s concerns.
Iran cannot continue its approach of denial, deception
and distraction. Now is the time to demand Iran’s full
cooperation, full compliance and full commitment
to resolve outstanding questions about its nuclear
programme.
Given Iran’s ongoing breach of its obligations,
the international community must make good on our
commitment to fully and aggressively enforce the
sanctions that the Security Council has imposed. The
full implementation of those measures will reduce
Iran’s ability to advance its nuclear programme, support
terrorism and destabilize the region, thereby creating
more time and space to pursue a comprehensive and
negotiated solution through diplomacy.
We urge the Committee and the Panel of Experts
to accelerate their critical work in 2013 and to assist
Member States as much as possible in fulfilling their
obligations to implement the sanctions. We further
encourage the Committee and the Panel to investigate
thoroughly and respond vigorously to any report of
sanctions violations. We also must all be mindful of our
responsibility as Member States to share information
with both the Committee and the Panel to facilitate their
work. Furthermore, we reiterate that the Committee
should implement the recommendations contained
in the Panel’s final report of June 2012 (S/2012/395,
annex), including the imposition of targeted sanctions
on individuals and companies that facilitate Iran’s
evasion of sanctions.
Iran’s flagrant proliferation of conventional
arms constitutes a growing threat and makes the
Committee’s work all the more urgent. In recent
weeks, Iranian officials have publically acknowledged
exporting military equipment in blatant violation
of resolution 1747 (2007), which prohibits all arms
exports from Iran. Despite the sanctions in place, Iran
continues its well documented pattern of arms exports
to the Al-Assad regime in Syria, which uses them to
slaughter the Syrian people, and to militants in Gaza,
who use them to terrorize Israeli civilians, as we saw
just a few weeks ago.
The Committee and the Panel should intensify
their focus on Iranian arms smuggling and find ways
to stem the flow. The States in the region must also
do their part. Two years ago, the Council included in
resolution 1929 (2010) new provisions for States to
inspect suspicious cargo on their territories and to seize
10

and dispose of banned items. Every State is obligated to
stop Iran’s arms smuggle across its territory, whether
trans-shipment occurs by land, sea or air. To comply
with their international obligations, Iran’s neighbours
should increase the number of cargo inspections and
deny overflight requests by aircraft suspected of
carrying illicit cargo in violation of United Nations
resolutions. Iran’s consistent refusal to meet its
obligations and build international confidence in its
nuclear activities constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security today.
Our first priority remains to prevent Iran from
acquiring a nuclear weapon. The United States,
working with our partners in the group made up of the
five permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany (P5+1), is fully committed to achieving that
goal through a comprehensive approach of pressure and
engagement. We have not given up on diplomacy, but
Iran’s repeated obfuscations means that the international
community will continue to apply increasing pressure
aimed at changing the regime’s calculus. A durable
solution must roll back Iran’s most alarming nuclear
activities, including its enrichment and stockpiling of
uranium to 20 per cent and continued activity at the
Fordo site. In exchange, the P5+1 is willing to take
reciprocal steps to address Iran’s expressed concerns.
We want, and are working toward, a negotiated solution,
but the choice to engage constructively lies with the
Iranian regime.
Its failure to respond to the offers of the P5+1
would be a setback for Iran, the region and the wider
world. Working together, the international community
must convince Iran to choose engagement not isolation,
transparency not secrecy, and stability not discord.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), as well as for his commendable
work at the head of the Committee.
We also take note of the latest report of the Board of
Governors (GOV/2012/55) of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation of the
Islamic Republic of Iran’s Safeguards Agreement to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
as well as the midterm report of the Panel of Experts
established by resolution 1929 (2010).
The efforts of the international community over
the past 12 months with respect to Iran’s nuclear

12-64730

S/PV.6888

programme have not led to success, despite the stepping
up of diplomatic initiatives such as the activities carried
out by the E3+3 group. In its resolution GOV/2011/69,
the Board of Governors underscored the importance for
both Iran and the IAEA of intensifying their dialogue in
order to urgently resolve the most critical pending issues.
Iran was called upon to engage without preconditions
in talks aimed at re-establishing trust with respect to
the wholly peaceful nature of its programme. In the
final analysis, talks between the Agency and Iranian
authorities did not lead to the hoped for results.
The reports of both the IAEA and the Panel
of Experts note unequivocally that there has been
no agreement on a structured approach to resolve
questions relating to possible military dimensions of
Iran’s nuclear programme, and that there has not been a
positive response from Iran with respect to the request
for access to the Parchin site.
Concerning this situation, which continues to
erode a climate of trust, Togo would like once again
to call on the Islamic Republic of Iran not only to
honour its commitments as a party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons but also to
pursue good-faith negotiations with the E3+3.
We note to Iran’s commitment, reiterated on
1 November, to hold a dialogue with the IAEA. We
hope that the meeting in Tehran being held with the
Agency today will allow for an advance in cooperation
between the two parties.
To conclude, I would like to acknowledge the work
of the Group of Experts established by resolution 1929
(2010), which, through consultations, inspections,
investigations and outreach, has reminded States of
the need to fulfil their obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the Iranian nuclear
issue, namely, the implementation of sanctions in
the areas of export controls, customs, sea and air
transportation, finance and a ban on travel, as well as
to provide reports on such measures.
Togo is particularly pleased that, in May 2013, it
will host the regional seminar mentioned in the final
paragraph of the report of the Group of Experts. That
event will allow the countries of Central and West Africa
to discuss the measures that should be taken to comply
with the sanctions regime of the United Nations on the
issue and to adopt the necessary recommendations.
Mr. Zhang Junan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ambassador Osorio for this briefing.
12-64730

Over the past two years, Ambassador Osorio and his
team have made great efforts to advance the work of
the Committee, for which China expresses its thanks.
China always attaches great importance to the
work of the Committee and will continue to closely
cooperate with other members of the Committee to
enable the Committee to fulfil its responsibilities in
a balanced, pragmatic and effective matter. China has
taken note of the midterm report submitted by of the
Panel of Experts, acknowledges the efforts made by its
members, and hopes that they will continue to carry
out their work in a rigorous and appropriate manner
according to the mandate of the resolution and under
the guidance of the Committee.
The Iranian nuclear issue is of concern as regards
the authority of the international non-proliferation
regime and peace and stability in the Middle East
region. Because of the complexity and importance of
the issue, the international community must seek a
comprehensive, long-term and appropriate solution.
In that connection, the right of Iran to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy as a State party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons should be
respected. All parties, including Iran, should fulfil their
international obligations, including those contained in
Council resolutions.
At the same time, the international community
should relentlessly conduct dialogue, cooperation and
diplomatic talks towards a peaceful settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue. Over the past year, China and
other concerned Member States have made productive
efforts towards relaunching the dialogue over the
Iranian nuclear programme and setting it on the right
track.
In the current context of major changes in the
situation in the region, it is all the more important to
firmly maintain and promote the process of dialogue.
The dialogue has currently entered the substantive
stage, and the parties should continue to work under
the principle of gradual progress and mutual respect by
showing greater goodwill, flexibility and pragmatism,
as well as enhanced mutual trust through engagement.
They should seek common ground and solve their
differences in pursuit of a realistic and sensible
settlement.
We also hope that Iran and the International
Atomic Energy Agency will maintain and enhance
their dialogue and cooperation, and agree as soon

11

S/PV.6888

as possible on an action plan aimed at resolving
outstanding issues. The relevant Council resolutions
should be comprehensively implemented, but sanctions
are not their final goal. China is a firm supporter of
diplomatic solutions, and is not in favour of putting
excessive pressure or imposing new sanctions on Iran.
We always oppose the use or threat of force. China
will maintain an objective, equitable and responsible
approach, working tirelessly for peaceful negotiations
and playing its own role in preserving the common
interests of the international community.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio
for presenting the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). Since
this is his last briefing to the Council, I would like to put
on record our commendation of Ambassador Osorio’s
very able stewardship of the Committee over the past
two years and of the professionalism with which the
Committee has fulfilled its mandate.
I would also like thank the Panel of Experts for
its midterm report submitted to the 1737 Committee
last month. While we are studying it, we appreciate
the Panel’s work, including its outreach activities. We
encourage it to continue its work in strict accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
in an independent, objective, transparent and impartial
manner. The Panel should also continue the practice of
briefing the Committee regularly on all its activities.
We have taken note of the report submitted by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
November on the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Safeguards
Agreement and the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions on Iran (GOV/2012/55), in
accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 1929 (2010).
We hope that agreement on a structured approach will
allow Iran and the Agency to start substantive work on
the outstanding issues.
India has consistently supported the right of all
nations to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in
accordance with the relevant international treaties to
which they are party. Iran should fully cooperate with
the International Atomic Energy Agency to restore
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. We hope that the outstanding
technical issues concerning the Iranian nuclear
programme will be resolved peacefully through Iran’s
cooperation with the IAEA.
12

We welcome the fact that the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany (P5+1)
have reiterated their commitment to continuing their
engagement with Iran. We think that the talks between
the P5+1 and Iran should be resumed as soon as possible,
leading to a resolution of all outstanding issues through
dialogue and discussion.
In conclusion, India supports the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
concerning the Iran nuclear issue. While implementing
them, it is essential that every effort be made to ensure
that legitimate trade and economic activities do not
suffer.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Morocco.
At the outset, I would like to extend my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), for his final periodic report. I
would like to take this opportunity to put on record our
appreciation for Ambassador Osorio and his team, as
well as for the excellent manner in which he chaired the
work of the Committee. It does honour to him and to
Colombia, which he represents at the United Nations.
I would also like to thank the Panel of
Experts established pursuant to paragraph 29 of
resolution 1929 (2010), and to encourage it to continue,
under the guidance of the Committee, its participation
in meetings and workshops relevant to the Committee’s
mandate, particularly through its dialogue with Member
States during visits to the countries concerned.
As the Committee continues to consider all the
issues referred to it, we hope that it will also continue
to seek the cooperation of Member States and to benefit
from the professionalism and objectivity of the Panel of
Experts. We call on it to continue to consider all reports
of non-implementation, in view of their importance for
fulfilling the relevant Security Council resolutions, as
well as the recommendations in the last report of the
Panel of Experts (S/2012/395/annex).
The most recent report (GOV/2012/55) submitted
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on
16 November, concluded that pending issues relevant to
the Iranian nuclear programme had not yet been settled.
We hope that the Agency will receive full cooperation
so as to allay concerns and make tangible progress on
pending issues. As the IAEA is the only agency with
12-64730

S/PV.6888

competence relating to safeguards, it should receive
full cooperation at all times, including the necessary
information on sites and facilities.
Proceeding from our conviction that dialogue
and diplomacy are the only ways to settle this issue
peacefully, we believe that continuing negotiations
between the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany (P5+1) and Iran is extremely
important. However, the success of such a dialogue
requires continued and sustainable commitment and
good faith in the negotiations, as well as a willingness
to refrain from taking any positions or making any
announcements that could complicate matters. First
and foremost, Security Council resolutions must be
respected, as must requests by the IAEA, in view of
Iran’s international commitments.
We would like to stress the importance of preventing
any weakening of the non-proliferation regime and

12-64730

of providing every possible assistance to States in
helping them abide by their safeguards agreements.
Without this, the denuclearization of our world, which
is exceedingly important to us, will not be achievable;
nor will it promote the voluntary nature of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. However, in
the same vein, we would like to emphasize the right of
all States to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The
non-proliferation regime is based on a delicate balance
between the rights and obligations of States, a balance
that all should maintain and respect.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

13
