S/2016/189

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 February 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 5 November 2015 to 26 February 2016

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my previous
report of 4 November 2015 (S/2015/837).
2.
Two serious breaches of the cessation of hostilities between Israel and
Lebanon threatened the fragile calm along the Blue Line and in the area of
operations of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) took place on 20 December 2015, when three
rockets were fired from the UNIFIL area of operations towards Israel, and on
4 January 2016, when Hizbullah carried out an improvised explosive device attack
against two Israel Defense Forces vehicles south of the Blue Line in the Shab’a
Farms area. On both occasions, the Israel Defense Forces responded with artillery
and mortar fire north of the Blue Line. In both instances, UNIFIL immediately
engaged with the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces to restore
the cessation of hostilities and prevent any further escalation and my Special
Coordinator engaged with the parties in Lebanon and Israel and regional
stakeholders to contain the violence and prevent it from spreading further.
Following the incident on 4 January, Israel and Lebanon reaffirmed their
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and to stability along
the Blue Line.
3.
These incidents and the broader security situation in Lebanon continue to
reflect the vulnerability of the country owing to the continued impact of the conflict
in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 12 November, there was a major terrorist attack in
Beirut. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) claime d responsibility for a
suicide bombing that killed over 43 people and injured over 200 others in the Burj
al-Barajneh neighbourhood of Beirut. Along the eastern border of Lebanon and
particularly around the town of Arsal, the situation remains unstable. Th ere were
frequent clashes between the Lebanese Armed Forces and Syrian armed groups,
including the Nusra Front and ISIL, and there was fighting between the Nusra Front
and ISIL by the Lebanese-Syrian border in the Qalamoun area. On 28 December,
over 450 people, including the injured and their accompanying family members,

16-03111 (E)

090316

*1603111*

S/2016/189

were evacuated through Lebanon in implementation of a local agreement
concerning four towns in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 1 December, the Nusra
Front released the 16 Lebanese Armed Forces personnel held since August 2014, as
part of a package deal involving the release of some prisoners held in Lebanon.
Nine other servicemen held by ISIL remain in captivity.
4.
There was some political momentum towards ending the 20 -month
presidential vacancy following parallel initiatives between the leaders of the
14 March movement and the 8 March Alliance. Notwithstanding the endorsement of
Sleiman Franjieh by Future Movement leader Saad Hariri and the endorsement of
Michel Aoun by Lebanese Forces leader Samir Geagea, a thirty-fifth parliamentary
session to elect a president was inquorate owing to the continued boycott of
members of Hizbullah and the Free Patriotic Movement. There were further sessions
of the “parliamentary dialogue”, chaired by Speaker Berri, and the dialogue between
the Future Movement and Hizbullah continued as well.
5.
On 12 and 13 November, the Parliament met in an extraordinary session and
passed a number of necessary economic and financial bills. Following an agreement
brokered by Speaker Berri, the Cabinet met on 28 January 2016 in the first full
session since July 2015. In that session, a number of decrees were passed, including
the appointment of three Generals to the military council. In another session, on
2 February, the Cabinet authorized the budget for municipal elections to be held in
May 2016. Prime Minister Tammam Salam continued his efforts to allow the
Government to function and to ensure the continuity of some of the State
institutions. During the reporting period, there continued to be regular, limited
protests by civil society calling for better governance and improved delivery of
services.
6.
The number of Syrian refugees registered by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon remained stable during the
reporting period owing to the entry regulations introduced by the Government of
Lebanon in 2015 restricting access except in exceptional humanitarian
circumstances. As at 31 December 2015, 1,069,111 Syrian refugees had been
registered by UNHCR, including 55,833 in the UNIFIL area of operations. The total
number of registered refugees saw a slight reduction of 9,227 people since my
previous report, owing to continuous verification processes conducted by the United
Nations, returns to the Syrian Arab Republic and some departures to third countries.
During the reporting period, Syrians continued transiting fro m Lebanon to Turkey,
hoping to reach Europe. Asylum seekers transiting to Turkey through Lebanon are
facing restricted access by air to Turkey following a change in entry regulations that
took effect on 8 January 2016.
7.
The situation in the Palestinian refugee camps was tense during the reporting
period, particularly following the announcement on 14 December that adjustments
to the hospitalization policy of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees would be implemented from Januar y 2016. The announcement
was followed by sit-ins and peaceful protests in front of UNRWA installations in the
camps. Since 11 January, there has been a significant escalation in the protests,
forcing the temporary closure of a number of UNRWA installations , and sporadic
general strikes, which forced the complete closure of UNRWA operations in the
camps. Threats against UNRWA staff members were also voiced.

2/17

16-03111

S/2016/189

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
8.
On 20 December, UNIFIL radar recorded three rockets that had been launched
towards Israel from the area of Hinniyah, south of Tyre (Sector West). One landed
in a field south of the Blue Line, another fell into the sea off the coast of Israel, and
the impact site of the third could not be located. Following the rocket attack, the
Israel Defense Forces fired seven mortar rounds into an area near Zibqin (Sector
West). No injuries were reported. There was no claim of responsibility for the
launching of rockets, which was widely seen as a reaction to the killing of Hizbullah
militant Samir Kuntar on 19 December, in what Hizbullah alleged was an Israeli air
strike in Damascus.
9.
On 4 January, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that three
improvised explosive devices had been detonated against two Israel Defense Forces
vehicles south of the Blue Line, in the Shab’a Farms area. After the attack, the Israel
Defense Forces fired a total of 122 high explosive and smoke shells, 82 of which
impacted north of the Blue Line, in the vicinity of Arab al -Wazzani, Bastara,
Majidiye and Meri (Sector East). The Israel Defense Forces reported that two
soldiers had been treated for shock as a result of the attack. The Lebanese Arme d
Forces informed UNIFIL that there had been no injuries and only minor damage on
the Lebanese side. Hizbullah publicly claimed responsibility for the attack,
attributing it to a “Martyr Samir al-Kuntar Group” in reference to the alleged Israeli
air strike of 19 December.
10. During both incidents, UNIFIL and my Special Coordinator maintained close
contact with the parties, including the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel
Defense Forces, and urged them to exercise the utmost restraint and to restore the
cessation of hostilities. In cooperation with the parties, UNIFIL carried out
investigations to determine the facts and circumstances of the incidents. In his
letters of 20 December 2015 (S/2015/1003) and 4 January 2016 (S/2016/4), the
Permanent Representative of Israel stated that Israel held the Government of
Lebanon fully responsible for any actions coming out of its territory; he called upon
the Security Council to condemn Hizbullah and the attacks and to demand that the
Government of Lebanon meet its obligations under resolution 1701 (2006). In a
statement on 26 January (S/PV.7610), the representative of Lebanon asserted that on
4 January, Israel had bombarded six Lebanese villages for one hour, noting that such
unilateral actions undermined the credibility of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed
Forces, threatened their security and jeopardized efforts to maintain stability in the
region.
11. UNIFIL monitors the area of operations and the Blue Line and reports all the
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) that it observes, including the presence of
unauthorized armed personnel or weapons. In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL
does not proactively search private property for weapons in the south unless there is
credible evidence of a violation of resolution 1701 (2006), including an imminent
threat of hostile activity from that location. In situations in which specific
information is received regarding the illegal presence of armed personnel, weapons
or infrastructure inside its area of operations, UNIFIL, in cooperation with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, remains determined to act with all means available within

16-03111

3/17

S/2016/189

its mandate and capabilities. To date, UNIFIL has neither been provided with, nor
found, evidence of the unauthorized transfer of arms into its area of operations.
12. UNIFIL continued to observe the presence of civilians carrying unauthorized
weapons in its area of operations, the majority of which were hunting weapons. On
numerous occasions, armed hunters crossed the Blue Line. Most of the observed
violations took place in the area of Blida (Sector East), where the Blue Line is
visibly marked on the ground. On 5 December, in the area of Blida, an Israel
Defense Forces patrol fired a smoke grenade in response to a violation of the Blue
Line by an armed hunter, after which the hunter returned north of the Blue Line. In
the same area, on 13 December, an Israel Defense Forces soldier fired one shot in
the air after a hunter had crossed the Blue Line. UNIFIL protested to the Lebanese
Armed Forces regarding the carrying of unauthorized weapons and Blue Line
violations by armed hunters, reiterating that it is the primary responsibility of the
Government of Lebanon to ensure that there is no unauthorized armed presence in
the UNIFIL area of operations and that the Blue Line is respected in its entirety.
13. Almost all other ground violations of the Blue Line were committed by
Lebanese shepherds and farmers, mainly in the areas of Shab’a Farms and Bastara
(Sector East). UNIFIL personnel continued to warn shepherds and farmers
approaching the Blue Line and to call on them to return whenever they were
observed south of the Blue Line. On 31 January 2016, UNIFIL observed 12 civilians
led by a local Member of Parliament, as well as a member of the Lebanese Armed
Forces, crossing south of the Blue Line by approximately 10 metres for about one
hour in the area of Bastara. The violation took place during a demonstration against
vegetation clearance by the IDF in the Shab’a Farms.
14. Two ground violations by the Israel Defense Forces were observed by UNIFIL
on 15 December, when an Israel Defense Forces excavator violated the Blue Line by
about 10 metres, crossing into the Lebanese side in the vicinity of Shab’a village
(Sector East) and, in a nearby location, 8 Israel Defense Forces soldiers violated the
Blue Line by about 30 metres. UNIFIL protested both violations.
15. On 1 December, UNIFIL personnel heard an explosion in the vicinity of
Khiam (Sector East). The Lebanese Armed Forces subsequently informed UNIFIL
that a spying device had been detonated, allegedly by the Israel Defense Forces,
causing injuries to two Lebanese civilians in a nearby vehicle.
16. On 5 November, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNIFIL that they had in
custody a Lebanese civilian whom they said had crossed the Blue Line in the
vicinity of Marun Ar-Ra’s (Sector West). UNIFIL facilitated his repatriation on the
same day and opened an investigation into the circumstances of the incident. On
5 February, UNIFIL facilitated the safe return to Israel of an Israeli citizen who was
being held in custody by Lebanese authorities after having crossed the Blue Line
some days earlier.
17. Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued almost daily, mostly with
unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, in violation of resolution 1701
(2006) and Lebanese sovereignty. UNIFIL protested the overflights to the Israel
Defense Forces and called upon the Government of Israel to stop them immediately.
The Government of Lebanon also protested the violations to UNIFIL.
18. Israel continued the occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north
of the Blue Line, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese

4/17

16-03111

S/2016/189

sovereignty. To date, Israel has not replied to the proposal submitted by UNIFIL to
both parties in 2011 concerning security arrangements aimed at facilitating the
withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the area. The Lebanese Armed Forces
informed UNIFIL in July 2011 of its agreement to the proposal.
19. Between 31 December 2015 and 4 January 2016, the Israel Defense Forces
carried out a series of daily exercises involving artillery and mortar fire in the
vicinity of the Blue Line in Sector East. UNIFIL protested the fact that the exercises
involved firing close to the Blue Line and UNIFIL positions, posing a threat to
UNIFIL peacekeepers and to the Lebanese population and limiting the freedom of
movement of some UNIFIL troops, who had to go into shelter during the exercise
on 4 January.
20. During the reporting period, UNIFIL generally continued to enjoy full freedom
of movement throughout its area of operations. A few isolated incidents of
aggressive behaviour against the Force nevertheless took place. In the most serious
incident, on 17 November, a UNIFIL armoured vehicle was blocked on the road
west of Tayr Harfa (Sector West) by two civilian vehicles with five men armed with
two assault rifles and heavy hammers. During the ensuing confrontation, one of the
men fired five rounds in the air, while another used a hammer to dislodge the
machine gun and ammunition mounted on the roof of the UNIFIL vehicle. This
prompted the UNIFIL troops to fire warning shots in the air. Before leaving the
scene, the men forcibly removed additional military equipment from the UNIFIL
vehicle. On 15 November, a UNIFIL patrol was blocked by four cars and
approximately 20 civilians in the vicinity of Zibqin (Sector West). One of the
civilians threatened a UNIFIL peacekeeper with a knife and another attempted to
take the pistol of the patrol leader, while others threw stones. In response, UNIFIL
fired warning shots in the air, after which the crowd dispersed. Earlier, on
7 November, a boy fired a hunting weapon in the general direction of a UNIFIL
peacekeeper guarding a United Nations position in Sector West, resulting in a pellet
hitting the peacekeeper on his fragmentation jacket but causing no injuries.
21. UNIFIL strongly protested these incidents to the Lebanese Armed Forces and
representatives of the Government of Lebanon, requesting a full investigation, the
return of all stolen equipment and that measures be taken to prevent this kind of
incident in the future. All interlocutors conde mned the incidents and expressed their
commitment to addressing the situation, reiterating the continued appreciation of the
UNIFIL presence on the part of the local communities. The stolen equipment was
returned to UNIFIL on 25 November.
22. Notwithstanding these isolated incidents, UNIFIL relations with the local
population remained largely positive. UNIFIL continued to carry out outreach
activities with local authorities, religious leaders and civil society, who consistently
expressed their appreciation for the activities carried out by the Force and their
determination to cooperate with its personnel to maintain calm in the area of
operations.
23. UNIFIL continued to implement quick-impact projects and civil military
cooperation initiatives to support the extension of State authority in the area of
operations and to assist local authorities in addressing some of the most pressing
needs of the population. UNIFIL conducted joint training with Lebanese Civil
Defence personnel on firefighting and search and rescue operations. It also
organized a training session with municipal police personnel from the area of

16-03111

5/17

S/2016/189

operations, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). UNIFIL contingents continued to provide dental, medical and veterinarian
assistance to the local communities.
24. The UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander continued his regular
engagements with the Lebanese authorities, ensuring a coordinated approach to the
security challenges in the UNIFIL area of operations and seeking increased
involvement of the Government of Lebanon, its ministries and security institutions
in southern Lebanon.
25. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to deploy two brigades south of the
Litani River. In the light of the tense security situation along the eastern border with
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Lebanese Armed Forces maintained a reinforced
presence in the north-eastern part of the UNIFIL area of operations (Shab’a village
and the Arqoub area). During the reporting period, UN IFIL conducted an average of
14,000 operational activities monthly throughout the area of operations, including
patrols, checkpoints and observation tasks. The increase in operational activities in
the reporting period compared with the previous period was aimed at enhancing
security in areas close to the Blue Line, in particular during the harvest season, and
preventing incidents during periods of heightened tension, such as following the
incidents of 20 December 2015 and 4 January 2016. The number of oper ational
activities carried out by UNIFIL in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed
Forces remained largely at the same level as in the previous period.
26. UNIFIL also continued to carry out joint exercises and training with the
Lebanese Armed Forces to further strengthen the tactical and operational
capabilities of the Forces and enhance operational coordination and the
effectiveness of joint operations. As at 31 January, UNIFIL had conducted 367 joint
exercises, workshops and courses with the Lebanese Armed Forces, including its
Navy. In accordance with its mandated tasks, the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force
provided training for the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy and carried out maritime
interdiction activities. During the reporting period, as at 31 January, the Maritime
Task Force had hailed 1,632 ships and the Lebanese authorities had inspected and
declared clear 337 vessels, in order to ensure that no unauthorized weapons or
related materiel were transferred into Lebanon.
27. Although UNIFIL has no mandate to monitor the line of buoys, which was
unilaterally installed by Israel and is not recognized by the Government of Lebanon,
the Maritime Task Force maintained a visible presence in the southern part of the
UNIFIL area of maritime operations to prevent tensions in the vicinity of the
disputed maritime border between Israel and Lebanon. During the reporting period,
it was observed that the Israel Defense Forces continued to carry out frequent
maintenance activities at that line. Furthermore, on several occa sions, Israel
Defense Forces patrol boats positioned south of the line of buoys fired machine gun
rounds and flares in a westerly direction.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
28. UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements with the parties remain ed a key
element in the efforts to safeguard the cessation of hostilities, ensure respect for the
Blue Line and promote security and stability in southern Lebanon.

6/17

16-03111

S/2016/189

29. Since my previous report, UNIFIL facilitated regular tripartite meetings on
25 November 2015 and 28 January 2016, during which representatives of the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces addressed security and
military operational issues relating to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
Discussions focused on air and ground violations, the occupation of northern Ghajar
by the Israel Defense Forces, the presence of unauthorized weapons in the UNIFIL
area of operations and claims by the Israel Defense Forces that Hizbullah carries out
reconnaissance activities along the Blue Line, as well as the implementation of
confidence-building measures to mitigate the scope for incidents along the Blue
Line. On 28 January, the parties discussed the importance of preventing further
breaches of the cessation of hostilities and reiterated their commitment to continue
to make efforts towards practical localized solutions.
30. The UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander also maintained regular
bilateral engagement with the civilian and military leadership in Lebanon and Israel
to gain support for the implementation of measures aimed at reducing violations of
resolution 1701 (2006), lowering tension and building confidence along the Blue
Line. There was no progress towards the establishment of a UNIFIL liaison office in
Tel Aviv.
31. On the ground, UNIFIL facilitated the smooth conduct of routine maintenance
activities in sensitive areas close to the Blue Line, in close coordination with the
parties. On 29 December, UNIFIL cleared vegetation affecting the Israeli technical
fence in an area between Kafer Kela and Adeisse (Sector East) upon request by the
Israel Defense Forces and in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
Additionally, UNIFIL continued to maintain liaison with the parties to facilitate the
coordinated conduct of winterization works, such as clearing culverts of vegetation
and mud, in other areas close to the Blue Line.
32. UNIFIL continued to work with the parties to visibly mark the Blue Line.
During the reporting period, the parties carried out field visits wit h UNIFIL to
measure and validate additional points and agreed on new points to be marked. As at
31 January, the parties had agreed to mark 314 Blue Line points out of a total of
528. Access paths to 313 of the agreed points have been demined and 255 points
have been measured. The parties have verified 227 of the 238 Blue Line markers
constructed by UNIFIL.
33. UNIFIL also continued to support the Lebanese Armed Forces through the
implementation of the strategic dialogue plan and the promotion of military
assistance by international donors to the Lebanese Armed Forces in the UNIFIL area
of operations. UNIFIL participated in the eighth meeting of the Executive Military
Commission, chaired by the Lebanese Armed Forces, on 4 December. On
27 November, UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces conducted a joint meeting of
the strategic dialogue subcommittee on training.

C.

Disarming armed groups
34. The firing of rockets on 20 December again provided evidence of the presence
of arms outside the control of the Lebanese State south of the Litani River. The
attack on 4 January proved Hizbullah’s military capability and its readiness and
willingness to use such capability in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). The
maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control of the

16-03111

7/17

S/2016/189

Lebanese State, in violation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701
(2006), continues to restrict the State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and
authority over its territory. In a televised statement on 16 February, the Secretary General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, again asserted that Hizbullah maintains a
rocket arsenal, which he claimed serves as a deterrent against potential aggression
by Israel. In the televised statement, he threatened to use the rockets to attack Israeli
storage installations, which would lead to the deaths of tens of thousands of Israeli
citizens. There were no meetings of the National Dialogue during the reporting
period and no other formal discussion of Hizbullah’s arms.
35. Following the terrorist attack in Burj al-Barajneh on 12 November, the
security services reported the arrest of a number of ISIL suspects. Between 18 and
20 November, the security services raided locations in Sidon, Tripoli and elsewhere
across Lebanon and seized a quantity of arms, explosives and belts for suicide
attacks. They also arrested suspects believed to be preparing further suicide attacks.
36. During the reporting period, there was no progress in the dismantling of the
military bases maintained by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine General Command and Fatah al-Intifada. In 2006, it was decided in the National
Dialogue that the bases should be dismantled. The existence of the bases continues
to compromise Lebanese sovereignty and impede the ability of the State to monitor
and control effectively parts of the Lebanese border.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
37. In its resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council decided that all States
should prevent the sale or the supply of arms and related materiel to entities or
individuals in Lebanon by their nationals or from their territories or using their flag
vessels or aircraft. In the same resolution, the Council also called upon the
Government of Lebanon to secure its borders and other entry points so as to prevent
the entry of arms and related materiel into Lebanon without its consent.
38. Representatives of the Government of Israel have consistently reported to the
United Nations that, according to their information, there are significant ongoing
arms transfers to Hizbullah across the Lebanese-Syrian border and that Hizbullah
has now amassed an arsenal of over 100,000 missiles and rockets, much of which
Israel claims is located in civilian residential areas. Most recently, such allegations
were reiterated in the letters of 20 December 2015 ( S/2015/1003) and 4 January
2016 (S/2016/4) referenced in paragraph 10 above. In a statement to the Security
Council on 26 January, the Permanent Representative of Israel provided examples of
locations that, according to Israel’s information, have been turned into fighting
positions by Hizbullah. The United Nations takes those allegations seriously,
including in the light of public statements by Hizbullah, but is not in a position to
verify them independently.
39. Hizbullah remained engaged in the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Funerals for Hizbullah fighters killed in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to be
held in Lebanon and, on 14 November, three Hizbullah fighters were reported to
have been captured near Aleppo. Other Lebanese individuals are also reported to
have joined armed groups fighting in the Syrian conflict. There continue to be
reports of Lebanese nationals joining ISIL in the Syrian Arab Republic, and the

8/17

16-03111

S/2016/189

number of suspected ISIL members arrested by security forces in Lebano n reflects
the role of radicalization by extremist groups.
40. The situation along the Lebanese-Syrian border was tense during the reporting
period. On 6 November, a bomb exploded in the town of Arsal, causing four
fatalities and a number of injuries. On 7 November, a second bomb targeted a
Lebanese Armed Forces patrol in Arsal and injured five soldiers. The Forces
continued to deploy robustly around Arsal and along the border. In early February
2016, the Lebanese Armed Forces raided a location in Arsal an d arrested a number
of ISIL suspects and seized an arms cache that also contained suicide belts. The
Forces reported multiple clashes with militants trying to infiltrate into Lebanon,
which caused a number of fatalities.
41. There were continued reports of movement of fighters and arms trafficking
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period. On
8 and 17 November 2015, the security services detained smugglers in possession of
arms. On 14 January 2016, former Minister Michel Samaha was released from
prison on bail pending his appeal of his conviction.
42. During the reporting period, there continued to be a number of incidents of
cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon. There were 31
shooting incidents, 32 shelling incidents, three rocket attacks targeting towns in
Lebanon and two air strikes by Syrian Government aircraft on Lebanese territory.
No casualties were reported as a result of those incidents.
43. On 12 November, the Parliament approved the allocation of $800 million for
the Lebanese Armed Forces. The funds were intended to enable the Forces to
renovate infrastructure and to be used for logistics and other non -lethal equipment
not covered by the $3 billion grant from Saudi Arabia for the provision of arms and
materiel from France. The Lebanese Armed Forces is in the process of updating its
capabilities development plan to reflect assistance received to date and to highlight
outstanding priority areas of need. Consistent with earlier calls by the Secur ity
Council and the International Support Group for Lebanon, international partners
continue to also support the Lebanese Armed Forces on a bilateral basis to enhance
the army’s capability to secure Lebanon’s borders with the Syrian Arab Republic
and counter terrorist threats.
44. The continued implementation of security plans in Tripoli and the Bekaa
contributed to a general calm in those areas, although incidents of concern occurred
during the reporting period. As a result of the widespread illegal posse ssion of arms,
firearms were again used by criminals and in personal disputes. A series of incidents
involving firearms caused a number of fatalities and injuries in Zahle, in the Bekaa
town of Maqneh and in Baalbek, as well as in Dar al-Wasa where there were
casualties from the Lebanese Armed Forces. On 1 February, the Lebanese Armed
Forces arrested 39 people and seized a quantity of explosives, arms and ammunition
after one person was killed and four injured in an armed disputed between two
families.
45. As at 31 December 2015, over $1.1 billion of the $1.87 billion required for the
2015 Lebanon crisis response plan had been contributed. In December, the
Government of Lebanon and the United Nations jointly launched the 2016 Lebanon
crisis response plan, which requires $2.48 billion to provide humanitarian assistance

16-03111

9/17

S/2016/189

and protection to almost 2.8 million highly vulnerable people and invest in services,
economies and institutions.
46. The Supporting Syria and the Region conference, held in London on
4 February 2016, resulted in an important shift in Lebanon’s approach to addressing
the Syrian refugee crisis. In its statement of intent presented at the conference, the
Government of Lebanon publicly acknowledged that Syrian refugees are likely to
remain in-country for a prolonged period of time and that more sustainable solutions
are required pending their eventual return when conditions permit. International
partners pledged important support not only to meet immediate humanitarian needs
but also to address the longer-term stabilization and development priorities
identified by the Government. In turn, the Government committed to reviewing
existing regulatory frameworks relating to residency conditions and work
authorizations, to enable the employment of Syrian r efugees. Both issues constituted
the main obstacle for refugees in securing livelihoods and accessing services.
Approximately 70 per cent of Syrian refugees continue to live below the poverty
line and increasingly depend on international assistance to meet basic needs. As a
result of deteriorating conditions, there continued to be reports of negative coping
mechanisms, including early and forced marriage, survival sex and child labour.
47. Following the launch in September 2015 of the “Back to School” camp aign,
approximately 249,000 Lebanese and 160,000 Syrian refugee children are now
benefiting from free education in public schools. Those efforts notwithstanding, at
least 300,000 Syrian children are still out of formal education. The Ministry of
Education is currently developing a second “Reaching All Children with Education”
plan aimed at enrolling all school-aged refugee children in formal and non-formal
education and ensuring the retention of Lebanese children enrolled in public
education.
48. Very few Palestine refugees entered Lebanon from the Syrian Arab Republic
during the reporting period owing to the application of entry restrictions imposed by
the Government of Lebanon in May 2014. The total number of Palestine refugees
from the Syrian Arab Republic registered with UNRWA in Lebanon decreased
slightly, to 42,000, following the return of some refugees to the Syrian Arab
Republic, with others reportedly leaving the country in an attempt to reach Europe.
They continue to face restrictions on renewing their legal status in Lebanon, which
is causing further humanitarian challenges. The suspension of monthly cash
assistance for housing, which started in July 2015, also increased the vulnerability
of this group.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
49. As in the previous reporting period, five manual mine clearance teams, one
explosive ordnance disposal team and one mechanical mine clearance team were
validated and deployed in the UNIFIL area of operations. UNIFIL cleared
136 square metres of contaminated land to provide access to Blue Line points
during the reporting period. Furthermore, the United Nations Mine Action Service
conducted eight quality assurance visits to operational and completed sites in the
area of operations and seven safety monitoring visits to refurbishment sites. The
Mine Action Service contributed mine risk awareness education material to the

10/17

16-03111

S/2016/189

Lebanon Mine Action Centre in the form of 5,000 puzzles to be distributed in the
schools of Lebanon.

F.

Delineation of borders
50. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the
Lebanese-Syrian border during the reporting period, including in areas where it is
uncertain or disputed, as called for in Security Council resolutions 1680 (2006) and
1701 (2006). The delineation and demarcation of the border between Lebanon and
the Syrian Arab Republic must be carried out as soon as practicable so that the
Government of Lebanon can extend its authority throughout all Lebanese territory
and the Lebanese security forces and the Lebanese Armed Forces can secure the
borders to prevent the entry of arms or related materiel.
51. There has also been no progress on the issue of the Shaba’a Farms. There has
still been no reaction to the provisional definition of that area contained in my
report of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2007/641) from either Israel or the Syrian Arab Republic.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
52. UNIFIL reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measures in close
coordination with the Lebanese authorities and provided security awareness training
to its personnel and their dependants. Force protection works to upgrade
installations and assets are ongoing. Stringent security measures remain in force in
the Arqoub area (Sector East), where movements by UNIFIL and other United
Nations civilian personnel require security escort. UNIFIL implemented temporary
precautionary measures during the 20 December and 4 January incidents, including
restrictions of movement in some areas and personnel taking shelter in some United
Nations positions.
53. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings at the Lebanese Military Court
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against
UNIFIL. In the case of a serious attack against UNIFIL peacekeepers serving with
the Spanish contingent in 2007, a hearing at the Permanent Military Court was
conducted on 30 October 2015, and the next one is scheduled for 1 July 2016. In the
case of a serious attack in 2008, in which one of the four previously sentenced
perpetrators filed an appeal, a hearing at the Military Court of Appeal was held on
25 November 2015, and the next one is scheduled for 10 March 2016. In three cases
of serious attacks perpetrated in 2011, the investigation is ongoing. In a case of
terror intent opened in January 2014, a hearing at the Permanent Military Court was
held on 5 February. The Court scheduled the next hearing for 13 June 2016.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
54. As at 5 February, UNIFIL consisted of 10,528 military personnel from 40
troop-contributing countries, including 394 women, as well as 252 international and
551 national civilian staff, including 75 and 145 women, respectively. In addition,

16-03111

11/17

S/2016/189

56 military observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO), including 4 women, are part of UNIFIL. UNIFIL is working to increase
the number of civilian and military women deployed, with a view to reducing the
gender imbalance in the mission.

V. Observations
55. I reiterate my condemnation of the attack against two vehicles of the Israel
Defense Forces on 4 January 2016, claimed by Hizbullah. I also condemn the firing
of rockets towards Israel on 20 December 2015. Both incidents constituted serious
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and of the cessation of hostilities. Retaliatory
fire by Israel into Lebanon is also in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
cessation of hostilities and does not conform to the United Nations expectation that
the parties will notify UNIFIL of an incident and refrain from responding, except
where clearly required in immediate self-defence.
56. I welcome the current resumption of calm but the incidents of 20 December
and 4 January are a reminder that the situation along the Blue Line is fragile and
vulnerable to developments in the region. There is a high risk of miscalculation as
to the potentially devastating consequences for Lebanon and Israel. The incident of
4 January, in particular, posed a very real risk of renewed conflic t across the Blue
Line. I therefore call upon the parties to adhere fully to resolution 1701 (2006) and
respect the cessation of hostilities and, to that end, urge them to take the necessary
measures, in close coordination with UNIFIL, to prevent any act t hat may
undermine calm and stability in the area.
57. I welcome the continued reliance by the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel
Defense Forces on the UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements as a key
element in preventing and defusing tensions along the Blue Line and containing
incidents when they do occur. In that regard, both parties should notify UNIFIL of
planned exercises, in particular if they take place in close proximity to the Blue
Line and include live firing. Such activities could cause misunderstandings between
the parties or place persons coming close to the Line, including UNIFIL personnel,
in danger.
58. Consistent with the constructive approach adopted by both sides in the
tripartite forum, I call upon the parties to step up efforts to fulfil their respective
obligations to achieve further progress towards the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and, in particular, to seek concrete ways to strengthen the foundation
for a permanent ceasefire and long-term solution to the conflict, as envisaged in the
resolution. I urge the parties to work with my Special Coordinator and UNIFIL to
examine areas where progress can be made towards a permanent ceasefire.
59. I note the recent progress made by the parties, in cooperation with UNIFIL, on
the visible marking of the Blue Line and call upon both sides to redouble their
efforts to find points of agreement in relation to the stretches of the Blue Line where
they consider marking to be contentious. I also recall that full respect for the Blue
Line is a critical factor in maintaining calm and stability in the area and that any
deliberate violation of the Blue Line is unacceptable.
60. The absence of progress on the Shaba’a Farms area in accordance with
resolution 1701 (2006) is a source of increasing concern. Developments on the

12/17

16-03111

S/2016/189

ground during the reporting period demonstrated, once again, the potential for
destabilization that comes from not addressing that issue. I reiterate my call to the
Syrian Arab Republic and Israel to submit their responses to the provisional
definition of the Shaba’a Farms area provided in my report of 30 October 2007.
61. The Israel Defense Forces continue to occupy northern Ghajar and an adjacent
area north of the Blue Line, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). I once more
remind Israel of its obligation to withdraw its armed forces from the area, in
accordance with the resolution. I urge the Israeli authorities to take steps to that end
and encourage them to make further use of the UNIFIL presence, liaison and
coordination arrangements to facilitate a smooth and secure withdrawal from the area.
62. It remains of serious concern that Israel continues to violate Lebanese airspace
on an almost daily basis, in complete disregard of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006). I once again call upon the Government of
Israel to cease all overflights of Lebanese territory and territorial waters.
63. I am deeply concerned about the presence of unauthorized weapons in the area
between the Litani River and the Blue Line, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), as
clearly indicated by the firing of rockets from the UNIF IL area of operations and the
use of assault rifles during the incident of 17 November 2015 against UNIFIL
peacekeepers, as well as the frequent sighting by UNIFIL of individuals carrying
hunting weapons. The continued presence of armed hunters, who at times also
crossed the Blue Line, has the potential to cause incidents between the parties. I call
upon the Government of Lebanon, who holds the primary responsibility to ensure
that there are no unauthorized armed personnel, assets or weapons in the UNIFIL
area of operations, to take all actions to that end.
64. I am concerned about the instances of aggressive behaviour against UNIFIL. I
recall that the Government of Lebanon has the primary responsibility to ensure the
safety and security of UNIFIL personnel and urge the Lebanese authorities to
continue to cooperate with UNIFIL to guarantee adequate protection of the
peacekeepers, including by bringing to justice the perpetrators of acts committed
against them.
65. I am reassured, nevertheless, that these isolated incidents between local
individuals and UNIFIL are not a reflection of the mission’s relationship with the
local population, which remains positive. I welcome the continued efforts by
UNIFIL to cultivate that relationship and also welcome the fact th at Lebanese
authorities and communities in the area of operations have reiterated their
commitment to work with UNIFIL to maintain the prevailing calm and stability.
66. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah does not provide protection to
Lebanon, as claimed by the group, but rather undermines the rule of law in Lebanon
and poses serious threats to Lebanese sovereignty and stability. Nearly 10 years
after a destructive but avoidable war between Hizbullah and Israel, the maintenance
of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control of the State continues to
contradict the country’s obligations under resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
I am deeply concerned at the readiness and willingness of Hizbullah to use its
capabilities in violation of resolution 1701 (2006), as the incident of 4 January
across the Blue Line again demonstrates. The threat made by Hizbullah Secretary General Nasrallah against Israeli civilians on 16 February is a chilling example of
unacceptable statements, which I condemn. Should Hizbullah’s possession of arms

16-03111

13/17

S/2016/189

or attempts to procure sophisticated weapons provoke conflict, the consequences are
potentially very grave for Lebanon and for the region. The arms held by Hizbullah
and other groups are an issue to be addressed by the National Dialogue, and it
remains vital that, once a President is elected, the National Dialogue reconvene as
soon as possible to address issues of fundamental importance to Lebanon and of
direct concern to the international community. It remains important that earlier
decisions by the National Dialogue be implemented, specifically those relating to
the disarmament of non-Lebanese groups and the dismantling of the bases of the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada. Protracted deferral in dealing with these issues has increased the risks to
Lebanon and Israel.
67. I condemn the participation of Lebanese citizens in the Syrian conflict, in
breach of the policy of disassociation adopted by the Government of Lebanon and
of the principles of the Baabda Declaration of June 2012, which was agreed upon by
all Lebanese political parties and the importance of which has been reaffirmed by
the Security Council. I call upon all Lebanese parties to cease any involvement in
the Syrian conflict, consistent with their commitment in the Baabda Declaration,
and to recommit to the policy of disassociation.
68. I remain concerned at the risk of further radicalization in Lebanon as a result of
domestic factors and the regional environment. Consistent with the global Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which I launched on 6 January, the United
Nations stands ready to assist the Lebanese authorities in their efforts to prevent
radicalization and violent extremism and is exploring avenues for early collaboration
in that regard. I urge all national and international stakeholders to work with the
United Nations to formulate a comprehensive approach to preventing violent
extremism in Lebanon in order to protect the country’s unique multi-confessional
nature.
69. I condemn the movement of fighters and war materiel across the Lebanese Syrian border in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), as well as shelling, shooting and
aerial incursions into Lebanese border areas from the Syrian Arab Re public. I
reiterate that the lack of a delineated, demarcated Lebanese -Syrian border is no
justification for violations of Lebanese sovereignty by any party. I call upon the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and groups fighting in Qalamoun to cease
violations of the border and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon.
70. I note again the proliferation of arms outside the control of the Lebanese State.
Illegally held firearms pose a serious threat to the security of the citizens of
Lebanon and undermine the rule of law. I call upon Member States to uphold their
obligations under resolution 1701 (2006) to prevent the sale or supply of arms or
related materiel to entities or individuals in Lebanon.
71. I commend the Lebanese Armed Forces and the security services for their role
in meeting the many security challenges faced by Lebanon, including securing
Lebanon’s borders with the Syrian Arab Republic, working alongside UNIFIL in
southern Lebanon in implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and ensuring
domestic security. I reiterate the importance of the close collaboration between
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces in the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). In particular, I recall that building the capacity of the Forces for tasks
mandated under resolution 1701 (2006) in the UNIFIL area of operations is a

14/17

16-03111

S/2016/189

strategic priority and an important element towards the full implementation of the
resolution. I note positively the appointment of the three members of the military
council, ending the vacancies in those posts. It remains important that there be
certainty in the process of appointing the leadership of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and that the process remain depoliticized to ensure public confidence in the
independence of the Lebanese Armed Forces. I welcome the continuing support of
key bilateral partners in providing equipment and training to the Forces and in
working to develop civil-military cooperation and human rights components. I urge
international partners and donors to continue to be forthcoming in support of
enhancing the capabilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces, consistent with the
updated capabilities development plan and the strategic dialogue plan to enable the
Forces to undertake the functions mandated under resolution 1701 (2006).
72. I welcome the renewed political engagement between the parties during the
reporting period, which led to the legislation passed in Parliament in November
2015, the resumption of cabinet sessions and an intensification of efforts to resolve
the presidential vacuum. I commend Prime Minister Salam’s continued leadership
and efforts to allow the Government to function effectively. The 20 -month vacancy
in the presidency remains of deep concern, given that it seriously impairs the ability
of Lebanon to address the security, economic, social and humanitarian challenges
facing the country. The protracted political crisis also risks fuelling deeper
alienation and radicalization among segments of the population, to the detriment of
responsible citizenship. I reiterate the call by the Security Council for all Lebanese
leaders to adhere to the Constitution of Lebanon and to the Taef Agreement and
National Pact, to put the stability and national interests of Lebanon ahead of
partisan politics, and to act responsibly and with leadership and flexibility to
urgently convene a parliamentary session and proceed to the election of a president.
I therefore call upon Members of Parliament boycotting the parliamentary sessions
on the presidency to convene urgently and elect a president without further delay.
73. I note the Government’s allocation of the budget for municipal elections and
welcome the opportunity for Lebanese citizens to exercise their right to elect their
local representatives. I urge the Lebanese authorities to ensure that the municipal
elections are held on time. I further encourage the Lebanese authorities to ensure
that measures are taken to improve the representation of women and offer any
further technical support by the United Nations necessary to assist in the process.
74. The proceedings of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon continue to reflect the
international community’s commitment to combating impunity. Separately, I note
the release of former Minister Michel Samaha from prison on b ail, pending his
appeal of his conviction on terrorism charges in May 2015. I once again urge the
Lebanese judicial and security authorities to continue their efforts to combat
impunity.
75. I thank the Member States participating in the International Sup port Group for
Lebanon and welcome the continued engagement, at the working level, by the
Group in Beirut, led by my Special Coordinator. The Group has met to coordinate
efforts and messaging on the peace and security, stabilization and humanitarian and
developmental issues facing Lebanon. The Group remains an important forum for
engagement with national stakeholders and for advocacy for expanded international
engagement in support of the resilience, stability and security of Lebanon.

16-03111

15/17

S/2016/189

76. In the context of slowing economic growth, I remain concerned at the
increased vulnerability, the rising poverty and the unemployment of refugee and
host populations in Lebanon, in particularly among women and young people. I
thank the Lebanese people and the Government of Lebanon for their continuing
generosity towards refugees, pending conditions that allow for a safe return, and I
note the continued importance of adherence to the principle of non -refoulement.
77. I am thankful for the increase in the support by the inte rnational community to
Lebanon, in particular as part of the commitments to significantly increase support
to the response to the Syrian crisis announced at the Supporting Syria and the
Region conference held in London on 4 February. Given the scale of nee ds
in-country, I reiterate my call for partners to sustain their engagement in Lebanon
and to combine immediate humanitarian relief with longer -term approaches.
Strengthening the economic stability and growth of Lebanon will help to alleviate
deepening vulnerability among the Lebanese and the refugees and contribute to
preserving the country’s stability. The implementation of the London commitments
will be crucial to address these challenges and expand economic opportunities for
both host communities and refugees.
78. I welcome recent discussions on the new financing initiative to support the
Middle East and North Africa region led by the World Bank, with the support of the
United Nations and the Islamic Development Bank, which would provide an
opportunity for Lebanon to access international financing at more concessional
terms. Such an opportunity would help to lessen the economic and social burden of
Lebanon and other countries hosting large numbers of Syrian refugees — all of
which, through their response, are providing a global public good.
79. I welcome the continued commitment of the Palestinian leadership to
disassociate the Palestinian camps in Lebanon from the violence in the region. The
need to improve the living conditions of Palestine refugees i n Lebanon, without
prejudice to the resolution of the refugee question in the context of a comprehensive
peace settlement, is ever more urgent. In that regard, the international community
must commit additional resources to complete the reconstruction of t he Nahr
el-Bared Palestine refugee camp, which began in 2009. The recent protests show the
increased reliance of the Palestine refugees on UNRWA services and indicate that a
more sustainably funded UNRWA contributes to more stability in Lebanon and the
region. Palestine refugees displaced in Lebanon from the Syrian Arab Republic are
becoming increasingly vulnerable. I encourage donors to be forthcoming in their
support of UNRWA, to avert a new funding crisis in 2016 and allow the Agency to
carry out its mandate to assist Palestine refugees effectively.
80. For both Lebanon and Israel, exploration and development of their respective
offshore oil and gas resources are national priorities. I again encourage both
Lebanon and Israel to proceed with steps that wo uld allow for a resolution of the
dispute over the exclusive economic zone, given that no progress was made during
the reporting period. The United Nations stands ready to assist if both parties so
request.
81. Lebanon continues to suffer the impact of the crises across the region and of
the Syrian conflict in particular. Breaches of the cessation of hostilities during the
reporting period reflect again the danger of the spillover of violent events in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the serious threat they pose to the stability of Lebanon.
The country’s stability cannot be taken for granted. Lebanon continues to face a

16/17

16-03111

S/2016/189

multitude of complex challenges and the United Nations will continue to work to
address those issues with its Lebanese and international partne rs in a “whole of
Lebanon” approach that incorporates the Organization’s commitment to human
rights and gender equality. Progress on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and other outstanding Security Council resolutions will be central to longer term solutions to end the conflict in the region and to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
82. I wish to extend my continued appreciation to all countries contributing troops
and equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon of UNT SO. I thank my
Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Sigrid Kaag, and the staff of her office; the
UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major General Luciano Portolano;
and the military and civilian personnel of UNIFIL for their important roles in
promoting stability and security in Lebanon and across the Blue Line at a critical
time for Lebanon and the region.

16-03111

17/17
