S/PV.8888

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8888th meeting

Wednesday, 27 October 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Kelly
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Ms.Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ben Lagha
Ms. Farrey
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585 (2021)
(S/2021/890)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-30816 (E)
*2130816*

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585
(2021) (S/2021/890)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Ms. Mounerfah Albarouki, General
Coordinator of the Syrian National Conference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/890, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585
(2021).
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Last week, from 18 and 22 October,
I convened the sixth session of the small body of the
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated
Constitutional Committee in Geneva. In accordance
with the agreement that I facilitated between the two
co-Chairs, titles of constitutional principles were
submitted before departure to Geneva by the three
delegations, namely, the delegation nominated by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, the delegation
nominated by the Syrian Negotiations Commission and
the middle third civil society delegation.
2/25

27/10/2021

Joined by my Deputy, Ms. Khawla Matar, I
convened the first co-Chairs’ meeting in advance of
the session, and they met in that format as required
throughout the week. The co-Chairs’ interactions were
frank, open and business-like. With United Nations
facilitation, they agreed how titles would be selected
and when they would be discussed during the first four
days. Together with me, they also met the middle third
civil society delegation.
Accordingly, draft constitutional texts on four titles
were presented in advance of each meeting and then
discussed in the Committee.
On Monday, the delegation nominated by the
Government submitted a draft constitutional text on the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic. On Tuesday, the delegation
nominated by the Syrian Negotiations Commission
submitted a draft constitutional text on the army, the
armed forces, security and intelligence. On Wednesday,
some members of the middle third civil society
delegation submitted a draft constitutional text on the
rule of law. On Thursday, the delegation nominated by
the Government submitted a draft constitutional text on
terrorism and extremism.
Let me note that the co-Chairs had agreed on that
distribution for the session with the understanding that,
in the next two sessions, other delegations would take
their turn in presenting draft constitutional texts on two
titles during the week.
Each principle was the subject of discussion for one
day. However, the co-Chairs were not able to agree on
the mechanism for progressing the discussion further
during the final day on Friday. The co-Chair nominated
by the Syrian Negotiations Commission made proposals
on that, but there was no co-Chair agreement. However,
the co-Chairs agreed that delegations that had further
material to present regarding the texts discussed to date
should be free to do so in the plenary meeting on Friday.
In that meeting, the delegation nominated by the
Government stated that it had no revisions to present
of its draft constitutional texts and that it did not see
any common ground. The delegation nominated by the
Syrian Negotiations Commission and some members
of the middle third delegation each presented revised
versions of their respective draft constitutional texts,
stating that those were attempts to build common
ground in the light of discussions earlier in the week.
The delegation nominated by the Syrian Negotiations
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Commission also presented comments on, and proposed
amendments to, the texts that had been presented by the
other delegations for the same stated purpose.
The meeting concluded without any points of
consensus or provisional agreement in the Committee.
Let me remind the Council that the Constitutional
Committee’s mandate, as agreed by the parties, is to
prepare and draft constitutional reform for popular
approval. In accordance with its mandate, it may
also amend the current Constitution or draft a new
constitution. That is what constitutional reform means
in that setting.
Last week, for the first time, all delegations
submitted draft constitutional texts. However, in the
absence of an agreed mechanism to revise the draft texts
and begin to identify commonalities, the 45 members of
the small body were not able to move from submitting
and discussing initial draft constitutional texts to
developing a productive textual drafting process. During
the week, the co-Chairs also discussed possibilities
for dates for the seventh and eighth sessions before
the end of the year, but an agreement on dates and a
commitment to meeting twice before the end of the year
was regrettably not possible. It was for those reasons
that I viewed the outcome, particularly the last day’s
discussions, as a disappointment.
It is important that the Constitutional Committee
continue its work with urgency and purpose — indeed,
that it works, as its terms of reference state, expeditiously
and continuously to produce results and continued
progress. That is what we agreed upon between the
two parties. I will continue my active consultations
with the co-Chairs and engage the middle third to
address the challenges that have arisen. We need a
common understanding on a working mechanism
to help the Constitutional Committee discharge its
drafting mandate. We also need to set the dates of the
forthcoming sessions. I remain convinced that progress
on the Constitutional Committee could, if made in the
right way, help to build some trust and confidence. But
let me stress that this requires real determination and
the political will to try to build some common ground.
As the Council knows, the Constitutional
Committee has approximately 30 per cent women among
its members, and the civil society delegation is indeed
comprised of nearly 50 per cent women. We continue to
stress the importance of their full participation in the
Committee’s work.

S/PV. 8888

On top of that and as part of our continuing
commitment
to
ensuring
that
peacemaking
efforts provide real openings for Syrian women to
meaningfully participate in all facets of the political
process, in parallel with the Constitutional Committee,
we convened near Geneva the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board. The discussions among that diverse
group of women from inside and outside Syria brought
real insights on the impact of the conflict on Syrians
from all backgrounds, both inside Syria and in the
diaspora. They showed a sense of common purpose
and urgency about the need for the political process to
move forward. They also stressed the need for effective
institutional arrangements to guarantee the protection
and full participation of women in the future of Syria,
and they gave me and my deputy valuable ideas and
advice. We will continue to consult them closely.
Let me also stress a third focus of our diplomacy
last week. On the side-lines of the Constitutional
Committee, I raised with the representatives of the
three Astana guarantor States — Iran, Russia and
Turkey — the need to accelerate collective efforts on
the crucial file of detainees, abductees and missing
persons. As part of that, I called for convening more
frequent meetings of the working group on the release
of detainees/abductees, the handover of bodies and the
identification of missing persons. As the Council knows,
tens of thousands remain detained, abducted or missing.
I continue to press this issue in all my engagements.
Today I will not elaborate on a range of other issues.
However, I want to stress that, as we facilitate this
difficult work, we never lose sight of the deep suffering
of the Syrian people in all its dimensions.
As our efforts were under way in and near Geneva,
violence continued on the ground in Syria. We saw
terrorist attacks, air strikes and heavy shelling, which
all led to casualties, including dozens of civilians.
Some of those incidents also underlined the constant
risks of a regional escalation. The violence must stop. I
continue to call for a nationwide ceasefire and to stress
that the obligations under international humanitarian
law to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure must
be respected. I also reiterate my call for international
cooperation to counter terrorist groups effectively
and in a manner that strictly adheres to international
humanitarian law.
Mr. Griffiths will shortly update Council members
on the grave humanitarian situation. For my part, let

21-308163/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

me simply recall here today that more than 12 million
Syrians remain displaced, either as refugees or as
internally displaced persons, and poverty levels are in
the vicinity of 90 per cent.
The current trajectory of developments in Syria
is deeply concerning. We have to break out of this
dynamic. As part of that, I am continuing to ask key
States to work with me in exploratory discussions on
concrete, mutual and reciprocal steps that are defined
with realism and precision, can be implemented in
parallel and are verifiable. We need a constructive
Syria diplomacy to help save lives, ease suffering,
promote stability and further the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015).
I will shortly be embarking on consultations
in a number of capitals, as well as engaging the
Syrian parties directly, as I seek to both facilitate the
Constitutional Committee and develop a wider political
process, step for step and step by step, to promote the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: As the Security Council hears
every month, and as we just heard from Mr. Pedersen,
the humanitarian crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic
continues to worsen. Accordingly, each month the
Council hears me, as the Emergency Relief Coordinator.
say the same. Yet without a change of course, each month
that will remain true. As my role is to bear witness in
the Council to the suffering of the Syrian people, I hope
that you, Mr. President, will bear with me.
Ten years into the conflict, life remains very
difficult for millions of Syrians, as Mr. Pedersen
just told us. It is increasingly difficult for many of
them. Violence continues to kill and injure civilians,
including women and children. Attacks and security
incidents increased throughout Syria this month. Only
last week, an attack in Ariha, in Idlib governorate,
reportedly killed 11 civilians and injured over 30,
including schoolchildren. A market supported by a
United Nations project was also damaged.
Again as Mr. Pedersen said, all parties to the conflict
must respect civilians and civilian infrastructure, as is
required by international humanitarian law, and make
every effort to spare them the consequences of conflict.
4/25

27/10/2021

Daily life in Syria is becoming less and less
affordable. Over 90 per cent of the population now
lives below the poverty line. Many people are forced
to make very difficult choices to make ends meet,
and therefore face a greater risk of exploitation. That
means that an expansion of early recovery programmes
must be central in our efforts to address needs in a
sustainable way. Progress has been made. Along with
other mechanisms, our pooled funds have increased
support to early recovery activities. However, much
more is needed. For my part, I will continue to urge
donors, agencies and implementing partners to enable
communities to have access to basic social services and
rebuild dignified lives.
On top of increasing poverty, the water crisis
and worsening food security, people in Syria are also
facing a resurgence of the coronavirus disease. Cases
are surging, intensive care units are at full capacity,
and vaccination rates remain below 2 per cent. And
now, exhausted by years of conflict, poverty and
the pandemic, Syrians are about to face another
bitter winter.
As temperatures start to drop, rain, cold and winter
conditions will compound hardship for millions of
people. Close to 2 million people in the north-west, for
example, mostly women and children, live in camps,
often in overcrowded and flimsy shelters, in valleys that
flood, or on rocky hillsides exposed to the elements.
And they have lived in these temporary arrangements
for some time. Although the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners are doing everything possible
to assist the most vulnerable, significant funding
gaps remain.
The United Nations and its partners continue to
make every effort, as required by the Security Council,
to scale up assistance. I was in Aleppo last August
when the World Food Programme’s cross-line delivery
of food aid reached Idlib governorate. This was a vital
step towards expanding the humanitarian response, but
we must now ensure that aid is distributed. As I speak,
full agreement from the parties remains pending, and
I would urge swift movement on next steps to those
withholding such agreement.
Preparations are also under way for another the
World Food Programme cross-line delivery in November.
Beyond this, the United Nations has developed a plan
for a series of regular and predictable inter-agency
cross-line operations to deliver multisectoral assistance
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

in the coming six months and to complete the assistance
coming across the border. We have already submitted
the request for the first inter-agency convoy under the
six-month plan to the Government of Syria. Support for
the plan from both the Syrian and Turkish Governments
as well as relevant parties in north-west Syria will also
be critical.
I am quietly optimistic that we will be able to
further expand cross-line access over the coming
months. The Security Council can be sure that we will
certainly do our part. I therefore urge all concerned
parties to ensure that cross-line missions and the aid
distributions that come with them proceed without
delays. If cross-line operations are to be a sustainable
way of reaching more people, then we need agreement
on a suitable distribution modality that is acceptable to
all the relevant parties and on security guarantees from
parties on the ground. This is a complicated matter, and
one that takes time, but all our efforts are behind it.
When it comes to delivering life-saving aid, all
channels should be made and kept available. Therefore,
as I mentioned earlier, cross-border assistance remains
the central part of the humanitarian response to ensure
that aid effectively and transparently reaches millions
of people in need in north-west Syria.
Constructive discussions with the Syrian authorities
have shown that previous mission-approval rates have
been misrepresented, including in at least one previous
report of the Secretary-General. I apologize for this,
and I assure Council members that, through our
cooperation with the Government, we will make every
effort to prevent this in future.
Therefore, to sum up, communities are determined
to restart their lives, yet still face so many difficulties.
What is needed is this: we need an urgent injection of
life-saving aid, especially as Syrians prepare for winter;
we need more aid for early recovery and livelihoods,
as Syrians want to be able to support themselves with
dignity; and we need to expand access to basic social
services, because Syrians, like all of us, want to send
their children to school, have electricity and water, and
a reliable health clinic — that is the least that we can
help them to achieve. And, of course — perhaps most
importantly — Syrians need peace and support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Albarouki.

S/PV. 8888

Ms. Albarouki (spoke in Arabic): The Syrian
National Conference is a group of Syrian women and men
within Syria and abroad from various but independent
political and civil currents. It considers United Nations
resolutions, in particular resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué, to be the fundamental road
map for getting out of the tragic situation in Syria. Our
political activity is therefore focused on achieving the
greatest national consensus on these resolutions and
the means of practically implementing them. As for
our humanitarian activity, it focuses on addressing the
humanitarian issues resulting from the ongoing complex
war, and on the need to prioritize all urgent matters.
With respect to the Constitutional Committee
and its work, we believe that there is a need to move
from the current working mechanism of exclusively
closed sessions to public discussions, that is from
internal conflict among negotiators, to a national
dialogue on drafting a modern Syrian constitution. To
this end, we organized and are still organizing large
meetings with in-person or remote participation to
integrate the idea of the Constitutional State into the
collective consciousness.
We have also called upon the Special Envoy to
invite the largest number of specialists, politicians and
jurists to Geneva to expand the circle of action and
influence, while constantly emphasizing that the matter
of a new constitution is part of a whole that includes
building trust, bringing about a political transition
and addressing the difficult humanitarian issues that
Syrians are being subjected to in different regions of
the country. The political negotiating process in Syria
has been limited to the constitutional issue alone, with
almost complete disregard for the confidence-building
measures mentioned in paragraphs 12, 13 and 14 of
resolution 2254 (2015). In the past few years, this has
led to some emergency humanitarian needs being set
aside or not given the attention they need.
The number of displaced Syrians has reached
6.7 million citizens to date, many of whom have been
forcibly displaced. More than 1 million of them live
in tents while more than 2 million live in so-called
temporary shelters. They are the victims of grave
housing, land and property-ownership violations. In
many cases, in the very place he resides — his place of
displacement — the victim has become an aggressor,
especially if he belongs to an armed group. We
therefore urge that the issues of forced displacement,
housing, land and property-ownership be included in

21-308165/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

the negotiations and deliberations of the Special Envoy
with the various Syrian stakeholders. These issues
have torn the Syrian social fabric and caused tragic
confrontations that are exemplified in the city of Afrin
and the so-called de-escalation zones.
The number of workers from international
humanitarian organizations on the ground has
decreased to less than a quarter of what it was, mostly
for security reasons, and there is a lack of local
alternatives throughout Syria. Bar Associations or even
local human rights organizations cannot defend the
victims because their members do not receive support
or any local or international protection. They can easily
be added to the long lists of arbitrarily detained persons
as prisoners of conscience throughout Syria.
The harsh daily living conditions experienced by
Syrians inside the country are the worst in the region,
whether in terms of the monthly family income or
accessibility of basic needs, such as water, electricity,
food and medicine. Like a cancer, the war economy has
flourished in all aspects of daily life. Unfortunately the
mercenary business throughout the country has become
the only employment opportunity for thousands of
unemployed youths.
The number of Syrian refugees today is close to
6.5 million. Regrettably, the conditions for a safe and
secure return are not available, neither in areas under
the control of the Syrian Government nor in those under
that of de facto governments.
Through a broad civilian network, we are trying
to build bridges with Syrians in Europe to provide
protection, connections and assistance for our people
in Syria. There are hundreds of thousands of families
inside Syria who lack any financial support that would
enable them to survive, including from a refugee
relative. Our people in Syria are full of hope, not
only that refugees are living in safe and acceptable
conditions but also that they would be able to help them
and become a voice that conveys their suffering and
pain to the entire world.
It is unfortunate that the policy of economic
sanctions lacks what the United Nations once called
“smart sanctions”. The most important Western
economic companies have a phobia of Syrian territories.
We acutely faced such problems during the spread of
the coronavirus disease pandemic. Our medical teams
faced great difficulties in delivering vaccines and
providing tests throughout Syria. Sometimes, Syrian
6/25

27/10/2021

doctors worked 20 hours a day, owing to the lack of
staff and equipment.
To this today, for instance, social networks have not
agreed to establish a hotline to allow Syrian doctors in
the diaspora to perform examinations remotely free of
charge to Syrians in the country. The stated reason is
that Syria is subject to sanctions that do not allow such
a hotline.
The current sanctions cause severe harm to the
Syrian people. Therefore, as a humanitarian priority, it
is crucial to reconsider the unilateral sanctions imposed
on Syria.
It is unfortunate that international institutions
and human rights organizations do not pay sufficient
attention to the issue of arbitrary arrests and missing
persons. Many of them claim that it would be useless to
take any action on the issue, while Syrian authorities deal
with Syrian detainees as hostages or bargaining chips.
The situation in militia prisons is no better. They
demand that huge sums of money be paid to security
officers, such as those of the Saydnaya prison, or to
the militias, such as Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. There is
no way to secure the release of detainees without a
payment. Many prisoners have been executed because
their families could not pay the money demanded.
We in the diaspora have actively participated,
in cooperation with Syrian businesspeople, in the
restoration of schools, mosques, hospitals and churches
in the south of Syria, despite the various restrictions
and harassment from the Government. It is necessary
to discuss exempting the vital reconstruction of schools
and hospitals from the economic sanctions imposed on
Syria, given that postponing the consideration of this
issue, or linking it to the reconstruction process overall,
would mean sacrificing the education and health of an
entire generation of our children.
It is well known that all our attempts to carry
out work that is not under the supervision of the
Syrian authorities are usually rejected. As a result,
authorities have issued a number of decisions ordering
the confiscation of movable and immovable assets of
anybody who participates in that noble work.
We believe in the role of the Syrian diaspora
to support our loved ones in Syria politically and
financially. We are eager to support any initiative aimed
at finding common ground among Syrians — men and
women — living in the diaspora. We also support their
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

coming together so that they can play a significant
political role in finding a political solution in Syria. In
that regard, we draw the attention of Council members
to the need to strengthen such initiatives and allow
refugees to play an active role in bringing peace to
the country.
In conclusion, the picture is not bright, but we
refuse to surrender our right to hope. We hope that the
Security Council and the United Nations will accord the
Syrian issue attention commensurate with the scale of
the tragedy being experienced by Syrians, in Syria and
abroad. We also hope that regional and international
organizations will put their pledges for Syria in the
right and appropriate place.
Any disregard of the Syrian issue today will have
severe consequences, not only for Syria but also for the
regional and international security in general.
The President: I thank Ms. Albarouki for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths and, especially, Ms. Albarouki for their input
into our meeting today.
The United States deeply appreciates the tireless
efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen and those of his
team to convene the sixth session of the Constitutional
Committee. However, we also share his frustration and
assessment that the results were disappointing. This
most recent round, which started with such promise,
ended as one more missed opportunity by the regime to
show its sincere commitment to the Committee’s work.
We will continue to urge all parties to participate in
good faith in the Constitutional Committee process
and to change their unproductive behaviour so that
the Committee can open doors for other aspects of the
political process.
The recent increase in violence across Syria,
including the attacks in Damascus and in Ariha
on 20 October, which we heard mentioned, only
underscored the imperative for a nationwide ceasefire.
That remains an essential element of resolution 2254
(2015). We urge the Special Envoy to continue to push
for progress on all aspects of the resolution. We very
much welcome the attention and focus he has given
to achieving the release of the tens of thousands of

S/PV. 8888

Syrians who are reportedly still arbitrarily detained
inside Syria.
Resolution 2254 (2015) remains the only
internationally agreed path to a peaceful solution to
the conflict. As Secretary of State Blinken said on
13 October, the United States Government will neither
normalize relations with the Al-Assad regime nor we
will support efforts to do so until we see irreversible
progress towards a political solution.
Let me address the issue of sanctions. United States
sanctions are targeted at the Al-Assad regime and
those who have perpetrated this conflict. The United
States is committed to working with parties to ensure
that sanctions do not impede humanitarian and earlyrecovery efforts.
On 18 October United States Treasury Secretary
Janet Yellen announced that the United States would
continue to seek ways to tailor sanctions to mitigate
unintended economic, humanitarian and political
impacts on non-targeted populations abroad, including
the civilian population of Syria.
We, too, are alarmed by the latest wave of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria. COVID-19
is spreading rapidly in the north-east, the north-west
and in regime-held territories. Fuelling that problem is
the fact that, as we heard, Syria’s vaccine coverage is
among the lowest in the world, with less than 2 per cent
of all Syrians being fully vaccinated.
The United States has taken steps to help mitigate
this latest COVID outbreak. On 25 September,
United States Agency for International Development
Administrator Power announced that the United States
would be providing more than $108 million in health
assistance for Syria.
The COVID-19 situation also underscores the
vital importance of the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism through which COVID-19 vaccines and
other life-saving supplies, including bottled oxygen, are
able to reach the people of Idlib. As Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths has told us, the needs in Syria are
rising, so we must seize every opportunity to help those
affected. We support all modalities for aid delivery, and
we encourage the Council to identify ways to expand
aid access across the country.
We also want to take this opportunity to reiterate
the United States’ deep appreciation to all States that
are hosting Syrian refugees, particularly Egypt, Iraq,

21-308167/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. While many Syrian
refugees hold out hope that they will return to their
country, no one should pressure them to risk their lives
or those of their loved ones to do so.
That is precisely what is at stake. We are deeply
disturbed by reports from Amnesty International
and from Human Rights Watch documenting horrific
abuses of individuals who have returned to Syria,
including killings, torture, sexual violence and forced
disappearances carried out by the Al-Assad regime and
affiliated militias. Those reports are entirely consistent
with information that the Council has received over
the past years. It is therefore no surprise that voluntary
returns of refugees to Syria are at their lowest level
since at least 2016, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In surveys, refugees continue to emphasize
that the conditions in Syria are not suitable for safe
and dignified returns and that the Syrian regime’s
policies — the arbitrary detentions, the torture, the
forced disappearances, the mandatory conscriptions,
the seizure and destruction of private property, the
tolerance of militias — all of that constitutes major
barriers to return.
The United States urges all Member States to
continue to protect Syrian refugees. We see all efforts
to press their return at this point as being premature. We
pledge to maintain our support to those Member States
in meeting the needs of refugees and host communities.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Geir Pedersen and Martin
Griffiths for their briefings, and we listened attentively
to Ms. Albarouki. We highly value and support the
mediation efforts of the Special Envoy on the political
track. We welcome the completion of the sixth session
of the small body of the Constitutional Committee, held
in Geneva. Its work has not been easy.
What is most important is that an effective political
process has been resumed in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and the decisions
of the Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held in
Sochi. It is very important that the sides have finally
been able to meet after a nine-month hiatus and to
continue with direct, constructive dialogue. I want to
note the contribution of the States guarantors of the
Astana process in ensuring that work.
8/25

27/10/2021

Unfortunately, at the height of the Committee’s
session, a terrorist attack took place in Damascus that
claimed the lives of 14 people. We believe that the
perpetrators, who do not wish to see the Committee
successfully complete its work, are trying to thwart it.
In the upcoming phase, it is very important to
ensure that the work of the Constitutional Committee
remains led and implemented by the Syrian people
themselves, without any external interference or the
imposition of artificial time frames.
There is no alternative to impartial work with
the Syrian sides in order to help them find mutually
acceptable solutions. However, we must be patient
and pragmatic, without excessive expectations of
immediate results, especially in dealing with such a
fundamental issue for any State as a constitution. We
are convinced that the intra-Syrian dialogue should not
be held hostage to technical modalities.
For our part, we intend to continue to work actively
with all interested parties in order to make progress on
the constitutional track. However, much will depend
on Mr. Pedersen’s diplomatic skills. A United Nations
Special Envoy must be in constant contact with the
Syrian people to try to resolve mutual mistrust and find
mutually acceptable solutions and compromises. We
hope to be able to count on more active efforts on his
part in working with all Syrian sides.
In spite of the overall stabilization of the military
and political situation in Syria, the threat of an
escalation of tensions remains, especially on territories
not under Government control, in Idlib, the Euphrates
area and Al-Tanf.
We note with concern the reports on continuing
illegal Israeli air strikes against Syria. In the north-east
of the country, members of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant are free to roam, exploiting the absence
of legitimate authorities, and we are seeing internecine
armed clashes there.
In that connection, we would like to once again
stress the importance of assisting the inter-Syrian
dialogue in order to restore the unity, territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence of Syria.
I should now like to move on to the contents of the
report of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian
situation in Syrian for the period from August through
September (S/2021/890). We note a significant
difference compared with previous reports with respect
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

to the statistics on authorizations issued to the United
Nations for humanitarian operations. The number of
regular programmatic movements with programme or
blanket approvals increased by 7 per cent. As of the
time of publication of the report, Damascus had already
approved 83 per cent of the 218 requested approvals
for missions requiring approval from the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs; 17 per cent remain under consideration,
so that is not a refusal. It appears, then, that almost all
requests made by the United Nations have been granted.
It turns out that access to 97 per cent of those in
need in Syria is generally not a problem. The only
serious obstacles to the movement of humanitarian
workers are mines and unexploded ordnance, but even
that did not prevent the United Nations from increasing
its presence on the ground in the north-east of the
country, where humanitarian convoys of the World
Health Organization are regularly sent, and in Deir ezZor governorate.
Of course, there is no need to comment here.
It is clear that Damascus is fully complying with its
obligations and is open to continuing to cooperate with
the United Nations. We hope that all colleagues in the
Council will take note of that fact.
Against that backdrop, the situation with respect
to cross-line humanitarian deliveries to Idlib looks a
lot less rosy. We have to note that as we feared, there
was euphoria from the one-time August convoy of the
United Nations World Food Programme. Over the next
two months, there were no further achievements. Food
continues to be stored in Sarmada.
The modalities for the UNICEF humanitarian
operation mentioned in the report of the Secretary
General require further explanation. Under what
criteria is it considered a cross-line delivery? As we
understand it, no lines were crossed and no cross-line
deliveries were made. We would also like to ask Martin
Griffiths for clarification as to what steps are being
taken to increase efforts on early reconstruction projects.
The figures cited in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/890) are encouraging, but real progress
has been minimal. It is not clear to us why efforts to
create jobs fall into the same category. How can the
undoubtedly important task of improving people’s
socioeconomic situation concretely affect living
conditions in a country with a shattered infrastructure?
To be frank, we see only a very indirect connection.

S/PV. 8888

Following his recent visit to Syria, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi clearly
articulated the need to create adequate conditions for
returning Syrian refugees.
Against the backdrop of the global economic crisis,
Syria’s neighbours in the region openly acknowledge
the limit of their capacity to continue hosting Syrian
refugees, a growing number of whom no longer want
to tolerate life in tents, without access to medicine and
education, and seek to return home in search of stability.
Every month, there are hundreds such Syrians — mostly
women and children. The Syrian Government has set
up reception and hosting centres in 413 locations for
1.5 million people to provide them with the necessary
assistance. Government programmes are under way
in the governorates of Aleppo, Damascus and Hama
to reclaim areas liberated from the militants. Those
efforts by the Syrian Government, squeezed by the vice
grip of Western sanctions, deserve support.
Nevertheless, with a determination that would be
better used elsewhere, Western colleagues are doing
their best to distort reality, politicize this purely
humanitarian issue, intimidate potential returnees and
spread fake news in the process. A good example of
that was the statement delivered today by my American
colleague. The sooner our colleagues shift to a normal
constructive approach, the better it will be for ordinary
Syrians and their neighbours in the region.
At the same time, we read reports from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
about the increase in extreme poverty in terroristcontrolled Idlib, even among the working population.
Not surprisingly, street protests have started in the
enclave among the rapidly growing number of starving
civilians, who are still effectively held hostage by the
remnants of die-hard insurgents. One recent example
of the absolutely slaveowner-like behaviour of the Idlib
bandits is the refusal to release a group of 50 teenagers
who had expressed a desire to attend universities in
Aleppo and Damascus. We hope that colleagues at the
Security Council who have been fighting for children’s
rights and education will make their position known on
this matter.
Despite all that, we must note the stabilization
of Dara’a. Over 70 per cent of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) have returned to their homes, schools
have reopened, and humanitarian aid workers have
resumed regular operations. Against that backdrop, it

21-308169/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

is of course disconcerting to see what is happening in
Al-Hol and Rukban camps. We call on our colleagues to
exert influence on their clients. We are also concerned
about the situation in northern Syria with regard to the
numerous violations of international humanitarian law
and the rights of IDPs in the areas of Ras Al-Ayn and
Tel Abyad.
In conclusion, I would like to urge everyone to
remember that very soon we will have to decide on the
future of cross-border deliveries. We will have to decide
whether to renew the cross-border mechanism in an
impartial manner, based on facts and achievements, in
line with the provisions of resolution 2585 (2021). There
are still serious questions about its implementation,
and time is running out. So-called “successes” that
are just a sham will not be taken into account in that
decision. I hope that our colleagues and the Secretariat
understand that.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I make this statement today on
behalf of the co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian
file — Norway and Ireland.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths for his briefing. He has set before us
in stark terms the enormity of the humanitarian needs
facing the people of Syria — a grim reality to which our
briefer, Ms. Mounerfah Albarouki, also gave expression
today, and we also thank her for her briefing.
I must begin by deploring the recent uptick in
hostilities in Syria, in particular in the north-west,
which have resulted in more than 100 civilian deaths
since June. This flagrant disregard for the lives of
Syrians is frankly unacceptable. We urge all parties
to the conflict to fully respect and implement their
international humanitarian law obligations, including
by ensuring the protection of civilians. We also call on
all States with direct influence over the parties to the
conflict to take any possible proactive steps that may
lead to increased protection for the civilian population
in Syria.
Syrians are facing yet another bitter winter.
With resilience levels at record lows after 10 years of
conflict, Syrians are now worse off than at any time
since the conflict began. In the north-west, many of the
2.8 million displaced persons find themselves living
in overcrowded flimsy tents, in valleys that flood or
on rocky hillsides exposed to harsh weather. Recent
winters in Syria have seen many killed or injured as
fires have ripped through crowded camps, storms
10/25

27/10/2021

have wreaked havoc and flooding has washed away
thousands of tents and destroyed temporary homes.
The onset of these harsh winter conditions is
coinciding with increasing fuel prices and food
scarcity. Tragically, lives will once again be lost this
winter, and we recognize the disproportionate impact
that those severe conditions and the ongoing conflict
and violence have on both women and children. The
extreme fragility of the situation underlines the
imperative of ensuring that help can reach those most in
need through the continued provision of humanitarian
access and adequate funding for the winterization
response. Furthermore, we must not lose sight of the
need for a broader humanitarian response — including
water, sanitation, health, education, shelter and earlyrecovery projects — geared towards providing for the
immediate needs of Syrians.
The harsh winter conditions will create fresh
operational difficulties for the complex humanitarian
access landscape in Syria. We note the increase this
year in cross-line access to the north-east. We welcome
the news of a potential inter-agency cross-line convoy
to the north-west, which will build upon the first World
Food Programme cross-line mission, which took place
in August. We also welcome the continued efforts at
the large cross-border operation at Bab Al-Hawa.
Thanks to the principled decision of the Council in
July, that cross-border operation is continuing to
provide a lifeline to 3.4 million people in need, who
are now facing another winter against the backdrop of
an intensification of hostilities, a deepening economic
crisis, an unprecedented spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and a severe funding crisis.
We are concerned about the deteriorating security
situation in Al-Hol camp, as reported by the SecretaryGeneral this month. The daily reality for those
vulnerable people is a continuing struggle to access
food, medical care, clean water, protection and other
basic services, not to mention their exposure to the
spread of COVID-19. It is critical that the security
provided at the camp be done in a manner that neither
endangers residents nor restricts humanitarian access.
The past two months have seen a sharp increase
in the number of COVID-19 infections in Syria. For
instance, in the north-west it has been described as
an uncontrolled outbreak, with the positivity rate
reported to have doubled in the past month, resulting
in widespread illness and death. That has put enormous
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

pressure on an already fragile health system and
added to the urgency of protecting access to water and
sanitation. All parties must facilitate humanitarian
access and uphold ceasefires in order to enable medical
humanitarian teams to undertake their vital functions,
including safely delivering COVID-19 vaccinations to
those who need it most.
In conclusion, I would like to underline our
commitment to supporting the people of Syria in the face
of this grave humanitarian crisis. As co-penholders, our
approach continues to be informed by the words of the
Secretary-General, who tells us that communities are
determined to restart their lives, yet desperately need
an end to the conflict, life-saving aid, early-recovery
support and respect for fundamental human rights in
order to do so. Our collective efforts on the Council
must surely be dedicated to ensuring that Syrians who
have suffered through this terrible conflict can live
with dignity and hope for a better future.
I would now like to deliver some remarks on the
political situation in my national capacity.
I thank Mr. Pedersen very much for his efforts
to provide new momentum to the Constitutional
Committee. We share his disappointment at the lack
of progress. As civil society briefer Rouba Mhaissen
eloquently told us last month (see S/PV.8866), in
order for any political settlement to be successful, it
must focus on building local resilience and supporting
Syrians, especially the voice and agency of Syrian
women. Their meaningful participation in the political
process is crucial to achieving sustainable peace after
so many desperate years of conflict.
As set out in resolution 2254 (2015), the new
constitution is an essential building block for a political
solution and national reconciliation, which the Syrian
people need and deserve. It is long past time for
meaningful engagement and tangible progress on that
vital task. Tragically, the vision of a peaceful future
remains elusive, and the Syrian people continue to
endure the horror of events such as last week’s lethal
attacks in Damascus and Idlib, the victims of which
included three boys and one girl killed while on their
way to school. Ireland condemns those attacks, which
serve to underline the importance of a nationwide
ceasefire across all of Syria.
Earlier this month an event took place on the
margins of the General Assembly on the plight of
the disappeared in Syria. Family members spoke of

S/PV. 8888

the terrible circumstances in which their loved ones
went missing. The Syrian Network for Human Rights
estimates that at least 149,000 people remain detained
or missing. That is an appalling situation for those
individuals and their families left in limbo as they
await news of their loved ones. We call on the Syrian
authorities and other parties to release detainees and
abductees, and we thank Mr. Pedersen for his work on
that important issue.
We listened with interest to Mr. Pedersen’s ideas
on step-for-step approaches by the Syrian parties and
international actors. Ireland looks forward to hearing
more about what he has in mind and is willing to be
helpful in whatever way it can. As always, he has our
full support in the vital work of seeking a political
solution to the Syrian conflict in line with resolution
2254 (2015).
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Pedersen, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, and Mr. Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings. I
commend their efforts to advance the political process
in Syria and ease the plight of the Syrian people. I also
listened closely to the briefing by Ms. Albarouki.
China welcomed the convening of the sixth session
of the small body of the Constitutional Committee
according to schedule and noted that it did not achieve
the results hoped for. While Syria continues to suffer
from foreign occupation, unilateral sanctions and
terrorism; while there is a grave lack of mutual political
trust among all parties in Syria; and while the future
and destiny of the country are not entirely in the hands
of the Syrian people, it comes as no surprise that the
Constitutional Committee has encountered difficulties
and delays in its work. Following the Committee’s
session, the Special Envoy said to the press that all
parties in Syria needed to reach an understanding on
how to advance drafting the constitution.
We call on all parties to remain constructively
engaged with the Special Envoy in that regard. All
parties in Syria and those who have influence over it
should take practical measures to effectively implement
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process based on
areas of consensus such as counter-terrorism, actively
cooperate, gradually build mutual trust to create
the conditions necessary for the political process,
substantively support the work of the Special Envoy

21-3081611/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

and jointly promote the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015).
Last week saw a terrorist attack in Damascus
that led to casualties. China strongly condemns the
attack and extends its condolences to the families
of the victims and its sympathy to those who were
injured. China opposes terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and supports the Syrian Government’s
counter-terrorism efforts. Terrorism is a scourge
for humankind. The Security Council should send a
consistent and clear message to the terrorist forces in
Syria and reject double standards.
The humanitarian situation in Syria described by
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths is of deep concern.
The economic crisis has affected Syrian society in
every aspect. Food and oil prices have soared, while
people’s income has continued to fall sharply. The
coronavirus disease pandemic remains a serious issue,
while vaccines are in short supply. Water levels in the
Euphrates River have dropped, while operations at the
Allouk water station have been frequently disrupted,
making it difficult to sustain water and power supplies
and agricultural irrigation.
Since Turkey illegally invaded north-east Syria,
it has repeatedly cut off the water supply from the
Allouk water station, affecting hundreds of thousands
of civilians and creating enormous difficulties for the
United Nations humanitarian relief work in the area.
China urges Turkey to comply with international law,
including international humanitarian law, protect
civilians, maintain infrastructure operations and
guarantee humanitarian access for the United Nations.
Syria’s humanitarian needs will increase further
as winter approaches. The international community
must pay equal attention to humanitarian assistance
and economic reconstruction and use a multi-pronged
approach to help the Syrian people cope with
multiple challenges. China appreciates the large-scale
humanitarian relief operations carried out by the
World Food Programme (WFP), the World Health
Organization, UNICEF and other agencies throughout
Syria. On 31 August, WFP delivered cross-line
humanitarian assistance from Aleppo to Idlib for the
first time. That was a major breakthrough.
We hope that all the parties concerned will work
together to develop a plan for inter-agency cross-line
operations in the north-west. China welcomes the fact
that the United Nations Development Programme, the
12/25

27/10/2021

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other agencies have actively carried out
early-recovery and livelihood projects in Syria, repaired
infrastructure, cleaned up debris and provided training
and job opportunities for the Syrian people.
Syria recently cooperated with Egypt, Jordan and
Lebanon with regard to natural gas. We encourage the
countries of the region to step up interaction and mutual
assistance to jointly improve the regional economic
and humanitarian situation. It must be pointed out that
unilateral sanctions have exacerbated the economic
and humanitarian crises in Syria and run contrary to
the efforts of the international community. They must
therefore be lifted immediately.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I also thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths and Ms. Albarouki for their briefings.
We remain extremely concerned about the security
situation in Syria. The latest reports of hostilities are
alarming, and they continue to compound an alreadydire humanitarian crisis. We firmly condemn all acts
of violence, in particular recent attacks in Damascus
and Idlib. We implore the parties to the conflict to
exercise maximum restraint and fully commit to a
nationwide ceasefire.
The protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure is paramount. We remind parties of their
obligation to fully comply with the principles enshrined
in international law, including throughout the conduct
of all military and counter-terrorism operations.
Failure to do so constitutes a gross violation for which
impunity should never be tolerated. The protection
of civilians extends to those residing in displacement
camps such as Al-Hol, where insecurity persists. We
reiterate that camp residents and humanitarian workers
must be afforded safety and access to basic services.
The economic and water crises confine the
Syrian people to a very perilous position, as they
have compounded food insecurity and shortages of
other commodities and generated potential long-term
humanitarian consequences. Record-low water levels
in the Euphrates River, precipitated by the existential
threat of climate change, in combination with other
troubling factors, such as the reduced operations of
the Allouk water station, therefore demand immediate
and sustained attention. Furthermore, we cannot ignore
the adverse impact of unilateral coercive measures
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

on the civilian population, the work of humanitarian
actors and the country’s coronavirus disease response.
We echo our unyielding appeal for the lifting of those
measures for the benefit of the Syrian people.
Practical steps must be taken to assist Syria and
Syrians in need. Vulnerabilities are high. Early recovery
projects and activities, including the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of civilian infrastructure, are critical
and must be tangibly supported by the international
community and other partners. That is necessary to
enhance the resilience of the Syrian people and to
bolster the country’s own national efforts to achieve its
long-term development goals. We ought to be reminded
that those projects are also an essential factor that
will encourage the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their places of origin.
Millions continue to be dependent on life-saving
aid in Syria, with needs are growing rapidly and daily.
Timely, safe and unhindered humanitarian access,
facilitated by the cross-border mechanism, remains
critical to the response. However, the mechanism
in isolation cannot effectively and adequately meet
the needs of all Syrians. The cross-line modality is
therefore required to complement the mechanism and
must be optimized and scaled up to enable greater
access. We therefore urge parties to continue to work
together to expand that modality.
We note with concern and regret the outcome of the
sixth session of the Constitutional Committee, despite
the best efforts of the Special Envoy. The Constitutional
Committee is unquestionably vital to the progress of
the wider political process and an important component
of resolution 2254 (2015). We strongly urge all parties
to remain committed to working together and to
engage constructively, in a spirit of mutual respect and
compromise. Commonalties have been found before,
and must be found again, to reach consensus and
move forward.
We continue to support the Special Envoy as he works
assiduously to facilitate the work of the Constitutional
Committee and the wider political process, including
through efforts on the unsettled issues of detainees and
missing persons. Confidence-building measures must
be prioritized in the process to foster goodwill and
encourage national reconciliation.
Lasting peace and stability in Syria cannot be
won through military means. A political resolution
remains the only path to finally put an end to a decade

S/PV. 8888

of conflict and suffering. Syria and its people require
pragmatic support that is Syria-focused and not directed
by geopolitical interests. That dictates constructive
actions such as the withdrawal of all unauthorized
foreign forces present on Syria’s sovereign territory.
Ten years of conflict have stripped away dignity,
protection and prosperity from the Syrian people. A
decade has been lost to turmoil and anguish. It is past
time for Syria to be supported with practical actions
rather than with mere verbal expressions of solidarity.
We have a duty to the Syrian people, and we must not
fail to discharge it.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen, UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Ms. Mounerfah
Albarouki for their briefings.
We also welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran
and Turkey to today’s meeting.
I will focus my statement on the following
points — first, violence and the ceasefire; secondly,
the constitutional process; thirdly, the rule of law, and,
lastly, the humanitarian situation.
First, Mexico rejects all recent acts of violence that
have been recorded. My country condemns the attack
on a military vehicle in Damascus, which led to the
deaths of 14 people. My delegation also condemns the
bombing in the north-west, including in Ariha, Idlib
and western Aleppo, which resulted in civilian deaths,
including children. We extend our condolences and
call for unconditional respect for international law and
international humanitarian law. Those events remind
us of the absolute need for a lasting national ceasefire.
The human cost is unacceptable. According to the most
recent estimates published by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, more
than 350,000 people have died in 10 years of conflict.
Secondly, we welcome the recent holding of the
sixth session of the small body of the Constitutional
Committee and highlight the agreement among the
parties on working methods. We deplore the fact that,
two years since the establishment of the Committee,
progress on the drafting of the constitution has been
limited. We call on the delegation appointed by the
Government to demonstrate resolve and commitment
as it participates in the constitutional process.
The Constitutional Committee is not the solution
to the Syrian conflict but, undoubtedly, it will lay

21-3081613/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

27/10/2021

the foundation for progress in the political transition
and social reconciliation and, ultimately, in building
lasting peace. In that regard, we applaud the ongoing
contact between the Special Envoy and civil society.
In particular, we welcome the recent meeting with
the Women’s Advisory Board. We underscore the
importance of ensuring the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women, young people and minorities at
all stages of political discussions.

of efforts in order to make progress towards a political
solution that will make it possible to prioritize the
urgent humanitarian needs of the country.

Despite the lack of progress in the drafting of the
new constitution, we note common ground among
delegations in areas such as the cessation of violence,
the containment of the pandemic, the protection of
civilians, the fight against terrorism, the strengthening
of institutions and economic recovery, as well as the
safeguarding of the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence of Syria. Resolution 2254 (2015)
remains the parameter for compliance.

Estonia condemns, in the strongest terms, the acts
of violence that took place last week across Syria. That
includes the attack on a military bus in Damascus and
missile attacks in Ariha on 20 October. At least 10
civilians, including four children, where killed in the
town of Ariha, in Idlib governorate, on that day.

With regard to the rule of law, we echo the
Secretary-General’s call. Mexico, too, calls for the
release of detainees and for clarification with regard to
forced disappearances, as soon as possible. We stress
that, unless the demands of thousands of families on
the issue are addressed, it will be impossible to mend
Syria’s social fabric or promote national reconciliation.
With respect to the humanitarian situation,
my country is concerned about the increase in the
number of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases,
which exacerbates critical humanitarian needs, in
particular in the north-west. To date, only 1.6 per
cent of the population have received the vaccine. And
the prognosis is a sombre one because, despite the
planned vaccination roll-out, it will be possible to
vaccinate only 15 per cent of the population. As we
have underscored several times, COVID-19 vaccines
should be considered a global public good. Access to
them should be guaranteed to everyone.
My country, Mexico, welcomes the efforts towards
the ongoing delivery of humanitarian aid across conflict
lines. To that end, we call for the necessary permits to be
issued. Humanitarian access — cross-border and crossline — is particularly crucial as winter approaches. The
displaced population in the north-east will require tents
and fuel. Approximately 80 per cent of those living in
camps for displaced persons are women and children.
In conclusion, Mexico reiterates that there is no
military solution to the conflict in Syria. That is why
we call for a nationwide ceasefire and the redoubling
14/25

Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their informative briefings today. We welcome
the participation of Ms. Mounerfah Albarouki and
appreciate her insightful comments.

We reiterate our call for a nationwide ceasefire,
which is a precondition for peaceful dialogue, based
on resolution 2254 (2015). All parties must adhere
to international law and provide safe, sustained and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all Syrian people.
The new wave of violence serves to highlight the
fact that, unfortunately, the war is far from over. As
noted by Ms. Albarouki today and by Ms. Mhaissen
last month (see S/PV.8866), refugees do not intend to
return to Syria under those circumstances. We reiterate
that the return of refugees must be voluntary, safe
and dignified.
Looking at the humanitarian situation, we commend
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for reaching an average of 5 million people in
both August and September with humanitarian aid.
As noted by Mr. Griffiths, cross-border aid deliveries
remain essential in providing food and life-saving
support to millions of internally displaced persons.
That support is crucial as overall living standards
continue to deteriorate due to widespread corruption
and warlordism. Estonia expresses concern over recent
reports of currency manipulation by the Syrian regime,
which has forced international aid agencies to use a
distorted exchange rate.
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his efforts, but
after six rounds of Constitutional Committee talks, there
have been no substantial discussions on the constitution,
no regularity in meetings and no meaningful progress.
The Constitutional Committee has failed the Syrian
people. We are witnessing delaying tactics and empty
promises. In that light, we encourage the Special Envoy
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

to explore other confidence-building measures to help
mediate conflicting interests.
Finally, the topic of locating missing people,
whether deceased or arbitrarily detained, remains a
priority for Estonia. Investigative mechanisms such as
the Human Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic and the General Assembly’s
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011 are important tools to reach
that goal.
Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Emergency Relief
Coordinator Griffiths for their briefings today. I would
also like to thank Ms. Albarouki for her statement.
The past month has seen a worrisome increase in
incidents of deadly violence in Syria. In particular,
we note with concern the 20 October rocket attack
on residential areas of Ariha city, in southern Idlib,
by regime forces, which reportedly killed 13 people,
including several schoolchildren, and wounded 30
others. The United Kingdom notes with concern the
bomb attack on a military bus in Damascus on the same
day, which reportedly led to the deaths of 14 people.
The United Kingdom condemns both of those
attacks. We reiterate our condemnation of any and all
acts of terrorism committed wherever, whenever and by
whomever. We reaffirm our demand that all parties in
Syria immediately cease any attacks against civilians
and civilian objects, as well as any indiscriminate use
of weapons. We express our condolences and sympathy
to the families of the victims of those and other attacks
and wish the injured a full and speedy recovery.
Against the backdrop of that apparent steady
increase in the level and nature of violence in Syria,
last month we expressed hope for substantive progress
on the political processes set out in resolution 2254
(2015), particularly in the sixth round of Constitutional
Committee talks (see S/PV.8866).
We thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his tireless
work in facilitating the talks in Geneva. After two
years of meetings, there were some signs of limited
progress. But we share the disappointment that, despite
Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts, the parties failed to
reach consensus on next steps, including drafting a new

S/PV. 8888

constitution or agreeing a date for the next round of
talks. In that sense, the process fell short. We hope to
see genuine preparation on the constitutional reform
process soon.
A political solution pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015) remains the only clear path out of the conflict in
Syria. In the absence of substantive progress towards
a sustainable end to the conflict, the United Kingdom
reaffirms its position that we will not provide funding for
reconstruction. In the meantime, the United Kingdom
remains committed to doing what it can to alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people. That includes restricting
the resources available to those seeking to perpetuate or
profit from the conflict and to provide what assistance
we can to Syrians facing one of the direst humanitarian
situations in the world.
Since the beginning of the conflict, the United
Kingdom has committed over $5 billion in humanitarian
aid to Syrians. In 2020-2021 alone, the United Kingdom
has provided over $2 million worth of food, clean
water, medical consultations and education and over
200,000 vaccines. Helping those most vulnerable in
Syria using every possible route remains a priority for
the United Kingdom.
Recent cross-line missions have demonstrated the
challenges of securing consistent and safe cross-line
aid access into north-west Syria. Cross-border aid
delivery remains the most effective and safest means of
delivery. We welcome the development of a six-month
plan for cross-line assistance to explore in more detail
the potential for increased cross-line access. We extend
thanks to partners, including Turkey, without the
collaboration of whom cross-line pilot missions could
not have taken place.
In addition to providing direct life-saving assistance,
the United Kingdom recognizes the importance of
humanitarian assistance and providing sustainable
solutions to meet people’s needs by strengthening
resilience, restoring capacity and catalysing recovery
from a crisis — otherwise known as early recovery. To
date, among other things, the United Kingdom’s earlyrecovery work in Syria has included cash assistance
to vulnerable households, imports for agriculture
and livestock production and basic housing repair
support. In north-east Syria, the United Kingdom
has supported over 5,500 people with cash-for-work
interventions and over 53,000 people through business
development interventions.

21-3081615/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, we regret that, until the Syrian
regime puts the Syrian people ahead of its own survival
and genuinely commits to making progress on the
political process endorsed by the Council in resolution
2254 (2015), that kind of support will never be enough.
We once again urge the Syrian regime to work in good
faith with the United Nations and the Special Envoy to
create a truly sustainable and peaceful future for Syria
and Syrians.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Geir
Pedersen and Mr. Martin Griffiths for their briefings,
as well as Ms. Mounerfah Albarouki for her testimony.
The war in Syria remains a daily reality. We
condemn the resurgence of violence as seen in the
bombing attacks in Damascus on 20 October and
the indiscriminate bombings by the regime and its
supporters on Idlib, which led to the deaths of at least a
dozen civilians, including four children. No effort must
be spared in order to bring about a general cessation
of hostilities under the supervision of the United
Nations and in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
France welcomes the efforts of the Special Envoy
to convene the sixth session of the Constitutional
Committee last week in Geneva. We take note of the
discussions held during the week, which focused on
issues that are extremely important for the future of the
Syrian people. We regret that the delegation appointed
by the regime did not demonstrate a willingness to pave
the way for a common text. We also regret that no date
for the next session has been agreed upon.
We must face reality: it has been two years since the
process was put in place, while no tangible results have
been achieved. We have already called, on numerous
occasions, for a sincere commitment from the regime
and the mobilization of its supporters in that regard.
The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015). It remains the common road
map for Council members to achieve a political solution
to the conflict. Until resolution 2254 (2015) is fully
implemented, there will be no lasting peace in Syria,
as the events of 20 October show. It is precisely in
the name of that lasting peace that we keep repeating
that, in the absence of a concrete political solution,
our positions on the lifting of sanctions, normalization
and reconstruction will remain unchanged. Without a
16/25

27/10/2021

political solution, there can be no voluntary, safe and
dignified return of refugees and displaced persons.
The humanitarian situation remains dire, and
the Syrian population is about to face the rigours of
a new winter of war. International humanitarian law
continues to be flouted. At least 126 civilians lost their
lives during the months of August and September alone.
Serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights will not go unpunished. France will
ensure that. Without justice, there will be no lasting
peace in Syria.
The protection of civilians, including humanitarian
and medical personnel, must remain an absolute
priority. Every effort must also be made to ensure full
humanitarian access and to accelerate vaccination
campaigns against coronavirus disease, as has been
reiterated on many occasions, particularly in the
north-west, where the pandemic is spreading in a very
worrisome way.
As the Secretary-General noted in his most recent
report (S/2021/890), the first cross-line convoy to the
north-west is a step forward. However, we know that
cross-line assistance is no substitute for cross-border
operations. We therefore encourage the United Nations
to step up cross-border convoys to meet people’s needs
as winter approaches.
After 10 years of war, it is time for all Council
members to understand that no one will win the Syrian
crisis with weapons. There is an urgent need for
everyone to show a spirit of compromise to bring this
tragedy to an end.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Mounerfah
Albarouki, General Coordinator of the Syrian National
Conference, for their briefings. I also welcome the
participation of the representatives of Syria, Iran and
Turkey in this meeting.
At the outset, Tunisia expresses its concern about the
widespread increase in violence, tensions and terrorism
in Syria in the past weeks. We are also concerned about
the signs of increasing armed clashes in some parts
of the country, which could undermine stabilization
efforts and exacerbate the security and humanitarian
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

challenges, especially amid the consequences of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
In that regard, we reiterate our firm position that
there can be no military solution to the crisis. The
solution will instead require a political settlement
led and owned by Syria and facilitated by the United
Nations, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
in order to put an end to external interference and the
presence of terrorist groups, preserve Syria’s unity and
sovereignty and restore its security and stability.
We also reiterate the importance of restoring
stability in Syria through efforts to de-escalate the
situation and restore calm. All parties should respect
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and protect civilians at all times, especially
children and other vulnerable groups.
The terrorist bombing that targeted a military bus
in Damascus on 20 October reminds us once again of
the need to address terrorist-designated organizations
while respecting international law and maintaining
unity in the international community. Civilians should
be protected from all forms of violence and aggression
regardless of their origin. We also note an increase in
fighting between various factions and terrorist groups
in Syria recently. We therefore once again recall that
the understandings and arrangements in force in Syria,
despite their importance, remain short-term solutions to
a ceasefire as long as they do not address in a practical
and effective way the issue of neutralizing terrorist
organizations, thereby ending the safe haven that such
groups have found in some parts of the country. A longterm political solution is required in Syria in order to
restore security and stability in both the country and
the region.
We also took note of the holding of the sixth
session of the Syrian Constitutional Committee and its
small body in Geneva last week. While we welcome
the re-launching of the constitutional reform process
among Syrians and the in-person meeting of the two
co-Chairs with the Special Envoy in Geneva, we urge
the Syrian parties to make more efforts to seek out
common ground and find the necessary compromises,
as well as strengthening confidence-building measures,
based on the principle of their full ownership of the
settlement process and the overriding interests of the
brotherly Syrian people.
Tunisia also welcomes the adherence of the Syrian
parties during the negotiations to the principle of the

S/PV. 8888

unity of Syria despite the failure to achieve the desired
progress in terms of drafting a constitution. We value
the role of the Special Envoy and once again express
our full support for his efforts.
As described in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/890), the humanitarian situation in Syria
continues to be a cause of concern, especially in the light
of the worsening living, health and education conditions
and the exacerbation of the situation regarding the
delivery and interruption of basic materials and
services. In that context, we note the importance of
taking proactive measures as winter approaches by
strengthening resilience and early-recovery projects
in Syria, which still lack sufficient funds, in order to
ensure an effective and timely humanitarian response.
We reaffirm the importance of ensuring sustainable
access by Syrians to basic needs and services and
respect by all parties of their obligations to protect
civilians, civilian and medical facilities and medical
and humanitarian personnel in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
We also stress the importance of delivering
humanitarian assistance to those in need wherever they
may be in Syria, while ensuring its use in an effective
and transparent manner. In that context, we call for the
strengthening of cross-line humanitarian operations in
Syria and the completion of the cross-line delivery of
humanitarian aid to Sarmada.
In conclusion, we welcome the constructive
engagement of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees with the Syrian Government on the issues
of forced displacement of Syrians and cooperation
to remove obstacles preventing the return of Syrian
refugees to their homeland. We support what the High
Commissioner has said regarding the fact that finding
solutions for displaced persons requires concerted
efforts by the Syrian State, host countries and donors.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen, Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Albarouki for their
briefings. We welcome the representatives of Syria,
Iran and Turkey to this meeting.
My delegation is concerned about the continuing
violence that has escalated in recent weeks. We deplore
the bomb attacks in Damascus on 20 October, as well as
the air strikes that have resulted in deaths and injuries.
The Niger urges the parties to refrain from any action
that could further aggravate tensions and calls on the

21-3081617/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

parties for a general ceasefire to create the conditions
for a political process.
We will not stop saying that the resolution of the
Syrian crisis cannot come from the force of arms
alone, but, rather, through dialogue and negotiations
and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). We
are disappointed that the Constitutional Committee is
struggling to make real progress and find a common
pathway towards drafting a constitution. It is high time
for the parties to pull together and show a modicum of
compromise to break this impasse in order to truly put
the political process on the right track. My delegation
calls on the parties to make gestures to build mutual
confidence by undertaking a unilateral mass release of
detainees and providing clarifications to the families of
missing persons.
On the humanitarian front, the Niger remains
deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in
Syria. We call on the Syrian Government to continue
its cooperation with the United Nations and its partners
to improve and strengthen the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, as well as the sharing of information.
The Niger calls for the easing or suspending
unilateral economic sanctions, which are weighing
heavily on Syria’s ability to cope with the pandemic
and the current economic crisis. For my delegation, all
those who need this aid should receive it, no matter who
or where they are.
In conclusion, the Niger recalls that any real,
tangible progress in the situation requires giving
up all foreign interference, including support for
armed groups. Syria’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity must be respected.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive
briefing today. I thank Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for his update on the humanitarian situation. I
also thank the civil society briefer, Ms. Albarouki, for
her insights.
Special Envoy Pedersen has just briefed us in
detail on the developments in Geneva with regard to
the sixth round of Constitutional Committee talks and
deliberations. It is encouraging that the Constitutional
Committee met last week in Geneva. While the meetings
led to no major outcome, the fact that parties presented
their proposals is a positive development. We hope these
efforts will further energize the political track and help
18/25

27/10/2021

the Special Envoy in the coming weeks in his mediation
endeavours towards full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). We reiterate that the Constitutional
Committee process has to remain Syrian-led and
Syrian-driven and facilitated by the United Nations. In
this regard, we continue to call on all external actors to
desist from adversely influencing the parties concerned.
There have been some important high-level regional
engagements with Syria as well. We take note of Syria’s
recent engagement with Jordan and the United Arab
Emirates. The opening of the border between Jordan
and Syria will help in the movement of people and
essential goods.
On the security front, we remain concerned with
the overall situation in Syria, including the recent
ceasefire violations in the north-west of the country.
We condemn in the strongest terms the recent
terrorist attack in Damascus, which resulted in the
killing of 14 people and injuries to many. India has
always believed that terrorism, in all its forms and
manifestations, constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. The
international community must unequivocally condemn
any acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, irrespective of the place,
time or the background of the perpetrators.
We have been referring to the involvement of
external actors in Syria and its impact on the growth
of terrorism in both Syria and the region. Such United
Nations-designated terrorist groups as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
as mentioned in recent reports of the Secretary-General,
have continued to gain in strength in Syria. ISIL has
continued to launch attacks in areas across Deir ez-Zor,
Hasakah and eastern rural Homs.
We believe that a nationwide comprehensive
ceasefire is paramount in serving the interests of the
Syrian people and will help to ensure that positive
developments such as the first cross-line humanitarian
aid operation from Aleppo to Idlib in August can take
firm root and not remain a one-off occurrence. In this
regard, we take note of the inter-agency cross-line
operations proposal that the Under-Secretary-General
referred to earlier.
The humanitarian crisis in Syria has not seen
much improvement in recent months. More than
12 million people across Syria remain in urgent need
of humanitarian assistance. The dire food insecurity
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

situation, as documented by the World Food Programme,
has been further aggravated by the compounding water
crisis. The drought conditions and reduced water levels
in the Euphrates River has further added to problem.
While the number of active cases of coronavirus
disease is rising every day, particularly in north-west
Syria, the vaccination levels continue to remain low. It
is clear that the current level of humanitarian assistance
remains insufficient, and there is therefore an urgent
need to scale it up.
We note the efforts aimed at easing unilateral
coercive measures. We remain confident that such
developments would also encourage progress in early
recovery projects being carried out by the United
Nations agencies and others in Syria.
India has continued to extend development
assistance and human-resource-development support
to Syria through grants and lines of credit for several
projects, including capacity-building programmes.
Just last week, through our grant assistance, we set up
a state-of-the-art centre of excellence in information
technology in Damascus.
Since the beginning of the conflict, India has
always had diplomatic engagement with Syria. We
intend to stay the course and reiterate our steadfast
commitment to continuing to render all possible support
and assistance to the people of Syria.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Albarouki for their briefings. I welcome the
participation of the representatives of Syria, Turkey
and Iran in today’s meeting.
Sustainable peace and development continue to
elude the Syrian people. These can only be achieved once
a comprehensive political solution has been reached.
Viet Nam reiterates its full support for the Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated political
solution, which is in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and in full adherence to international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
My delegation is pleased to see last week’s
resumption of talks within the framework of the
Constitutional Committee, although, as pointed out
by the Special Envoy, the desired outcomes have not
been achieved. In this regard, we encourage the parties
concerned to engage constructively in dialogue and

S/PV. 8888

negotiation with a view to realizing the Syrian people’s
aspirations for peace.
To facilitate this process, trust and confidence
among the Syrian interlocutors and international actors
need to be rebuilt and constantly consolidated. We will
continue to support the efforts of relevant parties and
the United Nations Special Envoy and his team towards
this end.
While the search for a political settlement is
under way, it is concerning to hear about the dire
predicaments of the Syrian people. Even though there
has been no major outbreak of violence since March
2020, the security situation is still extremely volatile.
We condemn the attack in Damascus on 20 October.
At the same time, protection concerns remain
prominent, and civilians continue to bear the brunt of
hostilities and insecurity, especially in the north-west,
as a result of the intensified violence. We call on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint to maintain the
security situation, which is an important condition for
facilitating the ongoing dialogues. Efforts to combat
terrorist groups designated as such by the Security
Council must continue. Meanwhile, it is important to
enhance coordination so as to best ensure respect for
international law, including humanitarian law, and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The hardships endured by the Syrian people have
also been intensified by the accelerating economic
meltdown, food insecurity, the water crisis and
the pandemic, among other things. We call for the
enhancement of the humanitarian response in order to
save lives. To do so, humanitarian access needs to be
ensured in a safe, unimpeded and sustained manner.
In that spirit, we welcome the fact that humanitarian
assistance has continued throughout Syria and that
there has been an increase in cross-line deliveries to the
north-east. We also commend the efforts to enhance the
recovery capability and resilience of the Syrian people.
We encourage further cooperation among the parties
to agree on distribution modalities, with a view to
establishing sustained cross-line assistance to the northwest, especially in the light of the anticipated increased
needs of 3.4 million people during the winter ahead.
While the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) has already been extremely painful, it is
particularly worrisome to see the dramatic surge in
COVID-19 cases. The 170 per cent increase in a single
month shows how severe the situation is. Therefore,

21-3081619/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

particular focus should be placed on the distribution of
vaccines throughout the country.
We also support the appeal for the waiving of
sanctions that hinder the humanitarian response in Syria,
which was also called for earlier by Ms. Albarouki.
Let me conclude by calling for further assistance to
the Syrian people in order to alleviate their difficulties.
It is undoubtedly of utmost importance to ensure the
unity of the international community in assisting them
through the current multilayered crises.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I make this statement
in a national capacity on the political situation in Syria.
I wish to thank Ms. Mounerfah Albarouki for her
valuable inputs in our discussions today as well as
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for their detailed briefings.
Let me start by commending the Special Envoy and
his team for their persistent work in preparing for the
meeting of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva
last week and for their efforts to bring the Syrian
parties back to the table. We welcome the fact that there
were good and open discussions in Geneva and that the
parties presented texts. That was a step forward. We
had, however, like others, hoped for more concrete
results and a more optimistic conclusion. We support
the efforts of the Special Envoy to identify possible
next steps for the Constitutional Committee, and we
urge all sides, in particular the Syrian Government,
to make the efforts needed to bring the constitutional
process forward.
Resolution 2254 (2015) remains the framework for
a political solution in Syria — one agreed by consensus
by the Council. It outlines a new constitution with
elections following.
While the Constitutional Committee is only one
part of a larger puzzle, it is a very important one. It
has so far been the only ongoing process and arena
where the parties meet. We reiterate the importance of
consulting with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board
and the Civil Society Support Room in those efforts.
Let me also highlight the importance of seeing
progress on other parts of resolution 2254 (2015), not
least the release of arbitrarily detained persons, which
remains such an important issue for the Syrian people.
The ongoing violence in several places in Syria
lately — in the north but also in Damascus — is a reminder
20/25

27/10/2021

of the urgent need for all to agree on a nationwide
ceasefire. We encourage de-escalation. Failing that,
there is a significant risk of further violence and
additional civilian casualties. I remind all parties of
their obligation to protect civilians.
There is an urgent need for progress towards a
political solution, and we continue to support the Special
Envoy’s efforts to implement a step-by-step approach.
Finally, Syria is still being used as a base for
terrorist activities. The continued fight against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant remains important,
as stability in Syria is crucial for the region and for the
broader international community.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for their briefings
on the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
I want to give special thanks to Ms. Mounerfah
Albarouki for the work that she does and for allowing
us to see beyond the reports and to get a glimpse of
the experience of the Syrian people; this file is of the
highest priority for Kenya. I welcome the participation
of the representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey at
this meeting.
My statement will focus first on political, security
and humanitarian issues.
We are pleased that the sixth Session of the
Constitutional Committee meeting convened this
month and held substantive discussions on the text
for the proposed constitutional principles. We call
on all members of the Committee to remain focused
and dedicated to the process. We also encourage
the convening of further rounds of Constitutional
Committee meetings to maintain momentum in the
discussions and to expedite the political resolution of
the conflict.
We cannot overemphasize the imperative for the
voices of the widest spectrum of Syrians, including
civil society, the diverse group of women represented
by the Women’s Advisory Board, the youth and
minority groups, to be heard to ensure a meaningful
political transformation.
The unresolved issue of the plight of detainees
and missing persons also needs to be addressed as a
confidence- and trust-building measure, which is vital
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

to the success of the political process. In addition,
of course, the plight of those detainees and missing
persons requires justice.
The persistent insecurity characterized by aerial
air strikes, indiscriminate shelling and improvisedexplosive-device attacks across Syria continues to be of
great concern. Kenya condemns in particular the recent
heinous attacks in Damascus and Ariha, Idlib, which
claimed many innocent lives. Those concerned must
understand that there is no military or violent solution
to the situation and that it is their responsibility to the
Syrian people to de-escalate hostilities and uphold the
nationwide ceasefire.
The Council must renew its efforts to combat
Security Council-listed terrorist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham, including holding accountable those
responsible for heinous crimes.
Turning to humanitarian issues, Kenya is concerned
that even as coronavirus disease cases continue to rise,
only 1.6 per cent of the population is fully vaccinated.
This, again, exposes the glaring weaknesses of the
multilateral system. The international community must
do much more to ensure the equitable distribution of
vaccines to all people across Syria.
Kenya commends the United Nations humanitarian
response through the early recovery and livelihoods
activities, which represents a promise of hope for
recovery towards normalcy. We encourage the
expansion of such activities, especially those aimed at
restoring schools and hospitals.
We further continue to encourage the use of the
cross-border aid mechanism, which remains a crucial
avenue for humanitarian assistance, while supporting
continued cross-line deliveries and encouraging further
agreements with partners to ensure consistent deliveries
to the north-west.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm Kenya’s
solidarity with the people of Syria in their quest for
lasting peace through a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political dialogue. We continue to deplore the fact that
this process in the Security Council has not shown
sufficient unity within the Council, which is all at the
expense of the Syrian people. Kenya will always try to
give a voice to the Syrian people as they continue to
suffer from the fight for power between multiple parties.

S/PV. 8888

We urge all members of the Council to unite behind the
interests, safety and security of the Syrian people.
I now resume my functions as the representative
of Kenya.
I give the floor to the representative of Syria.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We listened closely to the briefings provided
by Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Martin Griffiths. I should
like to make the following remarks.
The meetings of the sixth session of the
Constitutional Committee, held last week in Geneva,
illustrated serious engagement on the part of the
national team, which exhibited a spirit of cooperation
and a positive attitude. They sought to put forward
constitutional principles that responded to the
aspirations, rights and ambitions of the Syrian people to
safeguard national sovereignty, independence, security,
stability and socioeconomic well-being.
Against that backdrop, the Syrian Arab Republic
reiterates its commitment to a political solution based
on a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led intra-Syrian national
dialogue, to the Constitution, which is a Syrian national
sovereign affair, and to the Constitutional Committee,
which is itself sovereign. Syria stresses that outside
parties must refrain from interfering in, or hampering
the work of, the Committee by imposing artificial time
frames or predetermined conclusions, in line with
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria, as affirmed by all the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
The cowardly terrorist attack in the heart of the
Syrian capital, Damascus, on the morning of 20 October,
which targeted a bus with two explosive devices,
coincided with the meetings of the Constitutional
Committee. That was a clear indication of attempts by
terrorist organizations and their foreign sponsors to foil
efforts at reaching a political solution and to hinder the
work of the Syrian Government to restore security and
stability throughout Syria. That terrorist attack, which
left 14 civilians dead and many injured passers-by, was
clearly aimed at raising the morale of the terrorists
sponsored by the American and Turkish occupying
forces in Idlib, Al-Tanf and other parts of northern
Syria as they fall before the Syrian Arab Army and its
allies’ achievements.
It is regrettable and reprehensible that some Western
countries blocked the adoption by the Security Council

21-3081621/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

of a draft press release submitted by the delegation of
the Russian Federation to condemn that terrorist attack.
That Western approach reflects the double standards
and hostile attitude of those countries.
We also condemn the fact that Israeli occupying
forces escalated their hysterical aggression against
Syria — whether by bombing southern areas two days
ago following the reconciliation in Dara’a and the
restoration of security and stability there, its ongoing
aerial aggression against Al-Tanf, which is controlled
by American forces, or its assassination of freedom
fighter and former member of the Syrian Parliament
Medhat Al-Saleh, using snipers who fired bullets
originating from the occupied Syrian Golan. That
once again proves Israel’s involvement in undermining
security and stability in Syria.
The Syrian Arab Republic underscores its
commitment to continuing its efforts to liberate its
occupied territories and combating terrorism in tandem
with its political efforts. Such terrorists attacks and
terrorist acts will not deter Syria from continuing its
efforts to restore security and stability and rid our
people of all terrorist groups, irrespective of what they
are called.
Syria calls upon the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and stop Israeli acts of aggression,
which threaten peace and stability in the region, and
to compel the Governments known to be sponsors of
terrorism to halt their violations of international law
and comply fully with the Council’s resolutions on
counter-terrorism.
Yesterday, on behalf of my Government, I
sent two identical letters to the Council and to the
Secretary-General conveying the position of the Syrian
Government on the report of the Secretary-General
on the humanitarian situation (S/2021/890). Given the
limited time available here, I invite the members of the
Council to read those two letters and take note of our
detailed observations on the report, especially after we
exposed errors in the statistics and responses provided
by United Nations agencies and the misinformation
therein. We call for an investigation of the matter,
the correction of the errors and the restoration of the
reputation of the Syrian Government, as well as for
ensuring that this does not happen again.
It has been over three and a half months since
the Council adopted resolution 2585 (2021). However,
the Turkish occupying forces and the proxies of their
22/25

27/10/2021

terrorist organizations continue to hinder humanitarian
access from inside Syria. They continue to refuse
access for the Al-Atarib convoy to the north-west of
the country — a convoy which the Syrian Government
approved in April 2020. Moreover, they continue to
weaponize water against civilians.
There is also deliberate intent on the part of
Western Governments to not respect the provisions of
operative paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of the resolution, for
they continue to hamper any effort aimed at making
progress on humanitarian access from within Syria
and at promoting humanitarian activities in the areas
of early recovery and strengthening resilience, as
provided for in the resolution, which is also part of the
humanitarian response plan.
In addition to that, those same Governments have
again blocked the adoption of the strategic framework
for cooperation between the United Nations and the
Syrian Government, which would enable United
Nations agencies to relaunch development programmes
and projects in Syria and support efforts to achieve
sustainable development.
That raises the question of how one could
contemplate extending the provisions of the resolution
later this year. What will the Secretary-General say
in his substantive report to be issued pursuant to the
resolution? Is it possible that the percentage of funding
allocated to early-recovery projects does not exceed
5 per cent of the total pledges?
The United States Administration and the
European Union continue to use coercive measures to
stifle Syrians inhumanely and deprive them of their
basic needs — food, medicine, health care, electricity
and fuel — in particular as winter approaches, as well
as to undermine our efforts to counter the coronavirus
disease pandemic. All of that contradicts their alleged
humanitarian concern and reveals their false slogans
regarding their respect for the principles of international
law and the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as all United Nations resolutions,
which time and again have affirmed the illegality of
those measures and their violation of human rights.
They have also deliberately disregarded the appeals
of the Secretary-General and his representatives. Any
claim that such measures have no impact on the lives of
Syrians is a mere fabrication to cover up the facts.
In conclusion, Syria reiterates its demand for an
end to the illegal presence of the United States and
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Turkish forces on our territories and for stopping
their aggressive practices and looting of the country’s
economic resources and wealth. We also call for the
immediate and unconditional lifting of unilateral
coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people. We
stress that improving the humanitarian situation requires
support for the efforts of the Syrian State to meet the
humanitarian needs and provide basic services to all
Syrians, as well as achieving the development goals
and creating conditions conducive to the dignified, safe
and voluntary return of displaced persons and refugees.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their timely and informative
briefings. I would also like to thank Ms. Albarouki for
her briefing.
After 10 years of atrocities, Syria remains the
world’s largest protection crisis. Twelve million people
are living in food insecurity. That fact was brought
to our attention on World Food Day; however, it must
be kept foremost in our minds every day. Every day
more than 60 per cent of the population is unable to
secure access to safe and adequate food. Every day
an additional 1.8 million Syrians teeter on the brink
of hunger. Every day we talk of the importance of
protecting the Syrian people, but we must take action.
Malnourished children are more exposed to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and are dying due
to virus-related illnesses. The COVID-19 situation
is rapidly deteriorating, especially in the north-west,
where a second wave of COVID-19 cases threatens the
lives of Syrian civilians. The latest estimates indicate
that hospitals and health-care facilities are at 93 per cent
occupancy levels and lack the critical supplies required.
Despite calls here at Headquarters for vaccines for all,
only 1.8 per cent of the population in the north-west
has received one dose of the vaccine. Indeed, a mere
0.8 per cent of the population has received the requisite
second dose.
It is clear that the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point and
the United Nations cross-border mechanism constitute
an essential and life-saving channel for millions of
Syrians. Vaccines and humanitarian assistance are
needed now more than ever, as needs are expected
to increase during the upcoming winter season. We
therefore call for cross-border assistance to be expanded.

S/PV. 8888

Turkey is ready to do whatever is necessary to
support that vital work. We will also continue to support
the needs of 9 million Syrians under our protection.
Let me remind the Council that our tremendous efforts
for development for those people have been widely
recognized by the entire international community. We do
not need a lecture from those who violate international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
In that context, let me also set the record straight
regarding the Allouk water station. The reasons behind
the problem are well known and are reflected in the
reports of the Secretary-General. It is clear that both
the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units
(PKK/YPG) and the Syrian regime have used this
situation repeatedly for their ill-minded agendas.
Following the completion of the first cross-line
mission into Sarmada city, Idlib governorate, by the
World Food Programme, we expect the distribution of
food items in the north-west without delay. The Security
Council should be aware that that life-saving mission
was conducted in the face of stark security risks, as
repeated attacks by the Al-Assad regime in Sarmada
continued, resulting in tragic civilian losses.
That is of course part of the regime’s political
calculations to hinder progress on cross-line access,
which is in direct violation of resolution 2585 (2021).
It is most regrettable that the goodwill shown in that
process has been tainted by attacks perpetrated by
the regime.
On the political track, we will continue to push for
a lasting and credible political solution, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). Special Envoy Pedersen has
our unwavering support in his efforts to ensure that the
Constitutional Committee yields concrete results.
As the sole mechanism within the political process,
we believe that all sides should unite in order to
advance the Committee’s work. As summarized by the
Special Envoy, the sixth round of consultations of the
Constitutional Committee was finally held in Geneva
last week after a long delay. Although the Syrian
regime adopted a relatively constructive approach at the
beginning of the session, the subsequent regression to its
uncompromising stance of the past was disappointing,
to say the least.
Unfortunately, the sixth round did not feature
any serious deliberations on constitutional reform.
Furthermore, due to the regime’s intransigence, not

21-3081623/25

S/PV.8888

The situation in the Middle East

even the dates for the following sessions could be
agreed upon. After 10 years of conflict, we cannot let
the regime squander this opportunity. It is high time
for the Constitutional Committee to produce concrete
results on its core mandate. It is imperative that the
regime stop undermining the Committee’s work. This
is not a zero-sum game. It is in the best interests of all
concerned, including the Syrian regime, to engage in a
constructive and results-oriented manner.
Tragically, while the sixth round of consultations
of the Constitutional Committee was under way, the
regime targeted civilian areas in the Ariha district of
Idlib on 20 October. That brutal attack resulted in the
death of 13 people, including four children. We condemn
all attacks, in particular those intended to derail the
political process. Children and teachers were targeted
in Ariha. I repeat — children and their teachers.
It is abundantly clear that the regime does not
seek to counter terrorism. All that the regime has ever
sought is to oppress Syrian civilians into submission.
Ceasefire violations by the regime and its backers must
stop. Civilians must be protected. No one should feel
forced to flee their home. We need to take all necessary
steps to secure the political process and underpin
conflict resolution efforts.
In addition to the ceasefire violations, the PKK/
YPG remains a major destabilizing factor on the
ground. That terrorist organization and its offshoot,
the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces, do not relent
in targeting civilians and attacking Turkey. Only two
weeks ago, six Syrian civilians died as a result of the
car-bomb attack carried out in Afrin. That terrorist
group wreaks havoc in the region and prevents Syrian
Yazidis in Iraq and Syrian Kurds from returning to
their homes in Syria.
Their crimes are not limited to attacks on Syrians.
The terrorist attacks carried out by the PKK/YPG on
7 and 10 October claimed the lives of three members of
the Turkish security forces. Moreover, on 11 October,
Karkamış, a district of Gaziantep, was shelled by
mortars from areas under the control of the Syrian
Democratic Forces. That attack follows the rockets
fired at civilian areas in Kilis, Turkey, last March.
There is no doubt that this terrorist organization
is using its presence in Syria to target my country.
No Member State can tolerate deliberate attacks
targeting its citizens or its territory, and my country
is no exception. Turkey will not remain silent in the
24/25

27/10/2021

face of those cross-border attacks. We are determined
to neutralize this terrorist threat and will continue our
resolute fight against the PKK/YPG wherever needed.
Last month, the United Nations published the
first official death toll since 2014. Therein, the United
Nations identified 350,209 individuals killed in Syria.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Michele Bachelet, maintained that this
is a conservative estimate indicating the minimum
verifiable number of deceased. However, these Syrians
were identified by their full names, their dates of
death and their location in Syria. It is only right that
we recognize the unjust and unwarranted deaths of
innocent Syrian civilians and restore to them their
dignity.
The onus is upon us in the Council Chamber to hold
the regime to account. As we have discussed over the
past decade, countless war crimes and crimes against
humanity have been committed by the Al-Assad regime.
The international community failed these Syrians. We
cannot now fail in our quest for accountability. We
must take urgent action to end impunity and to save
the resilient Syrians who survived the most egregious
of horrors and who look to us to safeguard their future.
With regard to the statement made by the
representative of the Syrian regime, I will repeat: his
presence in this Chamber is an affront to the millions
of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the
hands of the Al-Assad regime. I will therefore not
honour his delusional remarks with a response.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his
efforts, particularly in the course of the preparation
of and during the sixth round of meetings of the
Constitutional Committee.
We welcome the first face-to-face meeting of the
Committee’s Chairs to directly discuss the Committee’s
modalities and programme of work. That, in itself,
shows considerable and encouraging progress. The
same is true for the consultations with the Committee
members on certain substantive proposals on the
elements of a draft constitution, which also took place
for the first time.
21-30816

27/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

As has been stressed at the recent meeting
of the representatives of the Astana format with
Mr. Pedersen in Geneva, we will continue to encourage
the Committee’s Chairs to engage constructively and
work in a spirit of flexibility and compromise. We
emphasize again that the Committee must continue
its work without any external interference or pressure.
Setting any artificial deadline for its conclusion or
any other conditions of such nature will negatively
affect the Committee’s work, which must therefore be
avoided. Ultimately, it must be ensured that it is a truly
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated
political process.
To complement the Committee’s work, serious
efforts must also be made in other areas. Occupation
of parts of Syria by foreign forces must come to an
end. Accordingly, all occupying and uninvited foreign
forces must leave the country without any precondition
or further delay. In this context, the Security Council
must live up to its responsibility and compel the Israeli
regime to end the occupation of the Syrian Golan
and immediately stop its aggressions against Syria.
Aggression and destabilizing measures of the Israeli
regime constitute flagrant violations of international
law and continue to threaten regional and international
peace and security.
The assassination inside Syria of Medhat Al-Saleh,
a Syrian citizen, by Israeli snipers from the occupied
Golan on 16 October 2021, is among the latest of such
adventurist practices. We condemn in the strongest
terms this criminal act as well as all violations of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria by the
Israeli regime, and we reaffirm Syria’s inherent right
to defend itself and respond at a time and place of
its choosing.
We also condemn the 20 October terrorist attack
in Damascus, which claimed the lives of 14 innocent
people and injured several others. Such a terrorist
act underscores once again that the fight against all
terrorist groups must continue unabated.
We also reject separatist activities or illegitimate
self-rule initiatives in Syria and condemn any efforts
to support them.

S/PV. 8888

Recalling the dire humanitarian situation in Syria,
further efforts must be made to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people in need, including through
depoliticizing humanitarian aid and supporting Syria’s
reconstruction. We also hope that the recent positive
approach taken by some countries will help expedite
Syria’s reconstruction and the return of more refugees
and displaced persons. In that context, we call for
the full and effective implementation of resolution
2585 (2021), through which the Security Council, in
paragraph 3 of the resolution, called upon all Member
States “to respond with practical steps to address the
urgent needs of the Syrian people”.
One such practical step can indeed be the removal
of unilateral coercive measures imposed on Syria.
Unilateral sanctions are used only for the collective
punishment of an entire population and, by any
measure, are unlawful and inhumane. They must be
removed against all targeted countries, including Syria,
where sanctions not only increase the suffering of the
Syrian people but also adversely affect the activities of
the United Nations as well as those of the national and
international humanitarian agencies in that country.
We also call for the allocation of more humanitarian
aid to the cross-line mechanism and for enhancing
the transparency of the cross-border mechanism
and ensuring that aid that enters Syria through that
mechanism reaches the actual beneficiaries and does
not fall into the hands of terrorist groups.
We reiterate our principled position that the Syrian
crisis must be settled peacefully and in accordance with
principles of international law, particularly respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
non-intervention and non-interference in their internal
or external affairs, and the peaceful settlement of
international disputes.
The Islamic Republic of Iran will continue to support
the people and the Government of Syria to restore the
unity and territorial integrity of their country.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

21-3081625/25
