UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

_,,;&J

9 OCTOBER

1973

AlJ$ ;j ,‘-; ‘1y: )

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1744)

Adoption

of the agenda

, . , ., . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . .. . . . .

, . .. . .. . . . . , . I . . . . . . . . . . ,, . ... . . ., . . . .

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

spv. 1144

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of fhe
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDFORTY-FOURTHMEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 9 October
President: Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1744)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010).
The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
2% agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with a decision taken
at our meeting yesterday, I propose now, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic to take their places at the
Council table in order to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. M. 2. Ismail (Syrian
Arab Republic) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw attention to a letter
dated 9 October 1973, from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council [S/11014], conveying a
message received by the Secretary-General from the Prime
Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Ali Bhutto.
3. Mr. MINI@ (Yugoslavia)1 : We have heard with indig
nation the news of the heavy bombing of Damascus and
1 Mr. Minii. spoke in Serbo-Croatian. The English version of his
statement was supplied by the delegation.

1973, at 3.30 p.m.

other inhabited areas.While the Security Council, the organ
of the United Nations entrustedwith primary responsibility
for the maintenanceof peaceand security is againtrying to
solve this crisis,the Israeliaggressor,
violating most brutally
all principles of international law, is ruthlessly bombing
urban centres, inflicting gravelosseson the peacefulcivilian
populations of Arab countries. This is one more insolent
challengeby the Israeli aggressor
to the United Nations and
world public opinion.
4. For more than six years the Arab peoplesand Statesof
the Middle East have been subjectedto constant aggression
and occupation in which the basic principles of international relations have been violated and the fundamental
national and human rights enshrinedin the Charter of the
United Nations have been denied.This situation, aswe have
repeatedly warned, is fraught with extremely grave dangers
for international peace and security. This has been confirmed again, unequivocally, by the latest developmentsin
the Middle East.
5. In connexion with thesedevelopments,my Government
issued,on 7 October, an official communiquewhich I wish
to quote:
“The newest escalationof military operations in the
Middle East, as a consequenceof Israel’scontinuing and
deliberate aggressionagainstArab countries and the Arab
people of Palestine,and its protracted occupation of Arab
territories and systematicrejection and underminingof all
efforts aimed at reaching an acceptable solution, have
causeddeep concern to the Government and people of
Yugoslavia.
“In most emphatically condemning the Israeli aggression, the Yugoslav Government gives resolute and allround support to the just struggle of Arab countries
againstIsrael for the liberation of all occupied territories,
in accordance with the decision of the Conference of
Headsof States or Government of Non-Aligned Countries
in Algiers.
“At the sametime, the Yugoslav Government appeals
to all peace-loving forces and responsiblefactors in the
world to take effective measures
with a view to extending
all-round support and assistance
to Arab countries, whose
legitimate and inalienable right is to fight for the
liberation of their territories that Israel hasoccupied.”
6. The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslaviahas always
lent its full support to the just struggleof the Arab peoples
and has constantly exerted its efforts towards solving the
Middle East crisis, convinced that such a solution shouldbe

sought in the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, which it has not been possible to implement
because of Israel’s obstruction.

13. The so-called state of “no war, no peace” in the
Middle East does not actually exist, as a war against the
Arab countries and the Arab people of Palestine has been
waged all the time. “Cease-fires” which do not rely an a
just and over-all solution of the problem amount, ln fact, to
an attempt at maintaining the status quo in the interests of
the conqueror and do not at all provide a basis on which
peace can be built. In 1970 the Government of Egypt
accepted the proposal on the temporary cessation of
hostilities. It made thereby a great concession believing that
this would create possibilities for finding a solution to the
crisis. The other side not only failed to respond in an
adequate manner but posed new conditions blocking every
perspective for overcoming the untenable situation.

7. After his meeting with President Sadat, in January last,
President Tito addressed personal messages to President
Nixon, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, President Pompidou, President Kaunda, Prime Minister Chou En-lai, Prime Minister
Heath, the Secretary-General
of the United Nations,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, and Pope Paul VI, in which he set forth
his views on the situation in the Middle East, emphasizing
that the eleventh hour had struck for taking immediate
action for the solution of the crisis and supporting the
initiative taken at the time by President Sadat and the
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt for the
attainment of a peaceful political solution of the crisisin the
Middle East on the basis of the well-known resolutions of
the United Nations.

14. The present escalation of military operations, which
directly threatens world peace, has underlined once again
the grave responsibility of Israel and of those who support
it in blocking avenues conducive to a solution of the Middle
East crisis in conformity with the principles adopted by the
United Nations.

8. These views were communicated simultaneously to all
other Governments with which we maintain diplomatic
relations. The course of events in the Middle East has,
unfortunately,
demonstrated how much time and how
many opportunities have been wasted.

15. The military operations at present under way have
once again shattered the self-deception of the country of
the aggressor that its security can be based on the
oppression of other peoples, on the use of force, on massive
recourse to State terrorism and on the assumption of one’s
own unalterable military superiority. Whoever bases his
policy on such a premise-as is the case of the Israeli
Government-brings
into jeopardy not only peace and
security in general but the fate of his own people as wdl.

9. Now is the time to recall that only three months ago, at
the initiative of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Security
Council thoroughly examined the Middle East crisis. Almost all the members of the Security Council warned then
that the failure to solve this crisis and to eliminate the
causes of constant and increasing tension was bound to lead
to ever more serious conflicts. Let us recall that the
nonaligned countries members of the Security Council
submitted at that time a draft resolution (S/10974/
embodying constructive elements for an over-all solution
and that 13 members of the Security Council voted in
favour of that text; however, that draft resolution was not
adopted as it was vetoed by one permanent member of the
Security Council [1735th meeting].

16. The international community has on numerous occasions condemned the Israeli policy of force and aggression in the Middle East in the resolutions of the General
Assembly, of the Security Council, and of other international forums. The recent Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-aligned Countries, held in Algiers,
which was attended by almost two thirds of the States
Members of the United Nations, expressed solidarity and
pledged full support to the Arab Countries in their struggle
for the liberation of the occupied territories and realizatlon
of the national aspirations of the Palestinian people.
Notwithstanding all this, Israel has persisted in its policy of
challenging the United Nations and flouting its decisions. In
the present situation the Arab countries and the Arab
people of Palestine are resisting the aggressor on the basis of
the legitimate right to self-defence, liberation of their
occupied territories, and self-determination-in
conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations. Resistance to
aggression and the defence of the principles of the Charter
constitute in themselves a contribution to peace. I should
like to state clearly that we should not for a singIe moment
lose sight of the fact that this struggle is being waged on tile
occupied territories of three sovereign States Members of
the United Nations.

10. The events with which we are concerned make it
incumbent upon us to emphasize again the following.
11. The Middle East crisis is a problem of the widest
international proportions and constitutes today the most
acute and the most dangerous hotbed of war in the world.
It is so by reason of the interests that are involved in it, the
forces and factors that are engaged in it, and the fundamental principles of international relations and rights of
peoples and States that are implicated in it.
12. It is obvious that the easing of tensions, regardless of
the results gained through it in relations between individual
countries and .in various geographical regions will rest on
very insecure foundations as long as the solution of crises in
aI1 parts of the world is not undertaken. It has been
confirmed once again that it is not possible to “control”
so-called local, regional crises and wars that threaten general
peace and security. I wish to stress here again the direct
interdependence of peace and stability in the Middle East
and the Mediterranean and peace and stability in Europe.

17. No one has the right to expect and demand of a
sovereign country and an oppressed people that it stand
idly by and not fight for the liberation of its territories and
recognition of its national rights. Who among us here would
renounce this right and tolerate the occupation of even the
smallest part of his own territory?
2

18. It is high time that the United Nations, and primarily
the Security Council, should address themselves to finding
an over-all solution of the Middle East problem through the
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly. A durable peace and
security in the Middle East can be realized only on the basis
of the complete withdrawa
of Israeli forces from the
occupied territories of Egypt, Syria and Jordan and through
the realization of the national rights of the Arab people of
Palestine. Only in this way is it possible to build a peace
based on respect for national sovereignty, territorial integ
rity, and the right to self-determination of all the States and
peoples of this region.

25. Indeed, I do not believe that members of the Council
could be satisfied with a hasty decision, knowing in advance
that it will not be complied with and that it would merely
constitute, in a problem that is already so complex, an
additional factor of complication.
26. The international community of which our Council is
the most legitimate expression will, I hope, assume its
responsibilities and define the measures that can bring
about an end to the present situation with respect for the
legitimate rights of the parties to the dispute.
27. Here I shall simply recall that the position of France
remains unchanged. France is in favour of a peaceful
settlement of the conflict and of a negotiated solution in
accord with the various United Nations resolutions and in
particular in accord with resolution 242 (1967). My GOVernment has never ceased to reaffirm this on many
occasionshere, before the GeneralAssemblyandelsewhere,
wheneverthere wasan opportunity to do SO.

19. This time, the United Nations, and above all the
Security Council, cannot stop at pronouncements only.
Should Israel persist in its aggression, occupation and
annexation, it will be necessary to examine the possibility
of applying sanctions against it within the meaning of
Chapter VI1 of the Charter, as demanded by the Fourth
Conference of Non-Aligned Countries.

28. This necessarylink to be establishedbetween the
present events and the situation asa whole shouldbe the
main concern of the Council. It would be futile to attempt
to impose on the adversariesprovisional measures
which
would settle nothing, just asit would be futile to imposeon
them commitments which are not coupled with sufficient
guarantees.

Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, before coming to the subject of our
debate I should like to congratulate you on your accession
to the presidency of this Council. Your personal qualificatlons and your diplomatic experience are already well
known to us and serve as our guarantee that you will guide
our deliberations with wisdom. We have already had proof
of this while observing the manner in which you have
guided the consultations and the first debates in these last
few days.
20.

29. Some may object that the Council facesan emergency
situation and must, accordingly, adopt emergencymeasures. But in our opinion that would mean disregardingthe
essentialfacts of the problem which we have beenfacing
for a long time.

21, May 1 be permitted to pay a tribute, too, at this time
to Ambassador Mojsov, the representative of Yugoslavia,
who presided over the Council last month with a competence, an authority and a friendliness which I am pleased to
recognize, but which I am sure came as no surprise to his
many colleagues who hold him in particular esteem and
friendship.

30. In the Near East, for a quarterof a century, countries
which becauseof their proximity are condemned,so to
speak, to coexistence do not manageto establishpeaceful
relations amongthemselves.A deepdistrust, datingvery far
back, ceaselesslyopposesthem, whereaseverything should
on the contrary bring them closertogether, asthough the
difficulties were beyond remedy and, as is shownin many
other cases,can therefore not be the subjectof a solution
that is acceptableto all.

22. Once again there is war in the Near East. In the
Israeli-Egyptian
and in the Israeli-Syrian sectors large-scale
military operations are taking place and they are the largest
since June 1967. Although there are no sufficiently
accurate data as to the number of soldiers involved on both
sides, government communiques and the information in the
press give us a rather clear idea of the extent of the battles.
The news, which has just been conformed, of bombing by
Israeli forces of a building housing representatives of the
Soviet Union in Damascus, under the ruins of which it is
reported that many persons were found, gives, if that were
still necessary, a tragic framework for our debate. I wish to
express to the Soviet delegation our sad condolence in these
painful circumstances.

31. The latest events in this situation, however spectacular, constitute but a new phasein this confrontation.
Has not the time come for us to attack the roots of the ill
and in good faith seekthe meansto overcome this kind of
inevitability? But to this endthe Council mustnot confine
itself to examiningpresentevents.It must, on the contrary,
try to promote the quest for a solution that will cover every
facet of the problem. This quest for a solution has been
spoken of for a very long time and the parties to the
dispute have declaredthemselvesto be in favour of it. But,
so far, every attempt madeto start the questfor a solution
has been sealed by failure. There is more.or lessgeneral
agreement on the principles contained in resolution
242 (1967). but there is no agreementon their imulementation. The fact of occupation, becauseit createsrelationshipsof inequality, constitutesthe major obstacle.

23. Clearly the situation we face may in the days to come
undergo unforeseeable developmentswhich could jeopardize in the long run any chanceof peace.
24. What we must note is that the operationsare taking
place in the Egyptian and Syrian territories which were
occupied by Israel in June 1967. That elementseemsto me
to be essential in so far as it will be decisive in the
assessmentwhich our Council must make of the situation.

32. In these circumstancesis it not the role of the Council
above all to promote the rapprochementof the partiesin a
3

common quest for a negotiated settelement to which the
international community would provide the indispensable
guarantees?

in the area which, amongst others, is the object of the
unanimous decision of the Council adopted a few months
after the end of the armed conflict in June 1367.

33. Our deliberations, I believe, should be directed to that
end and the resolution which we might adopt should, it
seems to me, take into account all those elements. It goes
without saying that my delegation is not opposed to the
adoption of a cease fire; but, if we go no further, we will
once again have satisfied our consciences at a small cost,
without succeeding in bringing about a change in attitudes
which alone can progressively lead to peace.

40. Many authoritative voices have warned of the consequences of failure, and it was none other than the
Secretary-General who, in the introduction to his annual
report on the work of the Organization for the period 19
June 1966-15 June 1967 said:
“I am bound to express my fear that, if again no effort
is exerted and no progress is made towards removing the
root causes of conflict, within a few years at the most
there will be ineluctably a new eruption of war.“2

34. The time has come for the international community to
put an end to this war which, whether open or latent, has
not ceased for 25 years. The time has come for the Council
really to assume its responsibilities and to attempt a major
effort to define the framework for genuine negotiations.

41. It is the tragedy of the present situation that all efforts
and initiatives taken over past years have now again been
defied by war. Once again human lives are lost; once again
untold suffering is inflicted.

3.5. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): Were it not for the
gravity and the seriousness of the present situation, I would
have preferred to open my statement with a longer tribute
to your predecessor to the chair, Ambassador Mojsov of
Yugoslavia, and a more explicit expression at the satisfaction of the Austrian delegation at seeing you, Sir, hold
the presidency of the Security Council at such a dramatic
moment. May then these short but sincere words of
congratulation suffice.

42. In a situation of this kind one objective, in the view of
my Government, must take precedence over all others: to
put an end to the sacrjfice of human life, to stop hostilities
without delay. A call for an immediate cease-fire would
therefore, in our view, be the primary task of the Security
Council.
43. The call for peace, the call to save human life should
be unequivocal, unanimous and strong. This is the moment
not to offer advice, dispense judgement, or attribute blame,
but to accomplish this basic humanitarian duty in the face
of bloodshed, destruction and suffering. We should do our
utmost to enable the Council, in the shortest time possible,
to come forward with this appeal. And we feel that such an
appeal would have to be the first step towards a new and
decisive effort to build a new, a firmer structure of peace
on the basis of the decisions and resolutions of the Security
Council and General Assembly, on the basis of the Charter
of the United Nations, and in accordance with the
aspirationsof the peoplesand nations of the Middle East,
which I trust are sharedby all mankind.

36. The Council over the past six years has been confronted with many situations resulting from the absence of
peace in the Middle East. Dangerous and abnormal as these
situations may have been, none could have been more
disastrous for peace and security in the world, of which this
Council is the supreme guardian, than the situation the
Council faces now: the outbreak of full-scale war.
37. Every meeting of the Council, including our most
recent examination of the question of the Middle East in
June and July of this year, has impressed upon us how
urgent and how imperative a rapid solution of the crisis has
become. But never has the need for action been more
pressing than in the present situation which, more than
analysis and argument, requires a quick and decisive
response.

44. The PRESIDENT: I call now on the representativeof
the Syrian Arab Republic.
45. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): Once againthe Middle East is the theatre of
armed conflict, Once again my country is the victim of a
war of aggressionlaunched by lsrael on 6 October of this
year. Finally, the explosive situation to which we have
constantly drawn the attention of the whole world, and
particularly that of the United Nations, has produced its
unavoidable fruit, a bitter fruit-war. No one knows how
this total war, which Israel has launched against the Arabs
for the third time, will end, what its consequenceswill be,
what scopeit will assumeand what forces and what Powers
will be involved in it. All this dependsupon the intention of
the Israeli aggressorand upon his plans for expansion.
However, Israel must not be unaware of the fact that one
can always start a war, but one can never guarantee how it
will end. We Arabs, the victims of permanent Israeli

38. In the present situation my Government is motivated
by a single overriding concern which must take precedence,
in our view, over aIl other considerations: the concern for
human life. This concern is increased because of the
existence of strong and ancient bonds of respect and
friendship between our people and all the peoples of the
Middle East.
39. It was an outflow of tK.s concern that Austria, in the
past, has never failed to advocate and support a solution of
this conflict by peaceful means. My Government has
repeatedly urged renewed efforts for a peaceful solution in
a spirit of awareness of the situation which, over the past
six years after the last outbreak of hostilities, continued to
be fraught with danger, with human suffering and despair,
with violence and fear. In the General Assembly and in the
Security Council Austria has lent support to all efforts
designed to open the way towards the just and lasting peace

2 See Official Records of the General
Session, Supplement
No. IA, pm. 45.

4

Assembly,

Twentysecorxf

aggression since 1948, know but one thing: our fatherland
and our resources are the subject of the covetousness of
world-wide Zionism and its imperialist satellites and allies. It
is our sacred duty to counteract these Zionist and imperialist designs by all the means at our disposal, That world
peace would suffer, that consumer societies would be
exposed to disturbances, is something about which we have
launched cries of alarm much too often in an attempt to
warn the whole international community. Regularly every
year, from the rostrum of the General Assembly, we have
emphasized the explosive nature of the situation in our
region. On numerous occasions we have drawn the attention of the Security Council and of the different organs of
the United Nations to the expansionist and hegemonic
designs of Israel.

Syria on 13 September last. We state nothing but the truth
when we say that the war that Israel launched against Syria
and Egypt on 6 October of this year is the direct result of
the promise, stated on many occasions, that the United
States would never let the Security Council adopt a
resolution against the interests of Israel. Moreover this right
of veto as it was conceived and included in the Charter
almost three decades ago no longer, in our view, corresponds to the realities of international life and it is essential
to consider the amendments that must be made in this
respect.
50. I have asked why all our cries of alarm and warnings
remained without any concrete results. I have just given
part of the reply to that question-that is the improper
recourse to the veto by the United States. Now I should
like to provide the rest of the answer.

46, Most recently, in the course of conversations which we
had with a number of heads of delegations to the present
session of the General Assembly, we emphasized the
irrnninent aggression that Israel was carefully preparing.
Everybody seemed to listen to us and to say that we were
right, but unfortunately all of this remained without effect,
without any concrete results. Why?

51. The essential idea at the foundation of the United
Nations was to construct a system of collective security on
a world-wide basis so that it might be possible to protect
our universe against such trials as the wars of 1914 and
1939. In other words, the idea was to protect world
security from the arbitrariness and selfishness of one State
or a small group of States, and more specifically the
arbitrariness or selfishness of a leader or group of leaders.

47. In the present system of the United Nations our
Organization is paralysed by the improper use of the right
of veto. WC find ourselves in a situation where this veto has
been utilized against justice and logic and against the will of
13 members of the Security Council. And that means that
it has been used against the will of the whole world except
Israel. If the veto has been provided as an exclusive privilege
to the permanent members of the Security Council by
virtue of the special responsibilities which they have for the
preservation of world order, one cannot see how that right
can be used to block the Security Council’s machinery and
to prevent it from fulfilling its principal function as defined
in the Charter, namely, to safeguard international peace and
security.

52. That being so, anything that strengthens and reinforces the authority of the United Nations is in consonance
with the Charter, which constitutes a sort of collective
contract unifying all Member States. On the other hand,
any action or behaviour or attitude which is harmful to the
authority of the United Nations or diminishes its prestige
constitutes a violation equivalent to the failure to fulfil a
contractual obligation.
53. Let us now consider what is happening in the world of
facts. Having sabotaged the activity of the Security Council,
the Government of Israel, supported by the United States,
is conducting a policy of obstruction designed to prevent
any collective political action aimed at finding a peaceful
and just solution to the Near East problem. Thus, the talks
of the four great Powers failed, just as all other attempts
timidly made by other groups of States have failed. The
mission of Mr. Jarring, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, has been similarly
sabotaged.

48. Some might argue that the right of veto is a privilege
of political discretion whose use is left entirely to the
judgcment
of the beneficiary Powers. That argument is
more than fallacious because the very ones who use the
veto improperly cannot claim that those who drafted the
Charter had the slightest intention to include in it a
provision which might be used against justice and logic and
even against international peace. If the veto is a political
privilege which does not always fit into the rules of law, it
is not possible under any circumstances to admit that its
use is left entirely to the discretion of the beneficiary States
because that would be tantamount to having world peace
depend upon the selfish and arbitrary will of a single State.
In all cases where the use of the veto does not correspond
to a situation of law and of justice it must necessarily and
exclusively serve the cause of world peace. That is how we
understand
this famous right of veto. Unfortunately, the
Government
of the United States has acted against right,
logic, common sense and the interest of world peace-in
other words, against the rational and democratic conception of the right of veto.

54. The lesson that we were supposed to learn from this
was that the solution of the problem was to be found in the
hands of the United States and its protegd, Israel, and
nowhere else. An attempt was made to eclipse the United
Nations, the role of world policeman having to be exercised
by a single great Power. But it so happens that that same
great Power does not manage to keep its promise and
honour a pledge given. Subterfuge or surrender to Zionist
influence?
In any event the famous Rogers Plan is
abandoned.
55. That is why our cries of alarm have not met with any
concrete positive reaction. There is a desire to freeze our
collective security machinery and replace it by arbitrariness
and the hegemony of a single great Power, which is itself a
prisoner of world-wide Zionism.

49. Israel, which interprets the American veto as encouragement, increases its attacks against the Arab countries,
and I would mention most specially the air attack against
5

for Elazar, occupied Syrian territory
Israeli territory.

56. For well over six years Zionist forces have been
occupying part of our territory as a result of a war of
aggression which they launched against us on 5 June 1967.
It was, as usual, a surprise attack. And it is comforting to
mention here that at last the Israeli Generals who took part
in that attack have publicly recognized-and
the Israeli
press has published this-that Israel was the first to open
fire and that the existence of Israel was in no way
threatened at that time by the Arabs-although
that argument was advanced by the Israeli side as a pretext for
justifying the war and attracting aid and sympathy from
abroad.

62. That is why Israel asks to have negotiations with us. It
wishes us to sign a document in which we would agree to
give up our occupied territories.
63. Yesterday and today the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Israel made a number of statements in which he asked
the United Nations to enjoin the belligerents to cease fire
and to return to the positions they occupied before
6 October this year. He also says that it was the Arabs who
opened fire first. This type of mendacious Israeli allegation
is very well known. In 1967 also they claimed that it was
the Arabs who had started the war but subsequently, proud
of their victories, their generals admitted that it had been
the Israelis who had opened fire first.

57. Thus it was admitted by the Israelis themselves that it
was a war of aggression, and as such it should have led to a
condemnation of Israel, accompanied by an enjoinder on it
to withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories.
58. The United Nations has done what it could, and since
the Palestine drama in 1948 it has adopted numerous
resolutions calling for the restoration of the inalienable
rights of the people of Palestine and enjoining the aggressor
to withdraw its forces from all the occupied Arab territories
and to desist from altering the physical character and the
demographic structure of those territories. However, Israel
has simply become more arrogant and it has continued to
practise an openly declared policy of annexation.

64. As for the request to respect the cease-fire, Israel is the
last country in the whole world to give any lessons to
anyone on this subject. When the 1967 war broke out, the
Security Council adopted resolution 235 (1967) of 19 June
1967 in which the Council took note of the acceptance of a
cease-fire by Syria and Israel and confirmed its previous
resolutions on an immediate cease-fire and cessation of all
military action. But Israel, in spite of its acceptance of that
resolution and its official statement, communicated to the
Security Council, that it would observe the cease-fire, had
on that very day-9 June 1967-ordered its troops to invade
Syrian territory. That is confirmed by David Elazar, the
present Chief of Staff of Israel, who wrote the following in
the Israeli publication, Bediot Ahronout, on 22 February
1972: “On Friday, 9 June, I received from General Dayan
himself by telephone the order to begin the attack on the
northern front in Syria.” General Elazar at that time was
Commander-in-Chief of the Israeli forces attacking Syria.

59. In the Golan region, in Syria, the Israelis have already
built 19 Jewish settlements. In the other occupied Arab
zones they have built scores of other colonies. In short, the
annexationist intentions of Israel are no longer concealed
and the Israeli leaders are openly saying that the settlements which Israel has built in the occupied territories give
an idea of the segments they intend to annex.
60. The following
is a statement by General Dayan
published by the Jewish Telegraphic Agency on 16 March
1973:

65. The Israeli offensive against Syria stopped only on 12
June, when the Israelis had completed their occupation of
the Golan, which they are still occupying at present. On 11
June the Security Council again adopted a resolution,
resolution 236 (1967) condemning the violation of the
cease-fire and calling for an immediate return to the
positions occupied by the belligerents at 1630 hours GMT
on 10 June 1967. The Israelis did not comply with that
new resolution either and continued their march until 12
June, refusing to return to their positions of 10 June as
stipulated in resolution 236 (1967).

“Dayan came out strongly in favour of large-scale
Jewish settlement in the administered territories and
indicated that wherever Jews settled would remain part of
Israel. ‘We have a right to regard Samaria and Judea as
part of Eretz Israel’, he said. He added, ‘I do not think we
shall advise Jews who settle in the territories to live under
an Arab ruler . . .‘. Dayan said he did not see any prospect
for a general peace settlement at this time because the
Arabs haven’t budged from their insistence on total or
almost total Israeli withdrawal
from the administered
territories. He said a partial settlement might bring a
cessation of hostilities but not peace. He said he was
opposed to a partial accord because an agreement without
diplomatic or political relations is unacceptable. He said
he would prefer the existing situation to that.“3

66. Had Israel accepted the cease-fire order, which it had
officially stated it had accepted on 9 June, no portion of
Syrian territory would be occupied today. That is why
Israel is not entitled to call for respect of the cease-fire
from anyone else.
67. But there is more. Since 1967 Israel has on numerous
occasions violated the cease-fire with impunity-I
empha.
size “with impunity”. It has adopted and practised State
terrorism; it has raised Mafia techniques to the rank of
official policy practised by a State Member of the United
Nations. The list of operations which Israel has faUaciousb
and cynically called “preventive” is very long. All these
operations constitute grave and flagrant violations of the
cease-fire.

61. Yesterday in a press conference the following question
was addressed to General David Elazar, Chief of Staff of
Israel, “Is the Israeli army going to cross the Syrian
cease-fire line? ” The answer was: ‘&Our troops are advancing from our territory towards the other side.” I should like
to emphasize the words “our territory”, which means that,
3Quoted

in I:nglish

has already become

by the spcakcr.

6

68. In order not to take up the time of the Council 1 shall
refrain from giving a list of these violations and shall limit
myself to recalling the cowardly and unprovoked attack
launched by the Israeli air force on 8 January I973 against
economic targets and urban centres in the north and south
of Syria. This attack resulted in hundreds of dead among
the civilian population and caused enormous damage. I shall
also mention the air attack against Syria on 13 September
last, which was also a surprise attack and without provocation.
69. It is surprising to hear Israel qualify the incursion of
its military aircraft into Syrian air space as a routine
patrol-in other words, something that should not provoke
any reaction on our part. In fact, Israel’s arrogance, which
knows
no limits, is beginning to be awkward for its
protectors
as well. We are certain that this arrogance,
which is unparalleled in modern history and which is
expressed in constant encroachments upon the sovereignty
of certain independent States, will ultimately awaken the
sentiments of justice among the responsible persons in
those States and will lead them to act in such a way as to
put an end to it. That, again, is why Israel has no valid right
to draw attention to the alleged failure to comply with the
cease-fire.
70. The Foreign Minister of Israel also calls for a return to
the positions held before 6 October. After that, he says, he
will be ready to negotiate to come to agreement on secure
frontiers. How can a country agree to negotiate while its
territory is occupied by a foreign Power? How can it agree
to negotiate when the occupier declares that he will never
agree to withdraw from the major part of the territory he
occupies?
For Israel, Jerusalem is not negotiable. The
sector of Gaza, the Golan and Sharm-el-Sheikh can, under
no
circumstances, be returned. The West Bank of Jordan,
according to the Dayan plan or the Allon plan, is to be the
area where these plans are going to be put into effect, both
plans giving that Arab region a hybrid status, reconciling by
some means military Israeli presence with Jordanian
sovereignty. The policy of annexation and fait accompli of
General Dayan is at present adopted by the party in power
and constitutes
its primary feature in the electoral
campaign now in progress in Israel.
71. These are the circumstances in which Israel is inviting
the Arabs to enter into negotiations without prior conditions-and
I emphasize this: without prior conditions.
Recent European history shows that any negotiations under
conditions
of foreign occupation can only lead to surrender, and any agreement which confirms the surrender is
bound to yield to the thrust of nationalist forces that
emerge, and ultimately will be swept away.
72. As for the Israeli thesis of secure frontiers, it is but a
fallacious and rather flimsy argument. Nowadays the whole
world is aware that there is no geographic obstacle that
could have any valid effect against modern weapons. In
fact, Israel, which has enormous quantities of the most
highly perfected types of weapons, is advancing this
faIIacious
argument in order to justify its policy of
annexation. The front line in Syria, established after the
1967 war, is on a plain and Syrian guns can easily reach the
settlements
built in the Golan. According to the Israeli

thesis, it would be legitimate for Israelto requirethat its
fmal bordersshouldbe placedsomescorekilometresdeeper
into Syrian territory.
73. The Israeli Foreign Minister hascalledfor a return to
the positions held before 6 October. We have refusedto
concedehis country’s right to call upon othersto observe
and comply with the cease-fire,Israelhavingoccupiedthe
whole of the Golan, having taken advantageof the
non-compliancewith the cease-fireorderedby the Security
Council in its resolution 235 (1967), and alsohavingtaken
advantageof the violation of resolution236 (1967). Israel
cannot call for the return to positionsoccupiedbefore
6 October because such positionshappen to be in our
national territory, And the fight we are wagingnow, and
which was provoked by the Israeli attack, cannot be
qualified asanything other than a nationalliberationfight,
which is in conformity with the principlesof the United
Nations and in accordancewith the normsof international
law.
74. We are not seekingin any way to causelossof human
life and the destruction of property when this potentiaI is
not mobilized against our security and when it is not
necessaryto liberate our occupiedterritory. We are not
threatening the survival of anyone.Our goal can be none
other than to recover usurpedArabterritory. Is it too much
to ask for support in our liberation strugglefrom all
peace-lovingand justice-lovingcountries?Is it too muchto
ask of the United Nations to give ussupportin an action
that is in accordance with resolutionsthat are being
trampled underfoot by Israelimilitarism?
75. The Foreign Minister of Israel has attempted to
exploit the religious and humanitariansentimentsof his
audience by stressingthat the allegedArab attack was
launched when the people of Israel were celebratingan
annual holy day. I shouldlike to recallthat it is a peculiar
feature of the Israelisto strike whenthe momentappearsto
be least likely for beginningan attack. We have endured
that experience on severaloccasions
and we have suffered
much from it. I shall add that the Islamicworld asa whole
has been engaged since 27 Septemberin the sacred
Ramadan fast, which is a month of prayer and charity. In
the mind of Israel, an attack duringthe month of Ramadan
resulting in a new Israeli victory bringsthe maximumof
humiliation to the Arabs andobligesthemto capitulate.
76. The representative of the United States yesterday
made a statement (1743rd meeting] in which he set forth
the position of his Government. That statementcalls for
several comments, which 1 shall attempt to make very
briefly.
77. First, the report of the United Nations observers
cannot always and in ail casesbe considered,alone, as
evidence of the whole truth. In the majority of cases,Israeli
military aircraft have avoided the front-lines, where the
United Nations observersare posted in Syria, and have
penetrated Syrian air spacein the northern part of the
country, coming from the west, after having covered a
distance of over 300 kilometresin Mediterraneanskies.The
United Nations observersnaturally cannot, in suchcircumstances,report violations of the cease-fire
by Israel.

indignation of the death of a certain number of United
Nationspersonnel, together with membersof their families;
that the wife of the Ambassadorof India in Damascushas
been seriouslywounded; and that five other officials of the
United Nations in Damascushave also been wounded,
Those officials were British, French, Italian and Jordanian
nationals.

78. Second, it is difficult to understand what the representative of the United States was attempting to say when he
called on the Security Council to perform its historic role.
Does he mean that the United States is then to abandon the
improper use of the right of veto?
79. Third, it is impossible for us to understand on what
legal or moral basis the United States wishes to see a return
to the positions occupied before 6 October. The cease-fire
cannot be considered as a permanent regime, as this would
in fact simply transform the cease-fire line into a definitive
border between the belligerents. Right and morality shun
this state of affairs and require that territory acquired by
force be returned.

85. I should now like to read to you the sameinformation
as reported by Agence France Pressein a telegram from
Damascus.I shall read directly from the printed sheetsof
the AFP teletype:
“For the first time since the unleashingof the fourth
war in the Middle East, Israeli aircraft, beginningat noon
on Tuesday, struck the Syrian capital, causingcasualties
among the civilian population, in particular among the
diplomatic colony of Damascus.The wife of a United
Nations expert, Mrs. Bhattacharya, was killed, and the
wives of the Ambassadorsof Pakistanand India, together
with their children, were wounded.

80. For six years and four months the United Nations had
been rendered incapable of finding and applying a solution
that would guarantee a just and lasting peace, and everything indicated that the situation was to crystallize for the
benefit of the connivance of certain Powers with Israel and
the dangerous tendency shown by certain other Powers to
coexist with Israeli aggression and expansionism.

“This raid was aimed particularly at the residential
quarter, where the Soviet Cultural Centre and the Orient
Hospital”-1 should like to emphasizethat, “the Soviet
Cultural Centre and the Orient Hospital”-“are located.
Shortly before noon, the first group of three Phantoms
flew over Damascusat low altitude before dropping a
seriesof bombs over the residential quarter, where the
residencesof several diplomats accredited to the Syrian
Government are located. A few secondsafter the flight of
those aircraft, thick black and white smoke roseinto the
blue sky, which is particularly clear over the Syrian
capital. A few seconds later, a Phantom again flew
towards the sametarget, followed by the white smoke
from the anti-aircraft missile.That sameaircraft strafed
with the machine-gun it carried”-1 emphasize that,
“strafed with the machine-gunit carried”-“groups of
people that had formed in the streets of the quarter
immediately after the bombing.

81. Now that Israel, through its new aggression against the
victims of the aggression of 1967, is providing an opportunity for implementation of the numerous resolutions of
the United Nations calling for the withdrawal by Israel
from all the occupied Arab territories, it would be absurd
and contrary to the spirit of all of those resolutions to go
back to the line held before 6 October, which, by definition, was a provisional line, but which in practice turned
out to be permanent and a constant defiance of United
Nations authority, of the feelings of national dignity of all
our peoples and the feelings of justice of all peace-and
freedom-loving peoples.
82. I wish to affirm that we are unshakably attached to
the principles of freedom and peace based on justice. We
are at present fighting to repel the aggressor, we are
exercising our right of self-defence. We do not wish to bring
death to anyone. We are seeking to prevent the aggressor
from sowing death and destruction in our land. We are
staunchly loyal to the principles of the Charter, and as a
small country we are in favour of strengthening the
authority of the United Nations and enhancing its prestige.
We abhor the necessity of devoting the greater part of our
national income to the requirements of defence; we would
prefer to be able to use all of our resources for the
furthering of our well-being and the progress of our people.

“It wasduring this attack that it seemsthat membersof
the families of the Indian and Pakistani diplomats were
struck. In the same quarter, but at some distance,
Madame Pet%, the wife of the First Secretary of the
French Embassy, was with a group which was likewise
strafed”-and I emphasize“a group which was likewise
strafed”-“The wife of the French diplomat was not
wounded, but she had to take cover under an automobile
in order to avoid the fire. MadamePetib, a few instants
later, found in the garden of her villa a fragment of a
bomb. Two minutes later, three other aircraft flew over
Damascusat high altitude and their passagewasfollowed
by three seriesof explosionscoming apparently from the
sameresidential quarter and from sectorslocated to the
south of the capital.”

83. We have nothing whatsoever against the Jews as Jews.
What we are fighting against is solely and exclusively
colonialism and Zionist expansionism, which seek to assert
themselves in our region at the expense of our people.
84. This morning I received information from Damascus
concerning the bombing by Israeli Phantoms of civilian
targets in the capital of my country. On the instructions of
my Government, I communicated that information this
morning to all delegations from the rostrum of the General
Assembly.4
We have learned with great sadness and
4 See Official
Session, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

of the General
2145th

Assembly,

meeting.

86. This information quite frankly calls for no comment.
Other information has indicated that the residenceof the
Soviet Embassy staff has been bombed and that 30
membersof the Embassyhave beenkilled. This information
fills our heartswith great sorrow. We expressour feelingsof
sympathy and solidarity to the families of the victims.
ThesebarbarousIsraeli acts show that Israel doesnot stop

Tlventy-eighth

8

short of any act of barbarity and atrocity. They show
Israel’s contempt for all human values and all international
conventions relating to the protection of civilians in time of
war.

92. I also wish to expressmy deepsympathy to those
Governmentswhosediplomatshave beenkilled or wounded
in Damascus.
93. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I had intended to askfor the
floor a little earlierin order to makea specialstatement,but
my distinguished friend the representative of France,
Ambassadorde Guiringaud, has somewhatanticipatedme
and has already mentioned in his statementthe tragicnews
we have only just received,in reportsfrom foreign agencies,
concerning the barbaric, bestial and gangster-likebombing
of the Soviet cultural centre in the capital of the Syrian
Arab Republic, Damascus,by Israeliaircraft, andthe death
of six Soviet citizens. This has beenconfirmed by a large
number of facts. There is alsoa report that in the areaof
Damascuswhere foreign embassies,
including the building
of the Soviet Embassy,are located, the buildingsof no less
than 10 foreign embassies
have beendestroyedand30 staff
members of the Soviet Embassyhave been killed. This
hfonmhm hasnot yet beenconfirmed, but both Agence
France Presseand UP1have reportedit.

87. I have also received, scarcely an hour ago, a telegram
of condolence addressed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic to the SecretaryGeneral. May I be permitted to read this text:
“With a heart filled with sorrow and affliction we have
learned of the deaths of a number of military observers,
members of a United Nations unit, as well as of a number
of United Nations experts who were among the victims of
the barbarous Israeli bombing of civilian targets in
Damascus. The death of Captain Tjorswaag with his wife
and son, as well as the death of the wife of an FA0
expert, Mrs. Bhattacharya, constitute an irrefutable condemnation of Israel and show its truly inhuman nature,
which runs counter to humanity and peace. On behalf of
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic I would
request you, Mr. Secretary-General, to accept my profound condolences and to be good enough to transmit to
the families of the victims my most sincere feelings of
solidarity and to communicate to them that I share their
sorrow and bereavement. (Signed): Abdul Halim Khaddam, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab
Republic.”
88. The PRESIDENT:
General.

I now

94. This is yet another bloody and villainous act of the
Israeli aggressors.I cannot find words to expressmy
indignation, anger and strongestpossibleprotest against
this act of the high-handedIsraeli aggressors,
the more so
since it was perfectly clear that this embassyquarter, if I
may call it that, contained no military targets. Embittered
by the fact that they are encounteringsetbacksat the front,
the Israeli aggressorsdecided, as high-handedaggressors
usually do in such cases,to avengethemselvesby bombing
peaceful quartersof towns.

call on the Secretary-

89. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
As Secretary-General
of the United Nations 1 have a special responsibility for the
courageous officers from many countries who serve as
United Nations Observers in the Middle East as well as for
all United Nations personnel in the area, and I wish to
thank the Foreign Minister of Syria for his expression of
condolences at the death of a United Nations Military
Observer, Captain Tjorswaagof Norway, and his wife and
daughter in Damascus
on 9 October.

95. These bloody crimes arethe equal of Hitler’s actions
as a result of which whole towns and populationscentres
were removed from the face of the earth, Wecannotfail to
react to suchacts by the Israeliaggressors.
96. We have already stated our view, in yesterday’s
statement by the delegationof the USSR in the Security
Council (1743rd meeting], that the causeof today’s events
in the Middle East is the aggressive,
expansionistpolicy of
Israel and those imperialist circleswhich supportit. In the
last few days Israel has concentrated considerablearmed
forces on the cease-fire lines with Syria and Egypt,
mobiiized reservistsand, after thus heating the situationto
the limit, unleashedmilitary action.

90. I wish to inform the Security Council that on hearing
this tragic news J immediately dispatchedthe following
messageto the ForeignMinister of Norway:
“I wish to expressto you and through you to your
Government my profound sorrow at the tragic death of
Captain D. Tjorswaag and his wife and daughter in
Damascus.Captain Tjorswaag and all the other United
Nations Military Observersin the Middle Easthavecarried
out their difficult and exacting role with exemplary
courage and dedication. The United Nations is greatly in
their debt.

97. Israel pursues a policy of blatantly ignoring the
Charter, United Nations resolutionsand the voice of world
public opinion, Peace-lovingforces throughout the world
condemn Israel’spolicy of aggression,territorial expansion
and international banditry. As has already beenpointed
out, this view has also been reflected in decisionsof the
recent Conferenceof non-alignedStates and in resolutions
of the Organization of African Unity.

“I would ask you to convey my sympathy and
condolencesto the surviving family of CaptainTjorswaag
in their terrible loss.”

98. In the opinion of the Soviet Government, it has
become essentialfor all countriesand peoplesconcerned
with sparing mankind the dangers and disasterswhich
accompany Israel’scontinued aggression
in the Middle East
to unite their efforts in the interestsof the earliestpossible
settlement of the situation in that area on a just and firm
basis,and of curbing the Israeliaggressor.

91. I am also deeply concernedat the report of the death
of Mrs. Bhattacharya, the wife of an expert of the Food
and Agriculture Organization and at reportsof injuries to
other United Nationspersonnel.
9

99. We consider that solidarity and unity of action in
engaging the Israeli aggressors are now more important than
ever to the peoples of the Arab and all other countries. The
Soviet Union’s position is that the struggIe of the Arab
States to liberate the territories occupied by the foreign
invaders is their just and sacred right.
100. As the Soviet delegation has said before, it will be
recalled that the Soviet Union consistently supported and
continues to support peoples fighting for their freedom and
independence. At the present critical juncture it will again
give its support to the Arab peoples fighting in a just cause
against Israeli aggression.
101. The Israeli aggression causes suffering not only to
those who are directly situated in the region of the Israeli
invaders’ direct aggression. Israel’s policy of aggression also
causes suffering to the people of many, many countries. An
important consequence of the continued occupation of
Arab land by Israel and of Israel’s unceasing aggression
against the Arab States is that they damage not only the
Arab countries and peoples, but also many other countries,
indeed the whole world, but particularly the countries of
Western Europe, not to mention the fact that in circumstances of international d&mte the Middle East is the most
dangerouspoint of tension in the world. Israel’saggression
and occupation of Arab territories have meant that for
more than six years the Suez Canal, that vitally important
internationa1 artery for the peoplesof WesternEurope and
the countries of the Pacific and Indian Ocean region, has
not beenfunctioning. The damageto the WesternEuropean
countries alone is calculated at thousands of millions of
dollars. And Israel and its Government are guilty of and
bear the direct responsibility for all this, which hascaused
incalculable damageto the peoplesof Western Europe and
of the Pacific and Indian Ocean region.
102.. Just as in their age savagebarbarian tribes, in their
mad urge for destruction, disrupted, demolished,wiped from
the face of the earth towns and the most precious
monuments of human culture, so in our civilized age the
Zionist barbarianshave disrupted and paralysed the Suez
Canal, that work of genius produced by human reasonand
the scienceand technology of the last century.
103. Economistsin Western Europe and the United States
seek the causesof present-day world inflation and the rise
in prices in the countries of the capitalist world. Apparently, however, none of them has to date studied Israel’s
guilt and responsibility for the rising cost of living, for the
general rise in prices throughout the world and for high
costs as a result of the fact that the Israeli aggressors
have
paralysed a vitally important waterway between Europe,
Asia and the Far East. Is this silenceon the part of scholars
a consequenceof pressureapplied to them by international
Zionism seeking to cover up and muffle comments on
Israel’s crimes and its responsibility before mankind,
seeking to conceal the damage Israel has caused by its
aggressionnot only to the Arabs, but to the whole world?
Naturally, the responsibility for these barbaric actions and
this damagerests fully and entirely on Israel, and Israel’s
rulers must answer seriously for these crimes to the
international community, to mankind,
10

104. While expressinga strong protest on behalf of the
Soviet Government, the Soviet delegation declares that
responsibility for the new international crimes, for these
bloody and villainous acts, for the death of Soviet citizens
and for the destruction of the cultural centre and the
Embassybuilding in Damascusrests fully and entirely on
the Government of Israel, and personaIly on Prime Minister
Golda Meir and General Dayan, those international crirninals who have sullied themselvesand stained their hands
with bloody and villainous acts, in the murder of many
foreign citizens.
105. I thank those representativeswho have expressed,
both in their statementshere in the Security Council arid
personally and directly to the Soviet delegation, their
condolenceswith respect to the tragedy which hasbefallen
theseSoviet citizens in Damascus.
106. I consider that it would be appropriate for the
Presidentof the Security Council, on behalf of the Council
members,to addressan urgent appealto the Government of
Israel to cease bombing peaceful towns in the Arab
countries,to ceasemurdering both the Arab population and
foreignersliving in these towns. This would be the most
reasonableand speedyaction and reaction of the Council to
this new bloody and villainous act by the Israeli aggressors.
107. The PRESIDENT: In view of the circumstancesthat
have arisen, and with the consent of the representative of
Indonesia,I have agreedto waive rule 27 of the provisional
rulesof procedure to enablememberswho have askedto do
soto speakin terms of condolencein respect of the tragic
news that has reached us this afternoon. I hope that
membersand representatives on whom I may call will
confine their remarks to the immediate subject on which
account I have waived rule 27, and will be as brief as the
circumstancesallow them to be.
108. I call on the representativeof Israel.
109. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It was not my intention to
speak today. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel
informed the Council yesterday that he would make a
policy statementat a future meeting. However, the mendacity and hypocrisy which permeatedthe speech by Syria’s
Deputy Foreign Minister, and the regrettable exploitation
by the representativeof the USSR of the grave newsof the
death of innocent personsfor his usual unbridled abuseof
Israel, compel me to comment immediately on this point,
110. War is always a tragedy. Lossof life, whether civilian
or military, must be profoundly regretted. To the aggrieved
families, especially of foreign nationals killed in the
hostilities, to their Governments and, in particular, to the
Government of the USSR and the Government of Norway
and to the United Nations we express our grief and
condolences.My delegation will join in the expression of
sympathy by membersof the Security Council for all the
victims of the renewedwarfare, men, women and children,
whether they be Egyptian, Syrian, IsraeIi, or citizens of
other States. However, the responsibility for these losses
mustbe placedsquarelywhere it belongs11I. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the representative of the Soviet Union on a point of order.

Il2. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
{translatiolz from Russian): The Soviet delegation does not
wish to hear excuses and condolences from a representative
of murderers and international gangsters.

region. The representativewho precededme waspermitted
to makelengthy attacks on my country. I do hope that in
the few remainingsentencesof my statementI shallbe able
to expressmy respect for your desire,Mr. President,that
the Council should be able to proceedwith the courseof
the meeting.

113. The PRESIDENT: I must insist that visitors in the
public gallery and representatives seated at the side of the
chamber refrain from making demonstrations of approval
or disapproval of what is said in this Council, The traditions
of this Council demand that its work should proceed in an
atmosphere of dignity and order, free from manifestations
of this kind. I ask all visitors to refrain from any further
manifestations.

121. I was about to say that since6 October Syria and
Egypt have unleashed massivepremeditatedaggression
againstIsrael. Since 6 October Syrianlong-rangeground-toground missilesof Soviet manufacture122. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of the
Sudan.

114. The representative of Israel may proceed.
123. Mr. KHALID (Sudan): All I am askingis that the
ruling of the Presidentbe respected.

11.5. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I am not at all surprised that
the representative of the Soviet Union found it necessary
to leave this room the moment I was about to touch on
responsibility for the aggression to which Israel has been
subjected by its Arab neighbours for the last 25 years. A
great share of that responsibility rests with the Soviet
Union, which has in recent years identified itself with the
fanatical, barbaric hatred and belligerency toward Israel of
the Arab Governments, supplying them with unlimited
quantities of arms, strengtheningtheir hostility, encouraging them to pursue their criminal course.If not for the
policies and actions of the Soviet Union, the Middle East
might today have already been in a state of peaceand not
in a situation of renewedsufferingand bloodshed.
I
I

124. The PRESIDENT: I hopethat the representativeof
Israel has finished his message
of condolences.
ShallI allow
him two more sentences?
125. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President,I am about to
finish my message.The questionis much too seriousto be
treated jocularly. I have comehereto expressthe viewsof
my Government, and I shallinsistthat the representatives
of my Government be given preciselythe sameright as
anyone else to express their views at this table without
interruptions by such defendersof human rights and
freedomsas the representativeof the Sudanand others.I
have already been interrupted three times,and I begyour
indulgence, Sir, to be allowed to conclude my brief
statementin a few more sentences.

116. I was about to say that the responsibilityfor these
lossesmust, however, be placed squarelywhere it belongs,
with those who have initiated the presentfighting andthose
who have waged brutal aggressionagainstIsrael for 25
years. It is Egypt and Syria that on 6 October chosewar
instead of peace. They are the ones.They havedecidednot
to talk with Israel but to shoot, not to build understanding
and agreement,but to devastate,to burn, andto ruin. Since
6 October Syria hasunleashed-

126. Since 6 October Syrian long-rangeground-to-ground
missiles127. Mr, KHALID (Sudan): Mr, President.
128. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to sayto the Foreign
Minister of the Sudan that I haveappealed,ashe hasheard
me appeal, to the representativeof Israelto terminatehis
remarks as soon as possible. I think I should say in
extenuation of the representativeof Israel,in connexion
with what he wishesto sayto us, that it wouldhave been
equally the right of any other memberof the Councilto
raise a point of order, shall I say, againstthe previous
speaker.If I may appealto all our colleagues,
I think that
perhaps that should be borne in mind. I hope that the
representativeof Israel may be allowedto finish his brief
statement. I wouId appealto him againto do soassoon as
possible.

117. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof the
Sudan.
118. Mr. KHALID (Sudan): Mr. President,I understood
you to say you would call on membersto expressthei
condolences. If that understandingiscorrect, I feel that the
present speakeris goingbeyond suchexpression.
I 19. The PRESIDENT: I wouId remindthe representative
of Israel that the purposefor which I interrupted the main
course of the debate was to allow certain representatives
who wished to do so to expresscondolencesfor those
victims of the grievous developmentsthat have been
reported to us in the courseof the afternoon. I haveheard
the representative of Israel expresswhat it seemedto me
were very sincere condolences.And I believethat, having
done so, he might respect the President’srequestthat we
may be enabled as soon as possibleto proceedwith the
main course of our discussion.1 hope that that will be the
case.He may now proceed.

129. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President.
130. Mr. KHALID (Sudan): I do not want to makeyour
job difficult, Mr. President.All I want is for the rules of
procedure to be respected,If the representativeof Israel
wishesto exercise a right of reply, he will havethe time to
say whatever he wants to sayafter the other representatives
whosenamesare on the list havemadetheir statements.

120. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): My entire purposeisto restate
our grief at the tragedy that is taking place today in our

131. The PRESIDENT: I think I shouldallow the representative of Israel very briefly to terminatehis statement.
1

I,., my own judgement
he is departing very much from the
terns in which 1 said 1 would waive rule 27, ad I suggestto
him that if he has statements that seem to be moving in the
direction of those we have just heard, he ask to speak at the
end of the meeting, when other representatives who are
waiting to make their statements in the course of the
general
debate have completed these statements. I would
appeal to him to reserve his further remarks, which sound
to me as though they are embarking upon matters outside
the range of condolences, until the end of the meeting,
when I shall be happy to call,on him.
132. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Thank you, Mr. President. I
can fully understand your impressions. However, had I been
allowed to proceed for another two or three minutes you
would have realized that I was referring to the innocent
civilian victims of the war renewed by Egypt and Syria-but
to the Jewish victims, to the innocent civilian Jewish men
and women who have lost their lives because of the
aggression by our two neighbouring States, may I be
allowed to refer to them as well?
133. The PRESIDENT: Please proceed. I hope that the
Foreign Minister of the Sudan will bear with me and with
the representative of Israel for a few minutes longer.

I

134. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): For the last three days Syrian
long-range ground-to-ground missiles with warheads of 500
kilos each have rained fire and death on Israeli towns and
villages. Damage and civilian casualties have been inflicted
in the areas of Migdal Haemek, Gevat, Kfar Baruch, and
Nahalal and in the villages of the Hula valley. Yet Syria has
the audacity to suggest that in the face of its aggression,
which makes no distinction between military and civilian,
Israel should not defend itself even by air strikes directed
against military targets such as the General Army Headquarters, the Headquarters of the Syrian Air Force, and
command posts located in Damascus. Responsibility for the
regrettable civilian losses-for
which we express our
sympathy-in the direct proximity to such military targets
is borne by those Governments which have brought about
this war. That applies also to the Israeli air actions against
military targets in Egypt and the civilian losses that might
have resulted from them.

I call

139. Mr. SCALI (United States of America):
I offer
condolences to the Secretary-General artd to alI
those of my colleagues whose fellow-countrymen,
aCCor&
ing to news reports we have received, have become innocent
victims of the tragic conflict now raging around them. Such
painful news must produce not only grief but also a
stronger determination in the heart of each of US at thii
table to strive even more urgently to discover the path to
peace. To all those who are still face to face with tlio hornu
of war we can and must offer hope.
profound

140. Sir Donald MAITLAND
(United Kingdom):
The
deplorable and tragic news from Damascus has dismayed
my delegation and I should like to offer my sympathy trc
those whose compatriots have been killed or irrjurctl.
According to one report, of which I do not yet have
confirmation, the casualties included one of my own follow
countrymen.
141. Mr. SEN (India): This moment is doubly distnstcfui.
First, so many people have been killed and injured irs
Damascus in most regrettable incidents and my delegatitrrt
would like to extend its condolences and sympathy
to ;tlt
those who are bereaved and to wish all those wllo XP
injured a speedy recovery.
142. Mr. President, we had hoped that advantage would be
taken of the ruling you gave to pay conilolences not tu gc?
into the reasons behind all those incidents. I sholrld r&r
like to point out that your ruling was made after the Soviet
Ambassador had spoken. However, I sl~ould like tc:, state
quite categorically that these incidents which have taken
place in Damascus and elsewhere are the direct result tll’ the
hostilities in the Middle East and we must protest
tlr%r
civilian lives of other nationals are being sacrificed in ttrt’
process. I would support the Soviet proposal that a itrcssagc
of condolence from the President should go to illI the
bereaved families, and particularly to the Secretary-Gene&
who also has lost some of his devoted servants.

135. Even now Egypt and Syria could stop this bloodshed
and destruction by agreeing to the only constructive
proposal made since the outbreak of the hostilities:
cease-fire and restore the cease-fire lines. However, if they
continue the course of war, they can hardly complain here
of the consequences of their own criminal actions. There is
no doubt that for their Day-of-Atonement aggression Egypt
and Syria will atone for the treachery on Yom Kippur, the
Day of Judgement. They will not escape judgement by
Israel, by the enlightened world or by history.
136. The PRESIDENT:
Egypt.

138, My Government, while offering its condolences to
the Secretary-General and, through him, to the Governments whose citizens have fallen victim to Israeli
air
aggression,
has this very short announcement to make. IQ’
these air raids on civilian targets in our countries COnthe.
the Government of Egypt will do its best and make ever?;
effort to dissuade the military leaders of Israel frtun
continuing these raids.

143. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): When I spoke c;irlicr
in the Council I was unaware of the tragic news wliicll 11aa
just reached the Council chamber. When 1 exprcsseci onrlic~
our profound and grave concern on the loss of life ;tad
human suffering, I was not yet aware of the full mcnsurc (1~
the tragedy unfolding before us. May I therefore, witI. your
permission Mr. President, express the shock and grief of nr>’
delegation at the tragic loss of innocent civilian lives irt
Damascus and all other theatres of the cruel war which WY@%
reported to us today, and I wish to offer, through yo11. rtrr
smcere condolences of tny Government to the secrotarr,.
General of the United Nations, to the Ambassador of the
Soviet Union ami to the representatives of all countries
whose nationals have suffered.

on the representative of

137. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): My Government has just
informed me that an air raid on Cairo has taken place. As a
result of this air raid and our defence we have now four
Israeli pilots in our hands-those who were attacking
the
women, the children and the men in the streets of Cairo.
12

144. Mr, ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): My delegation has
learned with shock and deep sorrow of the death of
innocent civilians in Damascus. We fail to understand why
civilian areas should form targets of bombing in a military
conflict of this kind. We deplore all loss of life, and our
heartfelt co’ndolences go to the Secretary-General and to
the Governments and the families of those innocent
civilians who lost their lives while going about their daily
innocent activities. In this respect we offer our most sincere
condolences to the Government of the USSR, which has
lost so many devoted and able diplomats in Damascus. We
also extend our sympathy and condolences to the Governments of other States whose citizens have been injured or
killed in this conflict, We deplore these losses of life and we
maintain that those who provoked the situation that has led
to these tragedies will surely pay the price for what they are
doing to human life.
145. Mr. MINIC (Yugoslavia)s: It is with deep feelings of
sorrow that the delegation of my country learned of the
latest information concerning the bombing in Damascus and
the victims of that bombing, particulady in the diplomatic
quarter of Damascus.
146. We wish to express, on behalf of our Government
and of my delegation, our most sincere condolences to the
Ambassador, the Government and the delegation of the
Soviet Union for the very serious losses suffered by the
diplomatic mission of the Soviet Union in Damascus. I also
wish to express our most sincere condolences to the
Secretary-General on the tragic death of an officer of the
United Nations and his family, They fell in the service of
world peace and in the struggle against aggression.
147. I also wish to express our sympathy to the Governments of India and Pakistan and to other Governments on
the destruction of their diplomatic missions and the losses
they have suffered among their embassy staffs.
148. These latest crimes of the Israeli aggressor call for the
most severe condemnation by this supreme organ of the
United Nations. The Security Council should accept the
proposal of the representative of the Soviet Union that it
address itself to the Government of Israel with a categorical
demand to put an end at once to the bombing of inhabited
areas and to the killing of civilian populations.
149. I reject with indignation the hypocrisy of the
representative of Israel in going beyond all measure in his
statement regarding the bombing of Damascus.
150. Mr. BOYD (Panama) [interpretation from Spanish]:
Having received confirmation today that United Nations
personnel and personnel of the Soviet Embassy and other
diplomatic missions have suffered loss of life when
Damascus, the capital of Syria, was bombed, the delegation
of Panama wishes to express its grief and condolences to
the bereaved.
151. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSfi (Guinea) {interpretation
from French): It is with deep emotion that my delegation
5 Mr. Mini6 spoke in Se&o-Croatian.
statement
was supplied by the delegation.

The English

version

of his

has learned of the tragedy that has struck the city of
Damascus, a tragedy provoked by the bombing of the city
that destroyed innocent civilian lives. I should like, on
behalf of my Government, to address my sincere and
heartfelt condolences to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, to the Soviet Embassy, and to all Governments whose citizens have been killed in this tragic moment
which the Syrian and Egyptian peoples are living through.
152. Mr. PEREZ de CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): My delegation has listened with deep sorrow
to the news of the loss of civilian lives as a result of the new
war which has been unleashed in the Near East. I wish to
associate my delegation, with the deepest feeling, with the
expressions of condolence already addressed here to the
friendly delegations of the Soviet Union and the Syrian
Arab Republic, to the Secretary-General, and to the
Governments of all the countries which have suffered the
loss of innocent lives.
153. The PRESIDENT: It is clear that all members of the
Security Council share a feeling of shock over the grave
news that has been received of the deaths of United Nations
personnel, diplomatic colleagues and other innocent victims
as a result of the continuing warfare in the Middle East.
154. In relation to the United Nations we have heard the
Secretary-Ccneral read to us the telegram of condolence
that he has already sent to the Government of Norway for
the tragic loss of the United Nations observer, Captain
Tjorswaag, and his family, and his telegrams to other
victims.
155. AS President of the Security Council, and speaking as
the representative of AUSTRALIA, I wish to place on
record the shock and the grief that we all feel over the
tragic loss of innocent human life that has occurred. I shall
respect the wishes of the Council and shall send a message
of condolence to the Governments and the peoples concerned.
156. I call now on the Secretary-General.
1.57. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I deeply appreciate
the expressions of condolence which have been voiced
around this Council table over the deaths of United Nations
personnel in Damascus. I shall certainly not fail to
communicate these expressions of condolence to the
Governments concerned and to the bereaved families.
158. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I wish to express my heartfelt
gratitude to all my distinguished colleagues in the Security
Council and all other representatives who have expressed
condolences with respect to the tragic death of Soviet
diplomats and other Soviet citizens in the capital of the
Syrian Arab Republic, Damascus, at the hands of the Israeli
international murderers. Of course, I exclude the representative of Israel from this.
159. On behalf of the delegation of the USSR 1 should
like to express our sincere condolences to the representatives
of those countries whose citizens tragically perished as a
result of this monstrous international act of villiany by the
Israeli murderers.

160. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative

of

by Israel. We have urged the Council, especially its
permanent members, to take effective steps to eliminate tile
root caises of the conflict.

161. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like to say only one
sentence. I should like to believe that although members of
the Security Council have found it appropriate only today,
in the light of reports from Damascus, to express sympathy
with the innocent victims of war, these expressions,
especially those of representatives of enlightened Governments-and I exclude the representative of the Soviet Union
from that category-apply
to all casualties irrespective of
nationality, including Israeli citizens.

167. Views have been expressed that the Council should
appeal to the warring parties to end hostilities and
withdraw to their original positions. My delegation agrees
with the view that the Council should act speedily in order
to achieve a cease-fire in the Middle East. We also agree that
the parties should return to their original positions. But it is
our view that those positions should be in accordance with
resolution 242 (1967); they should follow the line established before the outbreak of the June 1967 war. This will
be indeed an important step towards establishing secure and
recognized frontiers in the Middle East and towards the
return of peace to that region. I said “an important step”,
as real peace can only be expected to return to the war-torn
lands of the Middle East if the rights of the Palestinians are
recognized and respected. It would be naive to expect that
peace will return to the Middle East if Israel continues to
occupy Arab territories, if the Palestinians continue to be
denied their rights.

162. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to think that we
could now proceed with our debate.
163. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, allow
me to begin by expressing my delegation’s sincere condolences and deep sympathy to the families of the United
Nations personnel who have lost their lives and to the
Soviet Union, Norway, India, Pakistan and the countries
whose diplomatic representatives and other nationals have
been killed or wounded during the Israeli air attack on
Damascus.

168. Views have also been expressed about the primary
responsibility of the Security Council with regard to the
maintenance of peace and security. Members are worried
about the prestige of the Council. My delegation is of the
view that the prestige of the Council can be upheld only if
we prove capable of taking concrete actions that wilI lead
us out of the impasse, out of the situation of “no war and
no peace” resulting from the contradictory interpretations
given by Members to the provisions
of resolution
242 (1967). My delegation agrees that the Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security, and that the permanent membershave a special
responsibility to see that the Council lives up to its
responsibilities. I do not think, however, that mere concern
for the prestige of the Council without concrete alld
effective action is sufficient. My delegation would like to
remind the Council of the efforts made by its non-aligned
members during this summer’s debates on the Middle East.
We regret that the Council failed to adopt draft resolution
S/10974 of 24 July 1973. In rejecting it, the Council
should have been aware that the only option it left to
Egypt was to have recourse to force if it wanted to recover
its territories occupied by Israel.

164. This meeting of the Security Council has been
convened to discuss the very serious development in the
Middle East situation. It is with a feeling of deep
satisfaction that my delegation welcomes the assumption of
the presidency of the Council by you, Sir, an experienced
and wise diplomat, a representative of a neighbouring
country with which Indonesia maintains the closest ties of
friendship and co-operation, and whom I have had the
privilege to know and appreciate as a colleague arid friend
during the last 15 years or so. 1 shouId like to assure you,
Mr. President, of my delegation’s co-operation in the
execution of your important and difficult duties as President of the Council for the month of October.
165. It is an equally great satisfaction for my delegation
and myself to express our appreciation to the outgoing
President, my friend and colleague, Ambassador Mojsov of
Yugoslavia, for the competent and efficient manner in
which he presided over the Council’s work during the
month of September.
166. My delegation has tried to follow with close attention what is happening in the Middle East since the
outbreak of renewed hostilities on 6 October last. We have
listened most attentively to the statements made by the
delegations directly concerned in the war activities and by
members of this Council. It is not easy to find our way
around the facts which have been presented to us.
Indonesia’s position, however, is clear, and has been clear
since the very beginning of the Middle East conflict, WC
have said on many occasions that we support the efforts of
the Arab countries to regain their territories occupied by
Israel since the war of June 1967. We have always
maintained that peace can only return to the Middle East if
those territories are returned to their lawful owners, and if
the rights of the Palestinians who have been chased away
from their homeland are respected. We have also contended
that it cannot be expected that the Arab countries will
acquiesce in the continued occupation of their territories

169. Members have referred to resolution 242 (1967) 8s
the basis for finding a solution to the Middle East problenl.
My delegation agrees with that view. However, when the
Council adopted resolution 242 (1967), in its wisdom it left
the provisions of that resolution open to contradictory
interpretations, II priori dooming to failure efforts for their
implementation. It seems to my delegation that adherence
to resolution 242 (1967) alone will not help us towards a
solution of the Middle East conflict, as has been proved by
the failure of all efforts during the last six years. If
resolution 242 (1967) has to be the basis of the search for a
solution, the Council has to agree on one and the same
interpretation in order to be able to implement its
provisions effectively. Otherwise it will be just another
excuse to continue the impasse, to perpetuate the situation
of “no war and no peace” in which Israel can consolidate
its position in the occupied Arab territories and continue its
14

policy of integrating those territories into Israel, with all
the dangers inherent in such a state of affairs. The outbreak
of hostilities with which the Council is now faced is
sufficient proof that these dangers are not imaginary.

world would expect the Council to discharge
it. Weare also
aware that in the Middle East today, much death and
destruction is taking place and, if at all possible,we should
try to stop the fighting. I cannot, however,fail to recall
with regret many instancesin the past,sometimes
involving
great Powers, when massivedeath and destruction took
placeand, for whatever reasons,they went unheededby the
Council. In the Middle East, severalsuchincidentshave
occurred during the last sevenyears. However, we shall
always gladly adhere to the homely saying,“Better late
than never”. Taday Arab and Israeli lives are being
sacrificed in a totally unnecessaryconflict. Yet, significantly, neither the Arab Governmentsnor the Israeli
Government have requestedany action by the Council.We
cannot overlook their possiblereasonsfor not askingfor
the Council’s help. Nor can I claim that I care more for
Arab and Israelilives than they themselves
do.

170. As far as my delegation is concerned, the only
interpretation of resolution 242 (1967) that can lead us
toward peace in the Middle East is to follow the sequence
of, first, withdrawal of Israel from occupied Arab territories, then negotiation as to the outstanding issues,
including the rights of the Palestinians. If these two aspects
are settled, secure and recognized borders can be established and peace has a realistic chance of returning to the
Middle East. It is an atmosphere of peace and goodwill,
rather than soldiers and guns, that will be the most effective
guarantee that secure and recognized borders will be
respected.
171. Being realistic, my delegation remains of the view
that to arrive at one and the same agreed interpretation of
the provisions in resolution 242 (1967), we need the
co-operation and the political will of the permanent
members, especially of the super-Powers, and the same
sincere co-operation and political will are essential for their
effective implementation in order to arrive at an over-all
solution of the Middle East problem.
172. The raids on Port Said, Cairo and Damascus
by the
Israeli air force, causingcasualtiesamonginnocent people,
should remind the Council of the urgency of a meaningful
action. We cannot strongly enough condemn attacks on
non-military targets, causing numerouscasualtiesamong
innocent people. If it is the intention of Israel to
demoralize the Arab peoplesand break their fighting spirit,
perhaps Israel will remember the reaction of the British
people to the bombardment of London by Hitler’s Luftwaffe during the last world war.
173. My delegation is prepared to work together with
other members of the Council in the endeavourto bring
peace, real peace,to the Middle East.

177. For sevenyears the Arab countrieshavewaited for a
peaceful solution. For sevenyears Egypt has done everything in its power to bring about a correct implementation
of resolution 242 (1967). As late asJuly of this year, the
Council decided to find a solutionto the problem,but its
efforts came to nought becausethey wereobstructedby a
veto. Subsequentdevelopmentshave shownthat that veto
wasnot only againstthe expressed
will of 13out of the 15
membersof the Council, but wasalsoin conflict with the
viewsof the non-alignedcountriesfrom four continents,and
many other States besides.At that stagethe message
given
by the Council to the Foreign Minister of Egypt wasclear.
It was simply that since all solutionscould be prevented
arbitrarily, the only way Egypt could assertits legitimate
rights was therefore by force alone.The presenthostilities
in the Middle East are a mere translationof that message
which the Foreign Minister of Egypt carriedhome. He has
made no secret of it. Indeed, today’s message
alsoshould
not be lost on us, when he spokeabout what Egyptian
authorities wish to do should bombardmentand aerial
bombardmentof civilian centrescontinue.

178. Some delegationshave indicatedthat if the present
hostilities come to an end, someunknownandunexpected
174. Mr. SEN (India): We are glad, Sir, that your
avenuesto peacewould beopento us. At the sametime, all
presidency of the Council this month brings with it a
delegationshave been anxious to reaffirm in most solemn
wealth of experience and wisdom, of skill and dedication, terms that there has beenno changein their Governments’
which we so badly needwhen we are about to discuss
one
position. We do not, therefore, seewhy the cessationof
of the most difficult and dangerousproblemsbeforeUS. In
hostilities can bring about a greaterprospectof a peaceful
your task you have the full co-operationof my delegation, solution than what has happenedin the past. A cease-fire
as did indeed the Ambassadorof Yugoslavia,Mr. Mojsov,
was establishedat least four or five timesduring the last
when he conducted the affairs of this Council so success- seven years, always as a first step. There have been no
fully last month.
significant second or third steps, and all attempts at
political settlementhave proved abortive.
175. In the preliminary discussions,before a Council
meeting was called to discussthe presenthostilitiesin the
179. What Egypt and Syria aredoingnow is nothingmore
Middle East, we had indicated to you that, while wehad no
than upholding the provisionsof the Charter in asserting
objection to sucha meeting,if requested,we werenot at all
their right to self-defenceand to territorial integrity. This
certain that in the event of a likely failure by the Councilto
right is inherent to every sovereignState, and if Egypt and
come to a satisfactory decision,public opinion in the world
Syria have desistedfrom exercisingthis right it wasbecause
would not be more disappointedthan if the Councilhad
they had hoped that the Council would find a peaceful
not debated the problem formally and openly.
solution. It is no wonder, therefore,that the representative
of the United Kingdom said:
176. It has been rightly pointed out that the Councilhas
the primary responsibility for the maintenanceof inter“The ultimate verdict may well be that the basicfactor
national peace and security and that people al1over the
was the frustration of the internationalcommunity in its
15

efforts to bring about that just and lasting Peace in the
Middle East of which the promise was held out by
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) nearly six Years
ago.” [I 743rd meeting, para. 68.1
180. While Egypt and Syria are exercisingtheir right-a
right which can never be andhasneverbeenextinguishedIsraelhasextended the areaof conflict and given it a true
and tragic international dimensionby attacking andbombing suchplacesoutsidethe areaof occupationasDamascus
and port Said. A report hasjust now been given by the
ForeignMinister of Egypt that Cairotoo hasbeenattacked.
181. In the attack on Damascus
severaldiplomats,mcluding United Nations officials and the Indian and Pakistani
Ambassadors’families are reported to have been either
killed or severelyinjured. The Soviet Governmentsuffered
a particularly heavy losswith the death of more than 30
persons.We deplore these deaths and condemn these
attacks.
’
182. So, on the one hand, Egypt and Syria can be
consideredto have upheld the Charter, while, on the other
hand, Israel is open to the chargeof having renewedan
international war by attacking severalplacesin Egyptian
and Syrian territories. This is a fact we have to keep in
mind in comingto any decision.
183. Without the necessityof repeatingthe discussion
that
took placein the Council in June and July of this year, it
shouldbe clear to all objective andresponsible
personsthat
if peace is to return to the Middle East, Israel must
withdraw from the territories occupiedby force asa result
of the June1967war. Unlessthis basicprinciple is accepted
by the Council asa whole, it will be both unfair andunjust
for the Council to ask for a cease-firethat will leavevast
territories of Egypt, Jordan and Syria in the illegal
occupationof Israel.

declared that the causeof tension in tile Zra~
is Israeli aggression
and refusal to vacate the torrilorta’*
occupied by armed forces. This intransigence On the pJ.5
of Israel is clearly the basic causeleading to the prew%‘:
outbreak of hostilities. Our sympathies are erltiroly W:kF’
the Arabs, whose sufferings have reached the point *?%
explosion. Their causeis based on justice and delTlUd%
forthwith the attention of the international CO~ll~llWli!p
Immediate implementation by Israel of res&ti% ‘“.
242 (1967) constitutes a solution which can acres1
9!“*
tragic
march of events, settling the peace of the Fe&+
and of the world at large.”
consistently

187. We and many others have learnt t0 our COSf t&2
there cannot be any peace unless political problcrns ~FY
examined as a whole, and not simply with a view IL’
stopping the bloodshed without taking into accourll &.%
causeswhich leadto suchbloodshed. There can be 110pew@
without justice. The denial of justice in the circunistanica
of the Middle Eastis nothing but a direct encouragelncrll Sg+,
war and conflict, Those of us who would like to SW tij~kt:
and durablepeacereturn to the Middle East must benal obit
efforts to ensure that Arab territories are no lotspr?
occupied by the Israelis. The rest of the problema
including the rights of the Palestinians---canthen be s&et.
and some of them will lead to negotiations, direct ~$3
indirect, and in an atmosphere of equality in wlricls ~3:‘.
party will bring to thesenegotiations the weight of victklr+
or the humiliation of defeat and occupation.
188. Mr. KHALID (Sudan): My first duty here, Mr, f’rc~;~
dent, is to associatemyself with others who have said !ira”
it is a bit of good fortune that you are guitlirrg qrcl~
deliberationsat this time. Your own wisdom is a help. i’o~,country's
non-involvement is a help. It is the olet
involvement of some others that has brought us to 1h:a
impasse.
189. My secondduty is a sadone. With profound grief as
have learnt the newsof the brutal bombing of the porlca:K
abodesin Damascusand the tragic loss of life it caused. f~
deep sorrow we extend our condolences to the Sccrct;lr>General and the Governments of Syria, the Soviet t,~rric
and Norway on the death of their citizens in the service ~a*
world peaceand international co-operation.

184. We, like all other delegations,would like to seethe
present hostilities cease,but they can ceaseonly when
withdrawalof Israeliforceshasbeenacceptedby Israeland
begunin practice.Weagreewith the statementmadeby the
representativeof the United States of America that the
“least damagingway to bring this about is to have the
parties concerned return to the positions held before
hostilities broke out” (1743rd meeting, para. 161, Since
the hostilities broke out on 6 June 1967, the parties
concernedshouldreturn to the line that separatedthem on
that date.

190. Wealsoextend our sympathies ta other Goverrrn~cca$+
whosecitizens have fallen victim to this revolting, inJiwt;
minate bombing,

185. Someeloquent statementshave been madethat all
methodshave beentried except negotiations.This is simply
not true. Withdrawalfrom occupiedterritories hasnot been
tried, and unlessthis takes place Egypt has madeit clear
that there can be no negotiations.We support this view of
Egypt and other Arab Statesand will indicate our support
in any actionthat the Councilmay take.
186. Only yesterday the Governmentof India expressed
its official PdiCY in a statementwhich readsasfollows:
“The Governmentof India is deeply concernedat the
eruption of fighting in West Asia. The Government has
16

191. The sombrehorizons of the Middle East were ~XSKC
againstormy with the confused alarums of war. This ~‘35 XI,..
surprise to the fair-minded elements of the world c~Q?munity, those that knew man’s reaction to the disgrace 9wr:
humiliation and the usurpation of basic rights of life ran*:
Property. The caveats were many. They oamc from Statcc
Victims of blasphemy,and there is but one bhSphCIll_k~ra&
that is injustice. They came from elderly and rospoorted
Heads of State. They came from uninvolved but I~$I:!
disinterestedregional organizations. And all of tlrerll Iiahc:
hared the view so wisely echoed by our Secretary-Conrraj
that as long as the prospects of achieving a just all&:
acceptedsettlement of the Middle East problem was rltrt it:
sight the cease-firewould remain precarious and urrstnhlf

192. In the face of all those appeals and warnings, the
Security Council remained unmoved, And when it did act a
few months ago, its action was impeded by the negative
vote of the. United States Government. Yesterday the
United States decided to move-to get us moving. We
welcome this desire to use the United Nations machinery
more effectively. We welcome the desire to see the sanctity
of cease-fire lines enforced by the peace-keeping organs of
the United Nations-though
my Lebanese friends would
have liked to see this energetic concern demonstrated when
the armistice lines, much older than the cease-fire lines,
were violated in April of this year, and my Syrian friends
would have liked to see this energetic concern demonstrated last month, when Syrian harbours and hamlets were
savagely bombarded. However, we still say better late than
never.
193. But those of us who heard the United States
representative yesterday must have said that it is within the
United States power to do better than it did yesterday.
Perhaps the over-involvement of its successive administrations over the years made Ambassador Scali’s speech
sound as unrealistic as a voice from outer-space. Mr, El
Zayyat has spared us all the effort of looking up the United
States record in impeding a settlement in the Middle East.
What he had to leave out for the sake of brevity, the
Security Council knows full well. Let us talk of humanitarianism, it being the basis of the argument for the
cease-fire passionately advocated by the representative-not
by way of instructing anybody, but by way of refreshing
our minds.
194. During the 1967 hostilities, I was in one of the
European capitals. The scenes of war captives ordered to
wdlk barefooted in the scorching sun of the desert, with
their boots on their heads,you must all havewatched,asI
did, on television, or have seenthem in photographs.
195. To call for a cease-fireon humanitariangroundsis
transparently hypocritical. The Arabs have lost and won
wars, but their worst enemy cannot producesucha record
of gross brutality as that describedhere today. On the
contrary, the generosity displayed by Saladin to his
adversaries in this samecorridor, today coveted by the
Zionists as it was eight centuries ago by monarchsof
Europe, is legendary.

area and owes the Arabs something.To be stuck with
Harrogate two, or is it three, years later, is assuming
that
time has had to stop. Time doesnot have to stop. Things
have happened since then. Seriousthings. Britain, wellknown for its many-layered perceptions,could have done
much more than requestinga cease-fire,on humanitarian
grounds, asif mercy had beenone of the qualitiesof Israel.
199. A note of caution here. Those words on humanitarianism should not be misconstrued.This is not a war of
revenge.It is a move to liberate the occupiedterritories,as
quite rightly said by the representativeof the People’s
Republic of China yesterday. Warsof liberationarethe last
resort of a self-respectingnation. RidiculingPresidentSadat
becausehe saidhe waswilling to losea million soulscannot
cut much ice in the eyesof the Arabs.He knowsaswell as
the whole world knows that his adversariesare overequipped and over-trained. To usea figureof speechof this
sort is an indication of mounting impatience.Liberation
movements do not sit there and calculatelosses.
They get
into the battle having exhaustedall othermeans.
200. Again for the sakeof memory, let usgo backa little
and inform the United States Government how many
attempts at peacehave been foiled by its fearof antagonizing Israel or its designof having a bastionof its interests
overseas,impervious to what that meansto the peoplesof
the area, the real custodiansof its interests.The United
States of America must look back with a new vision to
opportunities lost and take a leaf out of PresidentKreisky’s
book, who lived down his emotionalacheswith admirable
statesmanship.
201. Let me enumeratea few of thoseopportunitiesthat
foundered on American casualtreatment of the Arab’sright
to live in peace.First, 10 days after the Junewar, the late
President Lyndon Johnson put his “five-point plan” to
which Arabs did not raise any seriousobjections.Second,
there was Charles de Gaulle’splan which raiseda hue and
cry in Israel. Third, there wasPresidentTito’s plan which
did not even get off the ground. Fourth, wehaveresolution
242 (1967) of this Council, over which we have been
squabblingever sinceit wasvoted into existence.Fifth, we
have Gunnar Jarring’s strugglesand frustrations. Sixth,
there was the June 1970 William Roger’splan that was
torpedoed to death by Israel when it fired on the Egyptian
teamsdredgingthe canal.

196. Let us have groundsother than humanitarian,if there
are any. The clientele of the United Statescannot escape 202. Well, how much more can the Arabs endure? The
their destiny. They werethe object of inhumanpersecution peace plans have not worked. On the contrary. Israeli
and humiliation throughout the bestpart of their history in
electoral in-fighting is pressingpartiesto a showof steelier
Europe, and they are taking it out on the Arabsnow.
muscles calculated to catch votes. Wecannot be expected
to wait on the pleasureof GeneralSharon,whoseelection197. Of the permanent membersof the Council, China,
musclesseemto be ridiculously inflated. He said“Israel is
now a military super-Power-all the forcesof the European
the Soviet Union and France spoke yesterday and today
and came out in favour of a dynamic andjust action by this
countries are weaker than we are. Wecan conquerin one
Council. That is the way responsiblePowersshouldact.
week the area from Khartoum to Baghdadand Algeria.”
YugosIavia, India and Indonesiasaidtoday what we in the
Please.If Europe can take it, Khartoum cannottake it, and
non-aligned world expect them to say: they advocated this is no bombast. The United Nationsshouldcondemnit,
fair-mindedness, a concern for world peaceand a senseof
and that is the only answerthis Organizationcan give to
justice-all qualities they abundantly possess.
insolent vanity. General Sharon, however, is counting on
the movements that the Sixth Fleet hasmadea habit of
198. I had hoped that the United Kingdom Government since 1958. But, let us trust that the United States of
would not have stoppedat what it said.Britain knowsthe
America will be as good as its word; it is the mightiest

Power, and can give Pax Americana what Pax Britannicawith all its falterings-gave the world in its heyday.
203. After two and half decades and as the current
situation dramatically illustrates, Israeli arguments for
peace, based on the theory of attrition, have proved
dangerously sterile. The current outbreak of war in the
Middle East must move the Council to undertake a
far-reaching search for a solution to the problem, and to
recognizc the obvious. The Council Carl, in no manner,
tolerate the fact that the security of Israel should be
preserved to the peril of the Palestinians, and at the cost of
Arab territories. Any political solution must come to grips
with two basic facts: first, the totally unacceptable occupation of Arab territory, and second, the emergence of a new
vitally important political force in the area, namely, the
national consciousness of the Palestinian People. Our point
of departure is resolution 242 (1967) of November 1967;
our take-off point is draft resolution S/10974 of 24 July
1973.

These are passingthoughts I put to you and my
colleaguesand I reservethe right to speakagainat a later
stage.
204.

205. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representativeof
Syria j.n exerciseof his right of reply.
206. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): The representativeof Israel said that the
Israeli forces had no other goal than military targets. To
reject this mendaciousallegation, I shall read an extract
from the text of a telegram of the Agence FrancePresse
which I readin its entirety in my earlierstatement:
‘L. . . A few secondslater, a Phantomagainflew towards
the sametarget. . . . That sameaircraft strafed with the
machine-gunit carried groupsof peoplethat had formed
in the streets. . .“- in the streets, not in barracks6‘. . . immediately after the bombing.

for the upheaval that is taking place today in the Middle
East with so much suffering and bloodshedspreadby the
Syrian military forces; the location of the headquartersof
the Syrian air force; the location of the various command
postswhich were hit in the air strike by the Israeli air force.
210. As I said earlier, how can Syria, having decidedto
tear to piecesthe cease-firein existence betweenIsraeland
itself since 1967, having launched a massive over-all
offensive againstthe Israeli armed forces and againstIsraeli
civilian localities, towns and villages, demand that Israel
should not defend itself by striking back at those military
targetswhich are the sourcesof the suffering, the grief, the
bloodshedwhich hasbeenbrought upon the areaasa result
of the initiative and the decisionof the Syrian and Egyptian
Governments?
211. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
Syria in exerciseof his right of reply.
212. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interprefatioa
ffom French): We just have been told that I did not
indicate the location of the act. Well, I do not know
whether I can read French or not but I shallreadit for the
third time: “That sameaircraft strafed with the machinegun it carried groups of people that had formed in the
streets. . ,” -in the street, with the weaponswhich wereon
board the Israeli aircraft. One usually employs bombs,but
in this casemachine-gunswere used on purposein orderto
destroy innocent civilians.
213. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
&W.

214. Mr. El-ZAYYAT (Egypt): I wish only to registera
aote about this continuing mention of Israel defending
itself. Israel is defending-if we can usethat word-Egypt
and Syria. I should like to make it absolutely clear to the
representative of Israel that the fighting is going on in
Egyptian land and in Syrian land. But I really did not askto
be allowed to speak becauseof that. I just want to seek
some information which I hoped would prove that the
“It wasduring this attack that it seemsthat membersof
the families of the Indian and Pakistanidiplomatswere information which I got is false.We are informed that some
struck. In the samequarter, but at somedistance,Madame United States citizens are volunteering as pilots in the
Israeli air force. We further are informed that the United
Peti& the wife of the First Secretary of the French
Embassy, was with a group which was likewise States Government is contemplating sending another 30
Phantomjets suchasthe one that was strafing people in the
strafed . . .” [seepara. 85 above].
streetsof Damascusand suchas the ones that rddcd Cairo
207. I have just been given information that a correspond- today. I do hope fervently that this is false information. 1
ent of the American television network, CBS, who witdo not think that the citizens of this country are goingto
nessedthe attack on civilian targets in Damascus,sent a
give their money and their lives in order to sustainthe
cablewhich wascirculatedhere in America, and I readfrom
domination and the occupation of other lands, even at the
it as follows: “Civilians have beenbadly hit in Damascus, price of bombardingciviliansand murdering people in their
private homes destroyed, hospital hit, no less than 30
housesin Damascus,in Port Said, in Syria and in Cairo.I
Soviet diplomatskilled.“6
wanted to make this request for information becausethis
hasgreat significancefor us. What makesme bring this ta
208. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
the Council is a piece of newsof a pressconference givenin
Israelin exerciseof his right of reply.
Washington, D.C., today by CongressmanLehman, who
sayshe is going to ask that his Government. the Gavern209. Mr. TEKOAI-I (Israel): I listenedvery carefully to the
ment of the United States of America, support with all its
last intervention of the Deputy Foreign Minister of Syria.
military and financial might the war that is now being
There was one thing missingin his words, andthat wasthe
preciselocation of those military targetsmentionedby me carried on by the Israeli military establishment against
which were also hit by the Israeli air force: the head- those who are trying to liberate their lands. We should
quarters of the generalstaff of the Syrian army responsible certainly welcomethe newsthat that information wasfalse.
6 Quoted
Litho

in I<nglish by the spcakcr,

in United

Nations,

New York

i%e meetingrose at 7 p.m.
Price: $U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

73-823014u1y

1979~2,200
