S/PV.9155

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9155

th meeting
Tuesday, 18 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2022/739)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-63852 (E)
*2263852*

Kosovo

S/PV.9155

of the region but also on the political and security
environment in which the Mission operates.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2022/739)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Selaković, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Caroline
Ziadeh, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Donika
Gërvalla-Schwarz to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/739, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ziadeh.
Ms. Ziadeh (spoke in French): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October.
In the region where the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
deployed, this month is characterized by crucial
deadlines for the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. That is the case in particular with regard
to the road map on energy and license plates, with
deadlines imminent, as well as many discussions at
several European levels on multiple matters relating to
the European prospects of Serbia and Kosovo, which
will have an impact not only on the lives of the people
2/25

18/10/2022

I am honoured to brief the Security Council on the
Secretary-General’s report (S/200/739) on UNMIK and
the latest developments in Kosovo. I will also offer
my observations on the situation in Kosovo within a
wider context.
As detailed in the report, the past six months
included many instances of political posturing
over matters that remain a part of the agenda of the
European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina: the energy road map, people’s
freedom of movement, the validity of identity cards
and the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities — to name just a few. We will continue
to extend all possible support towards the success of
that dialogue.
Equally, I am cognizant that developments in
Kosovo, as with all open matters in the region, are
affected by the European security environment as a
whole. In that light, I have been in close conversation
with many partners and stakeholders on the ground,
as well as interlocutors across the region. A shared
assessment is that issues that appear dormant can
easily return to the forefront of the dialogue agenda.
That places extra responsibility for ensuring close
coordination among the various missions on the ground.
When working together, coherently and effectively, we
can contribute to clarifying misunderstandings and
avoiding escalations. We can also help to empower
leaders whose vision recognizes the benefits of reducing
tensions, not inflaming them — leaders who are ready
to open up space for progress and positive change.
Since last spring we have all observed several
escalations in political rhetoric between Pristina and
Belgrade, as well as a few moments of acute tension
on the ground. They threatened to set back many of the
gains previously achieved through the EU-facilitated
dialogue. During those moments, the attention of both
sides was invested in mutual accusation rather than in
making use of formal or informal channels for engaging
in constructive dialogue. Diplomatic interventions,
along with a top-level dialogue meeting on 18 August,
led to temporary relief in the form of extended deadlines
and promises to continue discussions. Yet at best, the
parties’ willingness to risk dangerous confrontations
on the ground has set the process back. At worst,
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

it may lead to far more serious consequences, even
if unintended.
At times, when the line between political
provocation and overt belligerence blurs, we are
reminded of the importance and the discerning role of
our mandated international partner, the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), whose presence continues to ensure a safe and
secure environment in Kosovo. I want to express my
personal appreciation to departing KFOR Commander
Major General Ferenc Kajári of Hungary, under whose
leadership KFOR played its role in an exemplary
manner. I would also like to acknowledge his newly
arrived successor, Major General Angelo Ristuccia of
Italy, who I have no doubt will continue to foster the
essential UNMIK-KFOR partnership.
As I emphasized here in the Council in April
(see S/PV.9019), the Government of Kosovo has
an ambitious agenda, whose delivery depends on
sound decision-making, strong partnerships and
public consensus. That agenda is based on the rule
of law. We recognize the continuing efforts of the
Government to strengthen the rule of law and justice,
which can succeed only through full compliance
with all applicable legal frameworks and by ensuring
due process. In that context, I want to highlight the
importance of the full implementation of all high
court decisions, such as those of the Constitutional
Court; full respect for human rights, including social
and economic rights, property rights and freedom of
movement for all communities; and full respect for all
obligations previously undertaken and ratified within
the framework of the EU-facilitated dialogue.
Time and again, in the spirit of our shared
responsibilities in maintaining stability and security, I
have reiterated my call to both Belgrade and Pristina
to remain actively and constructively engaged in the
EU-facilitated dialogue and to preserve and build
on the acquis. There are many choices to be made
by political leaders in the days ahead about how to
manage their ambitions and objectives, given the wider
contours of economic and security uncertainty at this
time. Choices must be made between cooperation and
division, between threats and gestures of goodwill and
between compromises and zero-sum calculations. In
that connection, responsibility starts at home.
Amid all of the challenges, we have witnessed
positive examples of leadership and cooperation. The
Government of Kosovo remains focused on addressing

S/PV.9155

critical issues in relation to the rule of law. We hope
those efforts are being noted by European member
States weighing their positions on the visa liberalization
and travel regime for the people of Kosovo. As long
as we, the international community, remain actively
engaged in Kosovo, we also have responsibilities,
including the responsibility to support the choices that
offer hope for a better future to families and individuals
across society.
Regional Government-led cooperation initiatives,
regardless of their labels, authorship or participation,
can also contribute to the resolution of political
tensions and problems. That is especially true now, as
all parts of the region are affected by similar supplychain risks and other economic challenges. Of course,
regional initiatives are not a panacea. Sustainable peace
requires much more, including the direct engagement
of communities and a better understanding of their
views, concerns and interests. That is where the
role of missions such as ours can do more to support
progress. Our Mission continues to adapt its focus,
carrying forward some of the best initiatives launched
in the past, such as the long-established trust-building
agenda, while accurately assessing present realities.
We are renewing our resource priorities, refining our
institutional partnerships and enhancing our internal
working objectives and culture. My goal is for UNMIK
to focus on those areas where our continued presence,
in concert with the entire United Nations family — as
well as our other partners in Kosovo — contributes
consistently, with positive effects.
That includes, first, participating in and promoting
effective communication across ethnic and political lines
at all levels of society. It involves creating opportunities
that promote an atmosphere where respect for human
rights, the rule of law and the peaceful settlement of
differences is more consistently manifested.
Secondly, it means redoubling the Mission’s
commitment to support trust-building actors from
across all parts of Kosovan society, amplifying the
power and energy of those who possess the drive and
orientation to shape a promising future for themselves
and for generations to come.
Thirdly, it means helping to promote broad
awareness about the interdependence and shared
problems and interests of people across Kosovo and
throughout the region. It includes doing all of that in

22-638523/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

a manner that is well informed by the current regional
and global political landscape.
Our Mission will be refining its work with local
partners to advance the trust-building agenda with
a focus on women and young people, but also, more
broadly, on future leaders and changemakers from
all walks of life. In the past six months, we have used
our convening power in so many ways, including by
bringing together more than 150 youth leaders from
Kosovo and the region for the fourth United Nations
Youth Assembly, the largest multi-ethnic youth forum
in Kosovo, and hosting the Global Open Day on Women,
Peace and Security to raise the profile of women’s
participation in political processes. We have also
supported 37 civil-society organizations from across
Kosovo’s communities to launch the third annual human
rights report. Critical topics were constructively and
safely addressed in those forums: misinformation, hate
speech, women in leadership, youth decision-making,
domestic violence and more. We have also supported
access to justice and language rights, including through
initiatives to provide legal aid, translators in court and
free language-learning tools.
A few weeks ago, in his opening remarks to the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General stated, “we
live in a world where the logic of cooperation and
dialogue is the only path forward.” (A/77/PV.4, p.2)
He also stated, “[w]e need hope, and more, we need
action.” (ibid., p.1) I echoed that message during my
meetings with leaders across the region about the recent
developments in Kosovo. I am now more and more
convinced that any agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina can be achieved and implemented with a high
degree of public involvement and ownership. Allow
me, in that regard, to take the opportunity to commend
the EU Special Representative for his continuous
engagement in that regard.
Based on the mandate given by the Security
Council for the international presences in Kosovo, we
look forward to cooperating with the institutions of
Kosovo based on good faith and full respect for one
another. I wish to express my deep appreciation to the
Council for its sustained engagement and continuous
support of our Mission.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Ziadeh for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia.
4/25

18/10/2022

Mr. Selaković (Serbia): I am honoured to address
this body once again and to discuss the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2022/739). I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and the Special Representative
for submitting the report.
We take note of the efforts that Ms. Ziadeh makes
in performing her very responsible duty, especially
bearing in mind the necessity of a comprehensive
overview and the complexity of the situation on
the ground.
I also take this opportunity to underline that the
Republic of Serbia highly values the activities of UNMIK
in Kosovo and Metohija, established under resolution
1244 (1999). We advocate for its continued operation
in an unchanged and undiminished scope and capacity,
especially bearing in mind that the Mission has not yet
achieved the main goal of its mandate — a peaceful and
normal life for all citizens of our southern province.
Unfortunately, the past few months have not
brought more stability in Kosovo and Metohija, and
the situation in the province is not exactly as it is
presented in the report. The unilateral moves of Pristina
continue to consciously and systematically deepen
ethnic differences, causing discrimination against
the non-Albanian population. To our knowledge, 105
ethnically motivated attacks have been recorded since
the beginning of this year. In addition, Pristina is
actively working on administrative and bureaucratic
obstacles by taking measures that were not agreed upon
in the dialogue, the basic mechanism for negotiations
and reaching solutions between Belgrade and Pristina.
Pristina’s approach is problematic in many ways.
The irresponsible conduct of Pristina is consciously
sabotaging the efforts not only of Belgrade, but also
of the European Union and other parties involved
from the international community, with the clear
intention of achieving two goals — the first is to avoid
the implementation of assumed commitments; the
second, the ultimate and far more alarming goal, is the
intimidation, marginalization and persecution of Serbs.
In all previous statements before the Council,
Pristina focused on what happened in the past while
failing to mention, which is painful to witness, how
non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija are living
today. Serbs are still intimidated in different ways and
forced to leave their homes, villages and cities. Those
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

S/PV.9155

displaced are discouraged from returning to where
they were born and lived their lives. The Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina work
systematically to remove and erase as much as possible
of the cultural and national diversity that is left. At the
same time, Pristina is consciously fuelling inter-ethnic
tensions using all available methods.

2011. Therefore, we deem inadmissible attempts to
disregard the current format of the dialogue and annul
the agreements only because they are not to the liking
of the current political actors. It is unacceptable that
the current geopolitical circumstances are being used
to simply erase what has been painstakingly worked on
for years.

Attending religious celebrations seems to be a
crime in Kosovo and Metohija. That is the case for
Nikola Nedeljković, who was arrested for allegedly
“inciting ethnic hatred and intolerance”, but actually
his imprisonment was for attending the Saint Vitus
Day celebration. Nikola was sentenced to eight months
in prison without any material evidence. On the
other hand, let me remind Council members that to
this day there is not a single perpetrator held legally
accountable for the more than 1,000 Serbs killed since
1999. Owing to planned intimidation, almost all towns
and villages in Kosovo and Metohija are ethnically
cleansed. Representatives of Pristina are ignoring the
suffering and insulting the open wounds of the Serbs
who had to leave their ancestral homes, and I underline,
there are more than 200,000 of them. Such conduct has
not changed for the past 23 years, and it is completely
contrary to the democratic values and principles that
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government often
promote in their statements.

Belgrade, I underline, was institutionally involved
in the dialogue from the very beginning, while the
commitment of the other side has varied and continues
to vary depending on the political option that is in
power. The harsher political rhetoric and narrative of
the current leadership of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Pristina are accompanied by
concrete destabilizing steps. During the reporting
period, measures on license plates were imposed,
disguised as attempts at alleged integration into society.
Let me remind the Council once again that there was no
agreement on such measures in the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina.

Therefore, I consider it necessary to emphasize that
true political will by the international actors involved
and by Pristina is necessary in order to create the
conditions for the beginning of the end of discrimination
on a national basis and common life in the province.
I would like to draw the attention of Council
members to the rigid, problematic and extremely
irresponsible conduct of the other negotiating
party within the dialogue. In achieving the goals I
mentioned, Pristina applies the so-called policy of
reciprocity, a well-thought-out, malicious strategy
that, unfortunately, was not constructed independently.
By continuously insisting on mutual recognition as
a central part of the dialogue, the so-called policy of
reciprocity demonstrates the essential unwillingness of
the current political leadership of Pristina to find any
compromise solution.
Let me remind Council members that the talks
between Belgrade and Pristina did not start with the most
recent elections in Pristina, but have been in progress for
11 years since the technical dialogue started on 8 March

I believe that even today we will hear from the
representative of Pristina that its side has fulfilled
all obligations, but the decision on re-registration of
license plates shows that Pristina is not only failing to
fulfil what has been agreed upon, but it is nullifying
the results of the dialogue, creating a new crisis all over
again. The effect of such forcibly imposed measures is
best illustrated by the fact that, since the decision was
made, a single-digit number of re-registered vehicles
with Serbian license plates has been recorded, of
which only two are Serbs from the north of Kosovo
and Metohija. That is another indicator that Pristina
does not enjoy full support, but that, on the contrary,
it continuously provokes the natural reaction of the
Serbian population, which cannot endlessly be subject
to the arbitrariness of temporary institutions.
I believe that even today we will hear the already
known narrative of representatives from Pristina trying
to present every reaction of the Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija as an activity organized by Belgrade in
alleged attempts at destabilization. Such claims are
simply not true. Serbia, for its part, cannot in any way
contain the unease present among the non-Albanian
population of Kosovo and Metohija. It is an undeniable
fact that citizens’ protests represent a voice decrying
many years of institutional violence and the deprivation
of the rights of the non-Albanian population, which, in
this case, is denied the right to the peaceful enjoyment
of private property acquired in a legal manner. Pristina

22-638525/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

continues its attempts to confiscate property and, as is
well-known, one of the targets is the Serbian Orthodox
Church. By calling into question the return of property
to the Visoki Dečani monastery, Pristina, paradoxically,
is not carrying out the decisions of its own so-called
Constitutional Court.
I thought for a long time on how to best illustrate
the true picture of everyday life of the non-Albanian
population in Kosovo and Metohija. I will mention only
a few facts. Numerous ethnically motivated incidents,
hate speech, intimidation, violations of the right to a fair
trial, threats to the right to the freedom of movement
and religious rights and the desecration of churches
and graves were recorded in the most recent reporting
period as well. The frequent attacks on the sites of
the Serbian Orthodox Church are also unacceptable,
especially the shaming attitude towards Serbian cultural
and spiritual heritage, including the four monuments
inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List.
Numerous administrative and technical barriers are
being imposed on priests and monastic communities,
making it difficult — even impossible — for them to
survive on church properties.
When it comes to civil rights, the basic political
and civil right to vote has been taken away from Serbs
in the province, along with frequent intimidation and
violent incursions of the ROSU special forces, which
are an instrument for the implementation of Pristina’s
goals, under the pretext of allegedly fighting crime.
In December, Bratislav Nikolić, the President of the
municipality of Štrpce, was detained for organized
crime and corruption. He has not yet been charged, but
is being held in a detention unit. The sole reason for that
is to add yet more pressure on the Serbian community
living in south-eastern Štrpce, a Serbian enclave in
southern Kosovo and Metohija.
How can that be justified as the fight against
crime when special forces are used to raid village
festivals, schools and kidnap drivers of ambulances
transporting infusion containers and medicines? What
are the motives behind those actions, and how can
one justify them? Think of Ms. Dragica Gašić, the
only Serbian returnee in the town of Djakovica. She
is still not allowed to buy bread because of her origin
and nationality, because she lives in a municipality
that the local Albanians proudly consider forbidden to
non-Albanians. As many as 11 Albanian civil society
organizations are demanding her expulsion, as well as
a ban on any non-Albanian ever returning to that town.
6/25

18/10/2022

That is the level of intimidation that Serb returnees
are facing. That is why the percentage of returnees is
below 2 per cent and why it is still one of the lowest
in the world. Let me pose a question — are those the
characteristics of a fully fledged democracy and a
factor of stability in the region, as that society presents
itself to the world?
We are aware that the dialogue has a wider
dimension and that it can affect the situation in the
entire region. That is reflected in every statement made
by Serbian officials, including the President of the
Republic of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić. “It is better to
negotiate for 100 years than to fight for a day”. Those
are the words of our President that best describe the
policy of peace, reconciliation and regional cooperation
pursued by the Serbian leadership, which is guided by
the vision of building a common and prosperous future
of the Balkans.
I believe that it is a duty of today’s leaders to create
a clear common vision for future generations. Such a
vision was shown by the leaders of Belgrade, Skopje
and Tirana by creating the Open Balkan Initiative, an
initiative from the region and for the region, which
is already producing concrete results. Serbia has, on
several occasions, reached out to Pristina in order
to invite it to join that initiative. We counted on an
awareness of the importance of economic connectivity
and progress for the benefit of the citizens of the entire
Balkans. However, our invitation was not met with
understating from the other side.
We categorically reject Pristina’s argumentation
regarding the alleged unconstitutionality of the
formation of the community of Serb municipalities. It
is clear that Pristina’s attitude towards that obligation
reflects its attitude towards the Serbian people in the
province. It also indicates that Pristina is against Serbian
people being organized as an ethnic community, and
thus exercising their collective rights. The aim of their
approach, as a preferred model, is a community without
Serbs, such as those in Pristina, Djakovica or Peć or
similar localities in the province.
For our side, it is unacceptable that Pristina
has refused to fulfil its obligations and discuss the
formation of the community of Serb municipalities for
as many as 3,470 days, but I assure the Council that,
regardless, Serbia will not give up on its efforts to find
a compromise solution for the current situation.
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

I remind the Council that the representatives of
Pristina, although they often repeat in their statements
that the case of the so-called Kosovo is a fait accompli,
continue not to be recognized by the majority of United
Nations Member States for 14 years now. If the socalled Kosovo’s independence is a reality, how come
we have the dialogue? And how come Belgrade is faced
with increasing pressure as regards the need for mutual
recognition? What the current political leadership of
Pristina refuses to accept is that Belgrade cannot be
left out in the search for a final solution. The same
also applies to the case of the increasingly frequent
indications about Pristina’s upcoming membership in
international organizations. Will those moves help to
create the necessary atmosphere for dialogue? In that
way, are we rewarding Pristina’s destructive behaviour
and refusal of dialogue? Our view is that the attempts of
so-called Kosovo to join international organizations are
an unacceptable act, and Serbia will work decisively
against such steps.
During the previous meeting in April (see
S/PV.9019), we heard the calls of some members of
the Security Council for the reduction, or even the
termination, of UNMIK, with the explanation that
Pristina had its own functional institutions. However,
the circumstances that I have presented and the situation
on the ground again remind us that the international
presence in our southern province is still necessary. In
that regard, we support the efforts made by UNMIK,
the Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Mission in Kosovo within
their mandates. The Serbian and other non-Albanian
population in Kosovo and Metohija has the highest
confidence in the international presence and considers
it a guarantor of security, which further confirms that
international missions need to remain engaged in an
undiminished scope and capacity, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).
In conclusion, I would like to point out that lately,
in all international forums, we keep hearing calls for
respect for the principles of the United Nations. We
support the territorial integrity of all States Members
of the United Nations. But what about Serbia? I would
like to ask the members of this organ whether the need
to implement the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations applies only to some or to all of its Members?
As a country that consistently respects international
law and still suffers the consequences of it being

S/PV.9155

violated, we believe that the United Nations Charter
and international law, including the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of States, should be respected by all
and apply indiscriminately to all States Members of the
United Nations.
It was this organ that, more than two decades ago,
adopted resolution 1244 (1999) (see S/PV.4011), which
confirmed the territorial integrity of my country, the
Republic of Serbia. That fact did not prevent certain
countries from recognizing so-called Kosovo, thereby
violating not only the principles of the United Nations,
but also the resolution that they had adopted, by
adjusting international law to their interests and goals.
Precisely because of that, the increasingly frequent
mentioning of the case of Kosovo is an indication that
the precedent set opened a Pandora’s box, because the
strength of each principle rests on its full and universal
application and unconditional adherence.
Participants will notice that I posed many
questions in my statement, and I express the hope
that today we will hear answers to at least some of
them from members of the Security Council and the
representatives of Pristina, because the inhabitants of
Kosovo and Metohija of any nationality, whether they
are Serbs or Albanians, deserve it.
All inhabitants of Kosovo and Metohija have every
right to expect an improvement in the atmosphere
and a reduction of tensions at the ethnic level, which
are a prerequisite for a normal life. For such a step
to be made, we need constructiveness, which is not
lacking on the Serbian side, and the genuine support
of international actors. I emphasize that Serbia has
always been, and remains, deeply committed to finding
a sustainable solution by peaceful means for the sake of
peace, stability and a common future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for the invitation.
(spoke in English)
As Foreign Minister of the Republic of Kosovo, I
appreciate the opportunity to once again discuss the
current situation in our region and the opportunities, as
well as the challenges.
The Republic of Kosovo is the youngest democracy
in Europe and the country with the youngest population.

22-638527/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

Our country is very much on the right track despite all
the difficulties. Last year Kosovo registered economic
growth of more than 10 per cent, a record increase
in foreign direct investments and a record increase
in tax revenue so that our Government could set up
programmes for economic growth, invest in crucial
areas and assist people in need.
This year the growth was again significant, until the
Russian aggression against Ukraine caused disruption
and an energy and food crisis for many people in Europe
and beyond. But we are optimistic that we will also meet
those challenges, together with the most optimistic and
most resilient people in the region.
Our hard fight for the rule of law is being
acknowledged, and Kosovo jumped up 17 positions
in the Transparency International ranking. The World
Justice Project ranked Kosovo first in the Western
Balkans with regard to the rule of law.
Kosovo has made significant progress in
international relations. Among other things, we
signed more than a dozen important agreements with
neighbouring and other countries. We have reason to
be optimistic that Kosovo is on its way to becoming
the next member of the Council of Europe, which will
further strengthen the rule of law in our country. Being
encouraged by the highly positive response by many
countries of the European Union (EU), Kosovo will
apply for EU membership this year. We also aspire to
become a member of NATO as soon as possible.
Following that short overview, I must address some
serious threats to stability and peace in our region.
The most imminent threat is the escalation that the
Serbian President, Mr. Vučić, is threatening against
our Republic at the end of October. At the end of this
month, the transition period for replacing illegal licence
plates with legal ones will come to an end. Already
90 per cent of the respective car owners have replaced
their illegal licence plates with legal ones. There is a
minority of about 10 per cent left, who still have two
weeks remaining to register. It is quite simple: if one
owns a car, one has to have insurance and a legal licence
plate. Otherwise, one’s car is not allowed on public or
private streets.
Extremist Serbs are brutally chasing and
intimidating law-abiding fellow citizens, even burning
the cars of Serb citizens of Kosovo who have already
changed the licence plates. It is a huge mistake for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
8/25

18/10/2022

in Kosovo to suppress those facts, thereby not helping
citizens against extremists. Surely the topic of car
licence plates is not at all a matter for any foreign
interference from the neighbourhood in such technical
regulations. We urge the Security Council and the
international community to urge Serbia to stop its
dangerous course of again trying to instigate disruption
and violence at the end of this month.
We are grateful that the Kosovo Force (KFOR),
NATO, the United States of America and other allies
are ready to help our country to mitigate the tensions
instigated by Serb extremists and Mr. Vučić, as they
did in 2021 and again in 2022. It was NATO SecretaryGeneral Stoltenberg who stopped Mr. Vučić from
further escalating the situation by making it clear that
“should stability be jeopardized, KFOR stands ready
to intervene”. Our courageous Kosovo police and law
enforcement, with the help of KFOR, successfully
managed the crisis.
The decisions of our Government are long overdue.
Already in 2011, in Brussels, Serbia had agreed to
freedom of movement. But for another 10 years Serbia
breached its commitments, as has always done. When
our Government asked Serbia to finally stop preventing
our freedom of movement, Mr. Vučić refused. He
therefore forced us to enact reciprocity on the issue
of licence plates. Reciprocity is not aggression. It
is a best international practice, as everyone in this
Chamber knows.
The way Mr. Vučić can be motivated to take a
different approach is seen in the issue of identity
cards. Again, Serbia had agreed in 2011 to freedom of
movement, and, as always, it breached that agreement
for more than 10 years.
When Kosovo announced that it would also
implement reciprocity with respect to identity cards,
Mr. Vučić threatened us with violence again, leading
NATO and the European Union (EU) to intervene to
prevent violence. After more than 10 years, therefore,
citizens of Kosovo can finally travel in Serbia with
their identity cards, as they do when they travel through
neighbouring countries, such as Albania, North
Macedonia and Montenegro.
The threat to stability and peace came from one
side — there is no place for “both-sides-ism” in this
context — and that side is Belgrade. Kosovo has not
provoked or threatened anyone. Kosovo only insisted
22-63852

Kosovo

18/10/2022

that Serbia, after more than 10 years, rightfully stick to
an agreement it had signed.
In order to understand current and future threats,
it is necessary to know the background. Why is it that
Vučić is talking war? Where does that come from?
A European colleague of mine was quite surprised
when he learned recently that Mr. Vučić had been
Propaganda Minister for former Serb President — and
war criminal — Slobodan Milošević, and this during
the Serb genocide in Kosovo, and that Mr. Vučić never
apologized for that. Instead, he continues to celebrate
war criminals as heroes.
Mr. Vučić is also notorious for his statements on the
Serb genocide in Bosnia. In 1995, when thousands of
civilians in Srebrenica came under fire and shelling by
Serb military, the United Nations considered sending
military defence for these innocent civilians. It was
then that Mr. Vučić said in the parliament of Serbia
“For every Serb
hundred Muslims”.

killed,

we

will

kill

a

This “Serb supremacy” is a threat to peace.
Mr. Vučić is promoting the racist ideology of “Serb
World”. He even made it an official Government
doctrine. This ideology is a recycled version of the
“Greater Serbia” ideology, which was the ideological
basis for the wars and genocide that Milošević’s Serbia
waged against four countries in the 1990s. The ghosts
of the past are returning.
Civil society and non-governmental organizations
in Serbia are warning the international community that
the ideology of “Serb World” could lead to conflict and
war in the Balkans once again. How such an aggressive
ideology can end up is being demonstrated today by
Russia, which banked on the ideology of the so-called
“Russian World”.
Aggressive nationalism in Serbia has been in the
making for many years. More than a decade of relentless
nationalist and racist campaigns by Vučić and others
have emboldened the supporters of Serb supremacy.
That is how Serbia, with the support of imperial Russia,
has come to be a threat again. Vučić is preparing for
aggression, militarily and ideologically, just as Putin
has done. I urge the Security Council to see this parallel
and take active measures.
In
line
with
this
nationalist
agenda,
Mr. Vučić — together with, as we hear, his Foreign
Minister — constantly claims that Serbs are under

S/PV.9155

threat. He does not even shy away from open lies, such
as the idea that Serbian citizens of Kosovo would be
victims of pogroms.
The world knows who the perpetrator of genocide
in our region was. Milošević went down that path.
Back then, the United Nations ignored Milošević’s hate
propaganda, as he prepared for years to trigger the first
catastrophic war in Europe since the end of the Second
World War.
Not only has Mr. Vučić stepped up his aggressive
rhetoric inside Serbia, but he has also been engaging
in the largest systematic military buildup since the end
of Yugoslavia in 1991. From just 10 military exercises
with Russia in 2012, when Vučić took over, Serbia
has taken part in roughly 100 joint military exercises
with Russia in 2021 alone. Russian military personnel
are even working directly in the Serbian Ministry of
Defence. With the support and at the direction of
Russia, Serbia has become the second most dangerous
threat to European security, after Russia itself.
Just recently more than 40 members of the
Serbian parliament signed an amendment that calls
for the “reintegration” of Kosovo into Serbia. That
sounds dangerously similar to the Russian concept
of reintegration of Ukraine into Russia. A Serbian
non-governmental
organization
criticized
this
document as a “recipe for war”. A prominent supporter
of this proposal is the former Serbian Foreign Minister
and a past President of the General Assembly, Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, who was once, years ago, considered to be a
moderate modern politician.
The most recent measure is Serbia’s foreign policy
alignment with Russia. Serbia has undertaken this shift
since the full Russian invasion of Ukraine, just as Russia
is committing the worst atrocities imaginable. When all
of us were in New York only a few weeks ago, for the
high-level week at the General Assembly, we saw the
President of Ukraine Zelenskyy get a standing ovation
for his powerful statement to the United Nations and for
defending core principles of the United Nations against
an evil aggressor (see A/77/PV.7).
At that time, here in New York, Serbia signed an
agreement on alignment of foreign policy with the
exact aggressor of that war, Russia. Mr. Selaković,
sitting in this Chamber today, was the signer for Serbia.
Not only is this simply outrageous, but it is also a
disgrace for Serbia. Nobody in this room could think
that Mr. Putin would consult with his proxy Mr. Vučić

22-638529/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

about Russia’s foreign policy decisions; rather, it is the
other way around. This agreement constitutes Serbia’s
de facto submission to Kremlin rule, which in itself has
tremendous repercussions. Since Serbia is dominated by
Russia in its foreign policy, the EU, NATO and Kosovo
will have to take into account that no major foreign
policy decision is made by Belgrade without asking Big
Brother in Moscow for permission. Serbia made itself
a Russian asset. We in the West will have to reconsider
what that means across all arenas of foreign policy.
Fortunately, the situation in the Balkans and in
Kosovo is different compared to the 1990s. We are
better protected against an aggressive neighbour.
In Kosovo, we feel threatened but safe. The recent
deployment of additional United States troops to
Kosovo was an important step towards strengthening
peace and stability in the region. From my discussions,
I know that it is not only Kosovo but also our neighbours
who are very relieved and grateful for that important
commitment by NATO and the United States. From a
position of strength, we can talk and try to resolve the
challenges and mitigate tensions.
A few days ago, when the Head of the Serbian
Orthodox Church asked to visit our country and meet
the faithful, I, in my capacity as Foreign Minister,
granted permission for the visit. This is just another
example of our not being interested in tensions but in
normal exchange, and of our respect for the followers of
all religions in our country.
We gave permission for the visit to take place
despite the leading role of the politically powerful
Serbian Orthodox Church in creating the ideology
of Serb supremacy, its constant activities, role in
destabilizing neighbouring countries and historic guilt
in justifying and glorifying the brutal campaigns and
genocide against Serbia’s neighbours, including the
Republic of Kosovo. We gave that permission in the
hope that, someday, the surely difficult but necessary
exchange, addressing the severe issues that stand
between the victims of violence and genocide and the
Serbian Orthodox Church, might begin. Of course,
there is no easy way to address responsibility for the
past, but it remains an obligation for everyone to seek
a way for truth and reconciliation, wherever possible.
When we talk about dialogue, we mean real
dialogue. A dialogue must have a goal. The goal
cannot be empty talk. It was Kosovo that was the key
to restarting the dialogue after years of interruption.
10/25

18/10/2022

It was Kosovo that came up with a series of concrete
steps to resolve issues of mutual interest. Kosovo wants
to have a real dialogue. However, in order to have a
real dialogue, we must put the key question at its
centre — mutual recognition. Everyone already knows
that Kosovo’s independence is a done deal. Finally,
Serbia will also have to recognize reality. It will have to
recognize Kosovo, as most of Serbia’s neighbours and
so many others have already done.
It is a question of mutual recognition. That is what
President Biden said. That is what Chancellor Scholz
and other European leaders say. We must talk about that
reality. Kosovo is ready and prepared for a real dialogue.
Kosovo is a small but very special country. We speak
from a position of modesty and strength. We are a truly
European country, with people of many backgrounds
and unbreakable tolerance and pride. Kosovo is a
country that literally emerged from genocide. Serbia
and Milošević, together with Mr. Vučić and other aides,
wanted to wipe us off the map. With our courageous
defenders, the Kosovo Liberation Army, and the help
of NATO, which came to our rescue, the heroism of
women, children and the elderly in those darkest times,
we survived.
We saw how they protected their children, families
and loved ones, when brutal Serb forces burned down
our villages, raped our women and tortured and killed
our young men. We saw how they kept their dignity
when they were forced to flee for their lives to the
mountains. We saw how they never gave up when they
were expelled and forced out of their country, in the
hundreds of thousands, and forced to live in tents. It
was that spirit that made the miracle possible: after
the liberation of Kosovo, our people did not wait,
but flooded home, searched for survivors, started to
rebuild houses and property and restarted their life.
It is a miracle — a miracle of victory, humanity and
civilization over cruelty and barbarians.
That miracle continues, and we will make our people
proud and our country shine. There is no other country
that is more pro-EU or more pro-NATO than Kosovo.
Between 88 per cent and 92 per cent of our citizens are
in favour of the EU and NATO. Yes, we know that there
is still much to do — we are far from being perfect — if
we want to achieve our goals. However, we have proved
that we can. We have overcome even the most severe
difficulties and never lost faith. Our people are an
example for the world.
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

An example of resilience, dignity and openness,
Kosovo is a great place and an asset to Europe and the
world. We are glad and proud to have many friends all
over the world. That is why our people are looking to
the future, full of optimism and hope. In that spirit, we
are ready to engage with our friends, and even our foes,
in order to help to make the world a better place.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ziadeh for
her briefing, and her leadership in delivering on the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2022/739).
Norway supports Kosovo and the other Western
Balkan countries in their Euro-Atlantic ambitions.
We are concerned to note, however, that the report of
the Secretary-General describes heightened rhetoric
between Belgrade and Pristina and the escalation
of tensions on the ground, which have affected the
progress towards the normalization of relations.
We encourage the parties to strengthen their
dialogue and engage constructively, based on the
Brussels Agreement. In that connection, we welcome
the energy road map agreed in June with Serbia and the
agreement on identification cards, reached in August,
under the dialogue facilitated by the European Union
(EU). The latter has improved free movement between
Kosovo and Serbia and hopefully settled problems that
have sparked considerable tensions.
In the same spirit, we hope that the parties will
step up the dialogue to find a permanent solution to
the licence-plate issue. We do, however, strongly regret
the increased tensions in northern Kosovo, ahead of
the agreement on identification cards and call on the
parties to refrain from any unilateral actions that may
cause further tensions in the area.
We are also disappointed by the continued lack
of cooperation within the Belgrade-Pristina working
group on missing persons. Progress towards discovering
the fate of those who went missing during the events in
Kosovo from 1998 to 2000 is necessary, including as
part of reconciliation efforts.
Let me touch on another topic that requires
attention. Those responsible for conflict-related sexual

S/PV.9155

violence must be held to account. Greater accountability
is vital for reconciliation and peacebuilding in Kosovo.
We applaud the work done thus far by the Kosovo
Government commission to verify and recognize
the status of the survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence. We commend UNMIK for its support to that
process. It is an important step forward for the rule
of law and for reversing the climate of discrimination
and impunity.
Similarly, we positively note the Government’s
recent approval of stricter legislation related to rape,
sexual assault and domestic violence. We look forward
to further updates on the implementation of the five-year
strategy for protection against domestic violence and
violence against women.
Finally, let me underscore that full integration in
Euro-Atlantic structures will not be possible for either
Kosovo or Serbia without a comprehensive agreement
on the full normalization of relations. Overall progress
in the EU-facilitated dialogue continues to be slow.
Both Kosovo and Serbia should intensify their efforts
to improve relations, be more pragmatic and refrain
from actions and rhetoric that may set back dialogue or
increase tensions leading to incidents.
The current status quo cannot be an option, and we
urge all actors to fully engage. There is no alternative
to the EU-led process, dialogue or compromise.
Norway will continue to make its contribution to the
normalization process.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her briefing
today. I would also like to welcome the representatives
of Kosovo and Serbia to the Chamber.
I want to begin by welcoming the 27 August
agreement on free movement between Kosovo and
Serbia, following high-level talks in Brussels. This
agreement is a positive step in the right direction and
will deliver concrete results for citizens. It is proof
that acceptable, pragmatic solutions are possible
when leaders engage openly and constructively in the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. That European Union (EU)facilitated dialogue, mandated by the United Nations, is
the channel through which issues and tensions between
Kosovo and Serbia can and should be resolved. We
encourage both sides to continue their engagement
to resolve all outstanding issues, including the issue
of licence plates, as well as to preserve the integrity

22-6385211/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

of the dialogue by respecting and implementing
past agreements.
Both sides have a responsibility to refrain from
divisive rhetoric or action. The events of 31 July in
northern Kosovo and the heightened tensions between
Belgrade and Pristina throughout the reporting period
remind us that hard-won gains can be quickly undone.
Although calm prevailed, the importance of restraint
and commitment to dialogue to resolve disagreements
cannot be overstated.
Against the current backdrop of multiple and
intersecting global challenges, finding practical modes
of economic cooperation between Belgrade, Pristina
and the other countries of the region takes on new
urgency. In that regard, Ireland reiterates its view that a
comprehensive, final and legally binding normalization
agreement is essential for the European perspective of
both Serbia and Kosovo and for ensuring wider stability
and prosperity in the Western Balkans.
We know from experience in my country that
achieving lasting peace is not possible without building
a more equal and inclusive society. Peace cannot be
sustained and political processes cannot be successful
where women are not fully included and at the table and
where the voices of young people and civil society are
not heeded. Ireland welcomes Kosovo’s commitment
to gender equality, and we value the work done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to advance the women and peace and
security and youth, peace and security agendas. And
we thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for her updates today on that work. Though
steps have been taken to prevent and combat sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls,
we share the concerns of the Secretary-General that
more must be done to ensure effective protection and
support for victims and survivors of sexual and genderbased violence.
We know that the people of Kosovo aspire to join
the EU, and we welcome the fact that the Government
of Kosovo has made progress in advancing the EU
reform agenda. We take this opportunity to echo the
European Commission’s report on its 2022 Enlargement
Package on Kosovo and encourage Kosovo to continue
along its EU path and to intensify its efforts to
strengthen democracy, public administration and the
rule of law. In that context, I also want to underline
Ireland’s continued support for the Kosovo Specialist
12/25

18/10/2022

Chambers. Countering impunity for past crimes is
essential to preventing future violations. It is vital that
the authorities in Kosovo adhere to their commitments
to the Specialist Chambers. Ireland will also continue
to support the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo.
The United Nations has proved itself to be a trusted
partner of all communities in Kosovo. UNMIK plays an
important role by bringing people together, promoting
inter-ethnic cooperation and supporting vulnerable
and marginalized communities. We particularly value
UNMIK’s work on missing persons and the work of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
on the return of displaced persons. Advancing both of
those issues is an essential part of the reconciliation
process and can help to build confidence between
Kosovo and Serbia. We know, again from our national
experience, that peace is a process and not a moment.
It takes courage to overcome conflict and the divisions
it causes, but these are steps that need to be taken and
are worth taking.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): We thank
Special Representative Ziadeh for her briefing, and we
welcome the representatives of Serbia and Kosovo to
the Security Council.
The United Kingdom welcomes the continued
progress made by the Government of Kosovo on a
number of important issues, including its continued
commitment to reform, notably through its important
work on the rule of law and in tackling organized crime
and corruption; its efforts to improve support to victims
of sexual and gender-based violence and the integration
of the Istanbul Convention into its Constitution; and its
work on transitional justice, not least for survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence, as well as the work of
the Government Commission for Missing Persons.
Recent reports from both the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe also show good progress on countering
terrorism, public administration reform, the rule of law,
the fight against corruption and organized crime, and
the protection of human and fundamental rights. We
welcome the Government’s increased engagement with
minority communities. Dialogue between communities
is vital for the stability of Kosovo as a multi-ethnic
state, and we encourage the Kosovan Government to
continue that engagement. In particular, we encourage
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

S/PV.9155

greater outreach to Kosovo Serb political leaders and
representatives to resolve outstanding issues.

and Serbia, especially considering the current turbulent
situation in Europe.

The normalization of relations between Kosovo
and Serbia remains vital. We reiterate our full support
for the EU-facilitated dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo. Now is the moment for both parties to engage
in the dialogue in good faith, honour their dialogue
commitments and avoid actions and rhetoric that could
reduce the prospects for reaching a comprehensive and
sustainable normalization agreement that benefits the
people of both countries.

With regard to the relations between Kosovo and
Serbia we have witnessed some positive developments,
and we encourage both parties to build on them in order
to sustainably improve their relations by continuing
their European Union-facilitated dialogue while
refraining from taking any unilateral measures that
might lead to further tensions. We also look forward
to seeing them exercise flexibility in working to
return to the negotiating table with a view to reaching
a comprehensive solution. We commend both parties’
efforts to resolve certain outstanding issues and ensure
citizens’ freedom of movement between Kosovo and
Serbia through the use of identity cards issued by
Belgrade or Pristina.

The progress referred to in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/739), for example on the adoption of
an energy agreement road map, is encouraging. But
we were concerned when we saw the rise in tensions
on 31 July over the implementation of Government
decisions regarding car licence plates and identification
cards. Such decisions should not be used as an excuse
for blockades or violence. We therefore welcome the
resolution of the disagreement over identification
cards, facilitated through the determined efforts of the
EU Special Representative and international partners.
It is a clear example of what can be achieved when both
parties approach the process with pragmatism.
Finally, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has played a vital role in
the incredible progress that Kosovo has made since the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999). Conditions on the
ground are of course unrecognizable from 1999, and
now would be the right time to undertake a thorough
review of UNMIK’s shape and role, and of the Council
processes that we have around it. In the meantime, the
United Kingdom would like to reiterate its gratitude to
the Special Representative and the Mission for all of
their work and for their professional implementation of
their mandate.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Special Representative Ziadeh for
her valuable briefing to the Security Council and for
her tireless efforts alongside the team of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. I
also welcome the participation of the representatives of
Serbia and Kosovo in today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates stresses the importance
of intensifying efforts to encourage dialogue and
prevent the exacerbation of disagreements among the
communities in Kosovo, as well as between Kosovo

As for the developments within Kosovo, we stress
the need to continue working to reduce tensions in
the northern part of the country in order to prevent
any escalation there. In that regard, we commend the
ongoing efforts to strengthen the values of tolerance
and peaceful coexistence among all segments of the
society in Kosovo. Those efforts are particularly
important considering recent alarming incidents such
as the desecration of religious sites and cemeteries
and the spread of extremism and hate speech on
social media. In that context, we want to express our
continued support for the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and its
effective role in advancing the values of tolerance
and peaceful coexistence, especially by focusing on
young people as future leaders who play a vital role
in conflict prevention and resolution. Those efforts
include designing youth programmes that include every
segment of Kosovan society, enabling young people
to express their opinions and concerns, raising their
awareness of society’s various strata and demonstrating
the importance of strengthening communication among
them. That in turn will contribute to promoting social
cohesion in Kosovo. In addition, the role that regional
organizations and civil-society institutions have played
in this area has had positive feedback in Kosovo,
and we urge for continuing all efforts to strengthen
social bonds.
The United Arab Emirates stresses the importance
of supporting women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in all ongoing dialogues aimed at resolving
disagreements between Kosovo’s communities, as well
as in all dialogues between Serbia and Kosovo. We

22-6385213/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

refer in particular to the recommendations emerging
from the ninth United Nations Global Open Day on
Women, Peace and Security in Kosovo, including for
promoting the role of women in building sustainable
peace and creating a safe and inclusive environment that
encourages women’s participation in State institutions.
The participation of President Osmani-Sadriu of Kosovo
in the conference reflects the Government’s interest in
women’s issues. We also commend the developments
made in the area of women’s empowerment in
Kosovo, including their representation of 36 per cent
at the parliamentary level, and we hope to build on
those achievements.
In conclusion, my country stresses the importance
of promoting constructive dialogue between Kosovo and
Serbia. That is the only way to resolve all outstanding
issues and to achieve security and stability for the two
countries and the wider region.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank Special
Representative Ziadeh for her briefing and to welcome
Foreign Minister Selaković to this meeting. We also
took note of the statement by Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz.
Mexico regrets that no significant progress has been
made in normalizing the political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, owing among other things to
tensions arising from disagreements over freedom of
movement and the voting process that took place in
the Kosovo region during the Serbian elections. We
are particularly concerned about the violence in the
north of the region at the end of July, which resulted
specifically from the restrictions on movement. That
has also had a negative impact on the implementation
of the energy agreements. We acknowledge the efforts
of the European Union and the United States to reduce
tensions. I will briefly discuss recent developments on
four issues that Mexico sees as priorities.
First, regarding the issue of minorities, as indicated
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/739), Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian Kosovans continue to face major
social and economic obstacles. We call for efforts to
combat the inequality affecting those communities
and address their specific issues, including through
contributions to the United Nations fund in their support.
Secondly, on the issue of sexual and gender-based
violence, it is essential that the provincial authorities
strengthen measures to eradicate that scourge. The
alleged rape of a child in Pristina last month is
14/25

18/10/2022

shocking. We call on the authorities to conduct an
investigation of the case so that those responsible are
brought to justice, and to ensure protection and support
for victims. The European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) has noted that while incidents of
sexual violence, particularly those involving minors,
are often reported, reparations have been provided
in only a few cases. We urge the implementation of
EULEX recommendations on the handling of sexual
violence cases in line with the requirements of the
Istanbul Convention.
Thirdly, with regard to cultural heritage, we call
on the authorities in Pristina to mobilize the necessary
resources for the preservation of Kosovo’s medieval
monuments, particularly the Visoki Dečani monastery,
which UNESCO has designated an endangered
heritage site. We call for urgent action to prevent its
deterioration and implement decisions for its protection
and preservation.
Fourthly, with regard to the case of missing persons,
we regret that the working group addressing the issue
has not met in a year and a half. We urge the parties to
resume work on the matter, which will enable progress
to be made on reconciliation between communities.
In conclusion, I call on the parties to avoid
rhetoric that could escalate tensions and to engage
constructively in dialogue so that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for which
we reiterate our support, can continue to fulfil its
mandate to promote security, stability and human rights
in the region, in close coordination with the Kosovo
Force, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Caroline Ziadeh,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for her briefing on the situation in the province. We
welcome the participation of Mr. Nikola Selaković, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we listened
to the opinions of Ms. Donika Gërvalla-Schwarz. We
would advise Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz to refrain from
philosophizing and attempts at cultural and geopolitical
analysis. To be frank, her efforts today were not very
successful. She would have done better to concentrate
on the situation in Kosovo rather than distracting the
Council with her deep musings on the international
situation and Serbia’s foreign policy, which like
everything else all over the world is apparently being
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

S/PV.9155

run from and by Moscow. But while we thank her for
her flattering remarks, I would now like to correct her
erroneous views and provide the Council with a real
assessment of the situation in Kosovo rather than a
rosy one.

authorities do nothing to protect them. On the contrary,
the atmosphere of hatred towards Serbs is being
encouraged. Under the pretext of providing security,
Kosovo police bases are being built in the north, often
on Serbian-owned private territory.

Kosovo remains the main hotbed of tension in the
Balkans, undermining efforts to maintain peace and
stability in the region. The security situation in the
province is also steadily deteriorating and requires
close attention from the international community
and the Security Council. The process of systematic
violations of the rights of the Serbian population began
in 1999, and what amounts to a creeping process of
ethnic cleansing has been going on ever since. In the
course of a period of more than 20 years, the number of
Serbs south of the Ibar River has drastically decreased,
leaving only small enclaves of Serbians who cannot
stand up for their rights. For example, there were about
40,000 Serbs living in Pristina before the conflict.
Today there are barely 100. The only region where
Serbs are still in the majority is northern Kosovo, but
the Pristina authorities, headed by Albin Kurti, are
trying to take their oppression of Serbs to a new level.
Everything suggests that creating intolerable living
conditions for the indigenous Serb population seems to
be job number 1. Acts of intimidation continue in Serbpopulated areas and the threshold for the use of force
against the people living there is getting lower.

Already in 2013, in the framework of the negotiations
under the aegis of Brussels, an agreement was made to
establish a community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo.
That was not ideal, but nonetheless could ensure, in an
acceptable way, the rights of Serbs living in Kosovo.
However, Pristina refused to implement the agreement,
alleging that the Serbs were the most protected national
minority in Europe.

Since the beginning of 2022, more than 100 cases
of attacks against Serbs and their property, cemeteries
and holy sites have been registered in Kosovo. That is
almost double the number from the year before. There
is provocative and unjustified patrolling of Kosovo’s
water reservoir in Gazivode, an area adjacent to central
Serbia. The use by Serbs of neutral vehicle licence
plates has been banned, under the threat of confiscation
of the vehicles. At the end of July, Pristina’s decision
brought the situation close to a boiling point and almost
led to bloodshed. The next dangerous milestone will
be on 31 October, which is the deadline for replacing
license plates.
The problems associated with returning Serbian
real estate to its rightful owners are still unresolved.
For years, there have been violations of the property
rights of the land adjacent to the Visoki Dečani
monastery, a UNESCO World Heritage site. The pace
of return of non-Albanian refugees to the province
has remained unsatisfactory, as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/739). The local

In reality, no one ever even tried to compel the
Kosovo authorities to implement the agreement,
including the European Union, which acted as mediator.
At present we can state that those mediation attempts
totally failed. The long-standing inability of Brussels
to compel Pristina to, if not implement the agreements,
then at least to show that they are minimally capable of
negotiations doomed the contacts to failure.
At the United States’ bidding, the official narrative
of the European Union now has the infamous idea of
mutual recognition. That is being promoted not only by
the leading European politicians but is also reflected
in yet another resolution passed by the European
Parliament on Kosovo. And that is a glaring example that
the status-neutral position of Brussels has been revised.
At the same time, and in violation of resolution
1244 (1999), the Kosovo army is being created. We
are also witnessing the deep involvement of major
NATO players in that endeavour, and London is at the
forefront, as it is training the personnel.
Pristina continues to demand military assistance
from the West. It is trying to obtain yet another
American base there, electronic warfare complexes
and artillery with a range of more than 10 kilometres.
Kosovo’s military budget has reached a record level and
exceeds €100 million this year, which shows that Prime
Minister Kurti’s intentions are far from peaceful. There
is also an aspiration to involve Albania. In August, it
was proposed that Albania sign a mutual defence treaty.
Western countries act as though resolution 1244
(1999) does not exist. They continue to cook up socalled “alternative options” for a settlement that favours
Pristina. A glaring example of that legal nihilism was
a French-German project presented in September. It

22-6385215/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

was designed to force Belgrade to agree with Kosovo’s
statehood. And that is not the only such example
recently. Washington and Brussels are concentrating
their efforts on making Serbs yield their national
interests, sovereignty and territorial integrity. They are
resorting to threats, blackmail and ultimatums.
There are several other points to which we would
like to draw attention. On the basis of resolution 1244
(1999), there is a United Nations peacekeeping mission
in Kosovo — the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We fully support
the Mission, as it is the most important guarantor
of security in the province. We also understand how
difficult the circumstances in which it must operate are.
At the same time, we expect UNMIK to make realistic
rather than neutral rosy assessments of the situation in
the province.
In May 2019, Kosovo Albanian police used force
against a Russian staff member of UNMIK, Mikhail
Krasnoshchekov, who was severely beaten, and two
other members of the Mission. The perpetrators of that
crime have not been punished. And that took place in
the province which boasts about its commitment to the
rule of law.

18/10/2022

in accordance with international law and endorsed by
the Security Council.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Ziadeh for her briefing. I would
also like to thank Foreign Minister Selaković and
Foreign Minister Gërvalla-Schwarz for participating in
this meeting.
I want to begin by reaffirming our commitment
to safeguarding stability in the Western Balkans,
especially during this time of greater tensions in Europe
caused by Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine. The
United States will continue to work closely with our
European partners to foster peaceful and prosperous
multi-ethnic societies, in addition to strengthening
democracy and the rule of law.
The United States reaffirms its support for
Kosovo’s path towards European and Euro-Atlantic
integration, and the European paths of all countries in
the Western Balkans.

A serious violation of international legal norms
took place on the 31 December 2021, when a UNMIK
staff member, Mr. Antonov, was declared persona
non grata.

Serious and urgent engagement between the sides
in the dialogue facilitated by the European Union
(EU) is needed in order to achieve comprehensive
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
centred on mutual recognition. I want to commend
EU Special Representative Lajčák’s engagement with
the two parties. The United States will remain closely
engaged with him and our European partners in support
of the dialogue.

Furthermore, the Kosovo authorities made a number
of decisions aimed at basically forcing the personnel of
the Pristina office of the Russian Embassy in Serbia, as
well as our staff in UNMIK and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission in Kosovo,
to leave the province. We have informed the SecretaryGeneral and Special Representative Ziadeh about that
outrageous overreach, and we expect the actions by the
Kosovo authorities to be revised.

Through the EU-facilitated dialogue, Serbia and
Kosovo adopted an energy road map and peacefully
resolved the issues of exit and entrance documents at
their borders. We hope that a similar consensus will
be reached regarding the issuance and recognition
of licence plates. We likewise encourage the
implementation of steps outlined in the energy road map
and serious discussion on the potential establishment of
the association of Serb-majority municipalities.

We call upon UNMIK not to ignore those
outrageous cases of arbitrary conduct and to inform
the Council about such acts on a regular basis in their
reports. The absence of appropriate reactions by the
Secretariat creates a feeling of permissiveness with the
de facto authorities.

We cannot stress enough the need for stability in the
Western Balkans. The EU-facilitated dialogue is a key
component of that. We strongly encourage Serbia and
Kosovo to keep tensions low by focusing on dialogue
progress and avoiding inflammatory rhetoric. We urge
both sides to work with the United States and European
partners to implement the agreed energy road map and
to avoid tensions over licence plates.

In conclusion, let me underscore that the Russian
position on Kosovo remains unchanged. We advocate
attaining a viable, mutually acceptable solution between
Belgrade and Pristina, based on resolution 1244 (1999),
16/25

The EU-facilitated dialogue continues to be the
principal mechanism for reconciling issues between the
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

two neighbours, which has made the role of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in the region increasingly redundant.
As we have said in this Chamber many times before,
UNMIK has long fulfilled its purpose as outlined
in the original mandate. Make no mistake: UNMIK
played a critical and important role in maintaining
peace in the past. However, Kosovo, with the aid of its
European partners, has developed and strengthened its
institutions to take on much of the responsibilities once
under UNMIK jurisdiction. These briefings no longer
need to be held on a six-month basis and should be
reduced to annual meetings.
We are disappointed that the Council has not moved
toward sunsetting UNMIK, including by developing a
plan to close the Mission. The Council has far more
pressing priorities to address, and its resources are
limited. We urge the Council to take steps that will allow
for a more productive and relevant role for the United
Nations in Kosovo and will facilitate the normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia, and thereby
help advance stability in the Western Balkans.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special
Representative Caroline Ziadeh for her briefing. I also
recognize the participation of Mr. Nikola Selaković,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Donika
Gërvalla-Schwarz in this meeting.
The need for sustained stability in Kosovo has
gained more urgency as Europe is dealing with
significant security challenges. That demands that
the parties remain committed and consistent in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
We are concerned about the persistent rhetoric
between Belgrade and Pristina and the resultant
tensions on the ground. If this situation continues,
any progress in the normalization of their relations
will be undermined. We therefore reiterate the need to
strengthen efforts to counter the use of divisive rhetoric
and hate speech and to create a space that is conducive
to dialogue.
The rule of law is a critical component in
the management of diversity. Indeed, genuine
reconciliation and enduring peace stand a better chance
of being achieved in an environment with a strong
rule of law and responsive and inclusive institutions
to promptly prosecute and resolve disputes. Kenya
commends the United Nations Interim Administration

S/PV.9155

Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its support for the
integration of the judiciary and the administration of
justice in the north of Kosovo, focusing on improving
case management.
We also welcome UNMIK’s confidence- and trustbuilding efforts, including through the promotion of
cross-community engagement; the promotion of gender
equality in Kosovo, including through the women and
peace and security agenda; and engagement with young
people through the youth, peace and security agenda
and programme. We call for enhanced support for such
trust- and confidence-building measures, particularly
those that strengthen the participation of women, young
people and civil society in decision-making processes
and cross-community dialogue.
Finally, Kenya reiterates its full support for
sustained dialogue aimed at the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard,
we welcome the continued consultative efforts and
urge the parties to uphold the commitments made in the
framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue
and to engage in negotiations.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Special
Representative Caroline Ziadeh for her briefing.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2022/739)
confirms the important role played by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in preventing the resentments from the past
and hate speech today from resulting in a new wave of
violence in Kosovo. The risks of escalation are real, as
proved by the 31 July incidents. All actors must show
the necessary restraint and avoid unilateral measures
that could jeopardize advances made over years of
efforts towards peace and reconciliation.
The impasse over vehicle license plates and the lack
of progress since June in implementing the electricpower agreements are particularly worrisome. We
encourage decision-makers to demonstrate flexibility
and seek solutions that take into account local
sensitivities and contribute to trust-building efforts.
We welcome the continuation of direct dialogue
between the parties. The joint visit of President
Aleksandar Vučić and Mr. Albin Kurti to Brussels in
August and the visit of Prime Minister Ana Brnabić
to Kosovo in September were both important signs of
commitment to the path of reconciliation. We believe
that frequent high-level meetings should be encouraged

22-6385217/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

in order to foster dialogue and ensure lasting peace and
harmonious coexistence.
Brazil commends UNMIK for its initiatives to
strengthen institutions and promote the rule of law.
We are aware that Kosovo continues to face challenges
in the fight against corruption and organized crime,
as well as in the protection of vulnerable groups
and minorities, and we reiterate our support for the
Organization’s efforts in that regard. We also emphasize
the need for progress in the implementation of the
Brussels Agreement, especially with regard to the
establishment of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities in Kosovo.
We take note of the organization of the ninth
United Nations Global Open Day on Women, Peace
and Security, held in Kosovo in June. Brazil strongly
supports the recommendations resulting from the
event, which will help to ensure greater participation
by women in decision-making processes and to
combat harassment.
Brazil reiterates its commitment to the principles
of annex 2 of resolution 1244 (1999) as a basis for
building a future in peace and prosperity for the region.
We strongly support the continuity of UNMIK and the
efforts by regional actors, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to
mediate conflicts and strengthen Kosovo’s institutions.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to acknowledge the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Selaković, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and thank him for his statement. My delegation
is also grateful to Ms. Caroline Ziadeh, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for her comprehensive briefing.
We welcome her committed leadership of UNMIK
in the performance of its stabilization mandate,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999). We also take note
of the contribution of Ms. Donika Gërvalla-Schwarz in
this meeting.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/739) highlights continuing political tensions
between the Kosovo region and Serbia, which have
stalled the further implementation of the agreements
reached in the framework of the European Union (EU)facilitated dialogue for the normalization of relations.
We note with concern the unresolved issues pertaining
to the freedom of movement, energy-supply challenges
18/25

18/10/2022

in northern Kosovo and the agitations regarding
in-Kosovo voting during Serbia’s general elections held
in April.
Despite those contentions, we believe that dialogue
at the highest political level, backed by the genuine
commitment of the leaders to work through their
differences, will positively impact the efforts for a
peaceful and comprehensive resolution of the longstanding issues. It is in that context that we welcome
the discussions held on 18 August between the
representatives of the two sides at the highest level and
note the commitments made towards the de-escalation
of tensions.
We urge restraint from rhetoric and actions that are
unhelpful to the course of peace and reiterate our call
on both sides to recommit to the full implementation of
their respective obligations under previous and future
agreements to be reached in the context of the EUfacilitated dialogue. The flexibility of the parties and
their readiness to make necessary compromises would
be valuable to making progress in that regard.
In the immediate term, the parties must resume
the implementation of the energy road map in order
to ensure the continued supply of energy for heating
during the winter season, which is already upon us.
The impasse on vehicle license plates must equally be
addressed through practical measures.
Ghana firmly believes that any normalization
efforts and the pursuit of the legitimate aspirations of
the two sides must be founded solely on the principles
of international law, the values and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations and the path for a
political solution set out in resolution 1244 (1999). To do
otherwise, as the international community has become
acutely aware, would upend the rules and norms of our
international system that are critical to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
In our view, UNMIK’s mandate to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights remains
relevant as long as Kosovo is divided along ethnic lines.
We appreciate the Mission’s efforts to build trust and
social cohesion among the several ethnic communities
in Kosovo and encourage open, transparent and
inclusive engagement with all sectors of society as a
means to ensure the durability of agreements reached
in the political sphere. We also welcome the important
initiatives under the women and peace and security
and youth and peace and security agendas that seek to
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

S/PV.9155

enhance the capacity of women and young people to
meaningfully participate in the processes.

continue to encourage the Pristina authorities to address
the problems of all communities.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our support for
the collective efforts of the Security Council geared
towards normalization between the two sides and the
objective of peace in the region.

We have taken note of the activities of the EU Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo during the reporting period.
Furthermore, as part of an international cooperation
effort, we are happy to note that the Kosovo Force troops
have continued to effectively fulfil their mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999). Both missions need to adhere to
their respective mandates and maintain neutrality.

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I would like to join
other speakers in thanking Ms. Caroline Ziadeh,
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for her briefing to the Security Council. I also
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Selaković, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, at
today’s meeting.
Let me begin by reiterating India’s principled
position of supporting the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Serbia. We believe that all outstanding
issues need to be resolved through peaceful negotiations.
In that regard, we take note of the meetings held
between Serbia and the authorities in Pristina under the
auspices of the European Union (EU). It is important
that meetings be held without any preconditions and in
good faith. The implementation of signed agreements,
including on the establishment of an association of
Serb-majority municipalities, will remain fundamental.
We welcome the signing of the 21 June agreement with
regard to an energy road map, and we urge all sides to
proceed with its full implementation.
We are of the view that both sides need to find
common ground to overcome mutual concerns,
including political and ethnic issues, and avoid rhetoric
that may heighten tensions. We welcome the ongoing
efforts, including those of the Quint members and the
EU, towards a dialogue. We welcome the 18 August
EU-facilitated meeting between both sides, especially
the commitment made with regard to holding regular
meetings in the future towards the normalization
of relations.
Given its humanitarian nature, the issue of missing
persons needs to be resolved as a priority. We hope that,
with the support of UNMIK, the authorities will be able
to determine the fate of persons who remain missing.
The voluntary and safe return of internally displaced
persons from other countries in the region is also
essential as a confidence-building measure. Together
with the other international presence, UNMIK should

In conclusion, we note with appreciation UNMIK’s
important role in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights. We call on all sides to fully
cooperate with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK and facilitate
its work.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Ms. Caroline Ziadeh,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for her briefing and
welcome her presence in the Chamber. I also welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Diaspora of the Republic of Kosovo and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia
to this meeting.
We carefully read the report of the SecretaryGeneral on UNMIK that covers the past six months
(S/2022/739). It reflects important developments in an
ever-strengthening democratic country, an important
player in regional frameworks and a member of various
regional and international organizations, working
closely with United Nations funds, programmes and
agencies and aspiring to join the European Union (EU)
and NATO, with a clear vision of its foreign policy’s
orientation. I would like to commend the Republic of
Kosovo and its authorities for the progress registered
over the past six months.
Nevertheless, we find it surprising that the war in
Ukraine and its multifaceted impact is not mentioned
in the report, including Kosovo’s unequivocal
condemnation of the aggression, which is further
testimony to its strong commitment to international law
and human rights. We applaud its alignment with EU
foreign policy, including sanctions, and the generosity
in receiving refugees and displaced persons from
Ukraine, just as it did with refugees from Afghanistan.
The sustained efforts to fight against corruption and
the enforcement of the rule of law in Kosovo deserve

22-6385219/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

due recognition, and rightly so. They demonstrate the
resolve of the Government to build a country for the
citizens by the citizens. The Freedom House report
Nations in Transit 2022, published recently, highlights
an increase in democratic governance, the judicial
framework and independence. We encourage the
Government to continue on that path.
Despite what I just said, for 23 years now, a
peacekeeping mission has remained stuck there by
a frozen Security Council resolution — a relic of
bygone times and realities and at odds with the current
domestic and regional political contexts. In that regard,
let me reiterate our position: the situation in Kosovo is
no longer a matter of peace and security. Keeping it as
an issue under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations is baseless, and speaking of peacekeeping there
is meaningless. Our region has moved ahead and has
transformed, much more than polemics sometimes tend
to show. In our view, UNMIK has had its day. We join
the United Kingdom and the United States in the call
for a thorough review in order to ensure that UNMIK’s
work and role do not evolve in inertia, but reflect the
tremendous change through which Kosovo and its
population have gone.
I will briefly look at the mandates of the
international presences in Kosovo, which show many
overlapping areas regarding priorities, especially
between UNMIK and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. They of course represent
different constituencies, but looking for synergies, in
close cooperation with the Government, would make
the investment more impactful. We remain convinced
that it would be better to invest some of the $42 million
spent yearly for UNMIK in areas where Kosovo has
genuine and acute needs. After all, the United Nations
can make an impact anywhere only if it aligns with the
needs and priorities of the host country.
I have said it before, and I would like to reiterate
it again: the EU-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia has our full and unreserved support, and
we call on the parties to accelerate it. We welcome
the latest meeting in Brussels, restoring high-level
contacts between the parties, which led, among other
things, to an agreement on the freedom of movement.
We also expect the road map on the energy agreement,
as well as that on the issue of car licence plates, to be
implemented as soon as possible. Those agreements
not only have a direct impact on citizens, but they are
also important steps for increased confidence-building
20/25

18/10/2022

in tackling the core issue: a comprehensive agreement
on the full normalization of relations, leading to
mutual recognition.
Albania highly appreciates the very active role of
the EU Special Representative, Mr. Miroslav Lajčák,
and the United States Special Envoy and Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State, Mr. Gabriel Escobar, as
well as the involvement of the foreign and security
policy advisers of the President of France and the
German Chancellor. That is an impressive high-level
line-up of support, which cannot, and should not, be
wasted. It should serve as a catalyst to accelerate talks
on core issues, make history and change the Western
Balkans once and forever.
Finding the right and just solutions to challenging
situations requires wisdom and creativity, sustained
and genuine efforts, courage and vision. That is what
leaders are called on to do — lead, rather than follow,
and, if needed, take risks for the greater good.
In that respect, we think that it is time to reduce
the Security Council meetings to only one a year
in recognition of the progress made, as well as
encouragement for the parties to pursue dialogue with
more determination. The parties would achieve more,
as they have done, by sitting, talking and agreeing in
Brussels, rather than disagreeing in New York.
The rule of law is fundamental to every society. We
support the Government in its efforts to exert its lawful
authority throughout its territory. No one should be
allowed to disrespect the law, create tensions and incite
violence. In that respect, we strongly condemn the
consecutive attacks against Kosovo police in April in
two municipalities, and we commend the firm position
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ziadeh in that respect.
I will not tire of mentioning the new environment
that we have created in the Western Balkans, where
we look at each other with hope, and not suspicion,
and where we come together in joint efforts and
common projects, looking for shared benefits, and
not taking undue advantage of our neighbours. That is
the foundation of our current relations with everyone,
particularly Serbia, where we also share in our respective
efforts on the path to European integration and regional
cooperation, including through open Balkans.
All Western Balkan countries seek and pursue
European integration. We know that we can achieve it
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

only by building a democratic, developed and prosperous
society and by developing regional integration, with
justice and accountability, respect for human rights
and freedoms for all citizens, in particular through
exemplary respect for national minorities, not only
as a substantial element of European integration and
human rights values, but also as an important lesson
learned from the past. Serbia has the right to ask for
high standards for the Serb minority in Kosovo, and
we encourage the Kosovo authorities to keep the issue
as high as possible on their development agenda and
support them to that end. For the sake of truth, we must
recognize that Kosovo’s legal framework on minorities
is one of the best and should serve as an example
elsewhere in the region, including in Serbia. I say this
very generally, referring to allegations and complaints
by ethnic Albanians living in the Preshevo Valley in
southern Serbia in relation to the “passivization” by
Serbia of their residential addresses.
We know it very well: where there are grievances,
there are problems, and the best way to deal with
problems is to address them up front. The treatment
of minorities should be the mirror in which we see the
true progress we have made in building open and just
societies for all.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the Serbian Foreign Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Selaković, to today’s meeting. I have listened
carefully to the briefings by the Special Representative
Ziadeh and Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz.
Since June 2022, the Kosovo authorities have taken
unilateral actions on such issues as identity documents
and vehicle licence plates, which has led to a severe
escalation in tensions in northern Kosovo, disrupting
the process of normalizing relations between Kosovo
and Serbia and affecting security and stability in the
Balkans and South-East Europe. China expresses
its concern.
Under the good offices of the relevant parties, the two
sides have finally reached an agreement on the issue of
identity documents. China welcomes this development,
and, in particular, China commends the constructive
attitude demonstrated by Serbia. At present, the issue
of licence plates is still pending. Pristina’s demand is
that the conversion of licence plates be complete by the
end of this month. This may once again trigger protests
and even clashes and aggravate tensions between the
two sides. Such a situation must be avoided.

S/PV.9155

We support the two sides engaging with each
other through the mediation under the auspices of the
European Union (EU) in order to continue consultations
on the licence-plate issue. We call upon both sides,
and the Kosovo authorities in particular, to exercise
restraint, actively cooperate with the good offices of the
EU, bearing in mind the overall interest of maintaining
security and stability in Europe, and refrain from once
again taking unilateral actions.
Dialogue and consultation are the right way to
address the Kosovo issue. We are pleased to see that
the August meeting in Brussels this year between
Serbia and Kosovo produced positive results. Under
the auspices of the EU, the Serbian and Kosovo sides
arrived at a road map for the implementation of the
energy agreement. China encourages both sides to
continue to engage with each other pragmatically and
constructively and to implement the outcomes of the
previous negotiations.
In accordance with the provisions of the Brussels
Agreement, Kosovo should advance the establishment
of an association of Serb municipalities. Harmonious
coexistence of all ethnic groups is a fundamental
prerequisite for achieving stability in Kosovo. For
many years now, the unity and mutual trust of all
communities in the Kosovo region have been in a
fragile state. Recently there have been a number of
incidents targeting ethnic minorities and their places
of worship in Kosovo, including thefts and attacks.
China hopes the Kosovo authorities will take effective
measures to prevent the recurrence of such incidents so
as to guarantee the security and legitimate rights and
interests of all ethnic groups in Kosovo, including Serbs.
The presence of the United Nations is a strong
guarantee towards the settlement of the Kosovo issue,
which is sensitive and complex. In recent years,
there have been persistent tensions, which have also
escalated, posing a potential risk to European security.
Under such circumstances, the Security Council should
sustain its focus and attention on the Kosovo issue.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) should continue to work actively
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), effectively
carry out its mandates and play a constructive role
in maintaining regional stability, promoting national
reconciliation and facilitating dialogue between the
two sides.

22-6385221/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

China’s position on the Kosovo issue has been
consistent and clear. We support the sides concerned
in working with each other within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999) in order to reach a mutually
acceptable political solution through sincere dialogue.
In this process, Serbia’s sovereignty, independence and
integrity should be fully respected.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
France): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her briefing, and I welcome the
presence among us of the Foreign Ministers of Serbia
and Kosovo.
The incidents that took place in northern Kosovo on
31 July are worrying and remind us that there is no other
way forward for either Serbia or Kosovo than to reach
a comprehensive, final and legally binding agreement
to resolve the dispute between the two countries in a
sustainable manner. In this regard, France welcomes the
agreement on freedom of movement that was reached
between Serbia and Kosovo on 27 August within the
framework of the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union. This agreement illustrates the European
Union’s continued commitment to dialogue, and France
commends the efforts of its Special Representative,
Mr. Miroslav Lajčák.

18/10/2022

the rule of law, and economic and social development.
These efforts, which must continue, are also essential
for European rapprochement, as is the mobilization for
the full, equal and effective participation of women in
political and social life and for the respect of human
rights. We call for the continuation of the fight against
impunity for the perpetrators of serious crimes and for
cooperation with the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
We fully support the work of Ms. Caroline Ziadeh
as Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to promote security,
stability and the strengthening of the rule of law and
respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region.
UNMIK can count on the joint action of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. We particularly
welcome UNMIK’s efforts in conjunction with the
municipalities to support intercommunal dialogue.
In this regard, we support the proposal to establish a
centre for dialogue and contact in Pristina.
France, like the European Union, remains
committed to the stabilization of the Western Balkans
and to the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina. Their common European future depends
on it.

France encourages Serbia and Kosovo to fully
normalize their relations in a spirit of compromise. The
high-level dialogue meeting facilitated by the European
Union held in Brussels on 18 August showed that there
is a commitment by the parties to a comprehensive
agreement. The conclusion of such an agreement is
a condition essential for the European prospects of
Kosovo and Serbia, prospects in which both parties
have a mutual interest, and to which France reiterates
its commitment.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.

We call on both parties to implement, without
restrictions, the agreements already reached and to
refrain from any unilateral measure that could fuel
tensions. We encourage Kosovo and Serbia to work
constructively to find solutions on current issues,
such as those of converting licence plates or of
supplying electricity to northern Kosovo. It is also
essential that progress be made in the Working Group
on Missing Persons and on the issue of the return of
displaced persons.

The process of normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia has not made moved forward,
especially on technical aspects that have an impact on
community life in Kosovo. An urgent solution must
be found for the issue of freedom of movement, in
particular that of licence plates, at the risk of fuelling
more tension.

We express our support for the reform efforts
being undertaken by the Government of Kosovo, in
particular with regard to the fight against corruption,
22/25

I welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Selaković. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Caroline
Ziadeh, for her briefing, and we have listened carefully
to Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz.

Incidents and violence targeting minority
communities in Kosovo are one of the expressions of
communal tensions that are likely to be permanent
sources of antagonism. These tensions cannot be
resolved through unilateral initiatives but through
dialogue and addressing their root causes, in order to
22-63852

18/10/2022

Kosovo

build a sustainable peace. That goal can be achieved
only by implementing existing agreements, such as
the Brussels Agreement. Recent meetings between
the parties, mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, failed to advance the normalization process.
Increasing sources of tensions, altercations between
communities and police and other decisions that limit
the free movement of people and goods within Kosovo
are clearly detrimental to peacebuilding.
In addition to the free movement of people, there
is the controversial issue of the return of displaced
persons belonging to minority communities. The pace
of those returns, which remains below expectations,
must be accelerated in order to enable those people
to return to their region of origin, without fear or
pressure. We encourage the initiatives of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and local authorities to coordinate the return
of displaced persons and call on them to accelerate the
pace of those returns. In that regard, I would like to
stress the need for the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), as well as for the parties’ respect for
international law in order to put in place all guarantees
for peace and security for the people in Kosovo.
The issue of missing persons is of crucial interest.
The fact that the working group on missing persons
did not hold any meetings during the reporting
period delays the administration of cases of persons
still missing since the events of 1998 and 1999. We
encourage UNMIK to continue its efforts in that regard.
To that end, my country welcomes and encourages all
initiatives that promote coexistence and integration
among communities.
Another pending challenging issue is that of
peaceful coexistence among the followers of different
religions. In that regard, the 2016 decision of the
Constitutional Court to register the lands of the Visoki
Dečani monastery must be implemented. We also urge
the Kosovo authorities to adopt legislation that protects
freedom of religion and guarantees protection against
domestic violence, violence against women and genderbased violence.
We underscore the need to increase the role of young
people and women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
In cooperation with UN-Women, UNMIK activities
to combat harassment against women and for greater
participation by women in political processes are to

S/PV.9155

be commended. The same goes for cultural and sports
activities to encourage the participation of young people.
There are still several challenges in the area of
justice. We welcome and encourage the role played by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to
advance reforms in that area. We note UNMIK efforts
to operationalize justice and combat impunity. We
welcome the fact that proceedings have been initiated
in war crimes cases and that the considerable delays in
the administration of justice have been reduced.
My country calls on the parties to work
constructively towards stability in the region. To that
end, it is essential that the parties refrain from any
unilateral policy and that they be committed, in good
faith, to the quest for a diplomatic solution.
In conclusion, we encourage Special Representative
Ziadeh to continue interaction with the parties. We
commend UNMIK for its efforts to build intercommunal
trust and foster integration among all communities.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Selaković (Serbia): I must respond, as we heard
a plethora of blatant lies from Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz
during her statement. I would like to respond to just
some of them.
One of those lies was that she represents the
youngest democracy in Europe. Have you ever heard of
a democracy where people are banned from voting in
elections? Twice this year, Serbs living in Kosovo and
Metohija were not allowed to vote.
Another blatant lie was that 90 per cent of
Serbian licence plates have been registered. I repeat,
90 per cent. There are more than 9,000 people who own
vehicles in the northern part of Kosovo and Metohija.
I repeat, more than 9,000. Only two of them registered
their plates. Is that 90 per cent? Perhaps that is the best
example of the blatant lies.
From Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz’s statement, we can
see that she is obsessed with our President, Aleksandar
Vučić. She mentioned his name nine times in her
statement. She said that he was preparing for an act
of aggression but, at the same time, she made no
mention of what Pristina is doing. For the past eight

22-6385223/25

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

months, we heard continuous, systematic and repeated
lies about President Vučić preparing for aggression,
Belgrade preparing for aggression; that there will be an
escalation of conflict on the ground and that Serbia is
behaving like someone’s proxy or puppet.
At the same time, Pristina was constructing
four — I said, four — new special police troops bases
in the Serb-majority municipalities. What is the reason
for that? Is that not in preparation for aggression and to
push what is left of the Serbian community in Kosovo
and Metohija out of Kosovo and Metohija? That is the
only reason, and that is the real truth.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz said that President Vučić
promotes Nazi ideology of a so-called Serb world. First
of all, we would never hear President Vučić saying
that. Secondly, I will tell the Council who is promoting
Nazi ideas. Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz can say if this is true
or not. The so-called Kosovo Government has been
preparing to renovate Xhafer Deva’s house. I will tell
the Council who Xhafer Deva is.
Xhafer Deva was a very famous Nazi collaborator
during the Second World War. The Kosovo Government
is working on a project renovate Xhafer Deva’s house
in Kosovska Mitrovica. It has even been cheating the
European Union, in getting its support for the project
to renovate the house of a Nazi collaborator who was
decorated by Hitler himself. That is clear evidence of
the promotion of Nazi ideology and Nazi ideas.
I will not even mention SS Skanderbeg, which
was one of the very best and most brutal of Hitler’s
units during the Second World War. However, Albin
Kurti is the one promoting Nazi ideology. I will tell
the Council how. I will quote him. He was interviewed
by a journalist from Euronews on 16 February. The
journalist asked,
“You once said that you would support a great
union with Albania. Is [that] still the case?”
He said,
“I believe that full independence implies also,
independence from independence, so we could join
a federation with Albania or an EU federation.
Two referendums in the future could solve this, in
Albania and Kosovo …”.
The journalist asked him,
“How would you vote in that referendum?”
24/25

18/10/2022

He said,
“I think I would vote yes”.
That project existed only during the Second World
War, as a Nazi proxy State — so that concerns the
promotion of Nazi ideology.
My only message for Ms. Schwarz today is that
she should not so be obsessed with President Vučić in
such a way. Maybe it would be best for her to submit an
application to become one of his pupils. He could teach
her a lot about politics, diplomacy and international
public law — and about the way she found herself
here, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), which
defined Kosovo and Metohija as a part of the territory
of the Republic of Serbia.
When she is speaking about crimes committed, she
should not forget to remind the Council where Hashim
Thaçi, her former President, as well as Kadri Veseli
are right now and what they are doing in the detention
unit at The Hague. They are not playing cards or the
game of Risk. They are there to be tried and, I believe,
sentenced for the horrifying crimes they committed
against Serbs and the other non-Albanians in Kosovo
and Metohija. The Council adopted three resolutions
before resolution 1244 (1999): resolutions 1160 (1998),
1199 (1998) and 1203 (1998). In all three of them, the
activities of her fellows were named as terrorism. And
the members of the Security Council adopted those
resolutions unanimously.
We also heard it mentioned twice that Serbia is
breaching agreements. That, of course, is not true. It
has been 3,470 days since the first Brussels Agreement
was signed, and Pristina has not been forming any Serbmajority municipalities. Moreover, it has loudly said
that it is not going to do that. It is a matter of respect for
the accords and agreements.
Finally, one very famous poet said that if someone
is lying, they should lie in a way that ensures people
trust them. Next time, Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz should
take an approach from another angle if she really wants
to have an effect other than the one she has created with
her lies.
The President (spoke in French): Ms. GërvallaSchwarz has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz: I really did not want to
bother the Security Council regarding these personal
22-63852

18/10/2022

S/PV.9155

Kosovo

attacks, but I cannot ignore them. Mr. Selaković is
not even capable of calling me by my name, which is
not “Schwarz” — that is the name of my husband. My
last name is Gërvalla, and there are good reasons why
Mr. Selaković cannot articulate that name. Because it
was Belgrade that chased my father to Germany — he
was a journalist, writer and musician — and he was one
of the three people Belgrade’s State security service
killed behind our house. That is why it is so difficult
for Mr. Selaković to say the name Gërvalla — or
“Dërvalla” or however it could be spelled — because
there is a big hole in the collective conscience of Serbia
about that name.
I could really take a lot of time to react to a lot of
things that were stated, but I simply will not do that
because I very much respect Council members’ time. I
truly respect this body, which is dealing with war and
peace, especially with its ongoing intensive efforts to
end a war that is unjustified and very aggressive. I will
therefore only make the following two points.
It is difficult, as someone from Kosovo who
understands both our history and the present, to sit here
and listen about lies and truth. I would quite simply
recommend to everyone who is not very convinced at
today’s meeting not to listen to Mr. Selaković. They
do not even need to listen to me, the Kosovar Foreign
Minister. All they need to do is read the international
reports, starting with the latest Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe report and the progress

report of the European Union, and then continue
reading what the international presence in Kosovo is
reporting from the ground, because maybe I could be
trying to fool the members of the Council — which I
would never do because of the respect I have for this
body — but I ask them to not to let others to fool them
either. They should simply trust the sources they know
will tell them the truth about the progress in Kosovo,
as well as the problems, and about what has happened
in the past, what is happening now and how the future
can be.
From our side, our aim is to provide a better future
for our citizens. For all our citizens, the right to vote
in Kosovo is a guaranteed right for every citizen of the
Republic — without distinction as to Albanians, Serbs,
Turks and Bosniaks. The citizens of Kosovo — all of
them — most recently exercised their right to vote in
the national elections held in February 2021 and the
municipal elections held on 21 October. The right to
vote in Kosovo is therefore a very respected one, and
it is guaranteed by our Constitution for every citizen
of Kosovo.
Regarding everything else that has been insinuated
about the about elections in Kosovo — I simply ask
Council members to read the latest European Union
progress report, in which they will see how free and
democratic the elections are in Kosovo and how much
we care about the right to vote.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

22-6385225/25
