182

General Assembly-Thirty-first s~sion

Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing the
purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2
of the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States,12
and to give increased importance to its role in relations
among States,
Welcoming the fact that the International Law Commission completed the first reading of the draft articles
on the most-favoured-nation clause,
Noting with appreciation the work done by the International Law Commission on State responsibility,
succession of States in respect of matters other than
treaties and the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses,
Noting with satisfaction that the International Law
Commission continued to pay special attention to the
question of rationalizing further its organization and
methods of work,
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-eighth
session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1977;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Complete at its thirtieth session, in the light
of comments received from Member States, from organs
of the United Nations which have competence on the
subject-matter and from interested intergovernmental
organizations, the second reading of the draft articles on
the most-favoured-nation clause adopted at its twentyeighth session;
(b) Continue on a high priority basis its work on
State responsibility, taking into account relevant General Assembly resolutions adopted at previous sessions,
with a view to completing the preparation of a first
set of draft articles on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, if possible within the next
term of office of the members of the International Law
Commission, and take up, at the earliest possible time,
the separate topic of international liability for injurious
consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law;
(c) Proceed with the preparation, on a priority
basis, of draft articles on:
(i) Succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties;

(ii)

Treaties concluded between States and international organizations or between international
organizations;

(d) Continue its work on the law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses;

5. Urges Member States that have not yet done so
to submit to the Secretary-General their written comments on the subject of the law of the non-navigational
uses of international watercourses;
1 2 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.

6. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will continue to keep the progress of its
work under review and to adopt the methods of work
best suited to the speedy completion of the tasks entrusted to it;
7. Supports the request of the International Law
Commission to the Secretary-General to prepare and
publish as soon as possible a new and revised edition
of the handbook entitled The Work of the International
Law Commission;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International
Law Commission and that an increasing number of
participants from developing countries be given the opportunity to attend these seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission for its attention the
records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/98.

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the value of arbitration as a method of
settling disputes arising in the context of international
commercial relations,
Convinced that the establishment of rules for ad hoe
arbitration that are acceptable in countries with different
legal, social and economic systems would significantly
contribute to the development of harmonious international economic relations,
Bearing in mind that the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law have been prepared after extensive consultation
with arbitral institutions and centres of international
commercial arbitration,
Noting that the Arbitration Rules were adopted by
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law at its ninth session18 after due deliberation,
1. Recommends the use of the Arbitration Rules
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law in the settlement of disputes arising in the
context of international commercial relations, particularly by reference to the Arbitration Rules in commercial contracts;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the widest possible distribution of the Arbitration Rules.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/99.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its ninth session, 14
13 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17), chap. V, sect. C.
14 Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17).

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

--------------

Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined the
object and terms of reference of the Commission, and
its resolution 3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973,
by which it increased the membership of the Commission, as well as its previous resolutions concerning the
reports of the Commission on the work of its annual
sessions,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to
universal economic co-operation among all States on
a basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of all peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the
different social and legal systems in harmonizing the
rules of international trade law,
Noting with appreciation that the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law has completed,
or soon will complete, work on many of the priority
items included in its programme of work,
Noting further that, under resolutions 2205 (XXI)
and 3108 (XXVIII), a State elected as a member of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law takes office on 1 January of the year following its
election, and that its term of office expires on 31 December of the last year of the period for which it was
elected,
Bearing in mind that much of the substantive work
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law is carried out in its Working Groups which
usually meet during the months of January and February prior to the regular annual session of the Commission, and that inconvenience is caused to the work
of the Commission because vacancies occurring in the
membership of Working Groups as at 31 December
cannot be filled until the next regular annual session
of the Commission,
Taking into account the fact that Governments of
Member States which are not members of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law have
on occasion expressed the wish to attend sessions of
the Commission and of its Working Groups as observers
and the opinion of the Commission expressed in paragraph 74 of its report on the work of its ninth session
that it is in the interest of the Commission's work that
such States, not members of the Commission, be given
the opportunity to participate in its work as observers,
Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, at its sixteenth session, took note with
appreciation of the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 15
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its ninth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
Supplement No. 15 (A/31/15), vol. Il, para. 268.

183

work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction the completion of the
draft Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea18
and the adoption by the Commission of the Arbitration
Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;17
4. Further notes with satisfaction that a draft convention on the international sale of goods has been
prepared by a working group of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and that this
draft convention has been transmitted to Governments
and interested international organizations for their comments;
5. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law to hold a second international symposium on international trade law
in connexion with its tenth session in 1977 and, in
view of the fact that the symposium is financed by
voluntary contributions, appeals to Governments to contribute to the costs of the symposium;
6. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue its work on the topics included in its
programme of work;
(b) Continue its work on training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, taking into account the special interests of the developing countries;
( c) Maintain close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
continue to collaborate with international organizations
active in the field of international trade law;
(d) Maintain liaison with the Commission on
Transnational Corporations with regard to the consideration of legal problems that would be susceptible
of action by it;
( e) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(f) Keep its programme of work and working
methods under review with the aim of further increasing the effectiveness of its work;
7. Calls upon the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law to continue to take account
of the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the sixth
and seventh special sessions of the General Assembly
that laid down the foundations of the new international
economic order, bearing in mind the need for United
Nations organs to participate in the implementation of
those resolutions;
8. Invites the Commission on Transnational Corporations, if it identifies specific legal issues in its programme of work that would be susceptible of action
by the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law, to refer such issues to that Commission for
its consideration;
9. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law to review, in
the near future, its long-term programme and, in this
connexion, requests the Secretary-General to invite
Governments to submit their views and suggestions on
such a programme;
1 6 Ibid.,

111 fbid.,

---------

11 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17), chap. IV, sect. C.
chap. V, sect. C.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

184

Decides that:
(a) The term of office of those members of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law whose term would expire on 31 December 1976
is extended until the last day prior to the beginning of
the regular annual session of the Commission in 1977
and the term of office of those members of the Commission whose term would expire on 31 December
1979 is extended until the last day prior to the beginning of the regular annual session of the Commission
in 1980;
( b) Commencing with the elections to membe~ship
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law at the thirty-first session of the General
Assembly, all States elected to membership shall take
office at the beginning of the first day of the regular
annual session of the Commission immediately following their election and their terms of office shall expire
on the last day prior to the opening. o! the seve1;1th
regular annual session of the Comm1ss10n followmg
their election;
( c) Governments of Member States that are not
members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law are entitled, when they so request, to attend the sessions of the Commission and
its Working Groups as observers;
11. Requests the Secretary~General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the thirty-first
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its ninth session.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

Convinced that international trade is an important
factor in the promotion of friendly relations among
States and that the adoption of a convention on the
carriage of goods by sea which would take into account
the legitimate interests of all States, particularly those
of the developing countries, which would remove such
uncertainties and ambiguities as exist in the rules and
practices relating to bills of lading and which would
establish a balanced allocation of risks between the
cargo owner and the carrier, would contribute to the
harmonious development of international trade,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for the valuable work done in having prepared draft articles for
a convention on the carriage of goods by sea;
2. Decides that an international conference of plenipotentiaries shall be convened in 1978 in New York,
or at any other suitable place for which the SecretaryGeneral may receive an invitation, to consider the
question of the carriage of goods by sea and to embody
the results of its work in an international convention
and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
3. Refers to the conference the draft articles for a
convention on the carriage of goods by sea approved
by the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law, together with draft provisions concerning
implementation, reservations and other final clauses to
be prepared by the Secretary-General;
4. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To circulate the draft Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea,20 together with draft provisions concerning implementation, reservations and
other final clauses to be prepared by the SecretaryGeneral, to Governments and interested international
organizations for comments and proposals;

31/100.

(b) To convene the United Nations Conference on
the Carriage of Goods by Sea for an appropriate
period in 1978 at any of the places referred to in
paragraph 2 above;

10.

United Nations Conference on the Carriage of Goods by Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its ninth session 18 which contains
draft articles for a convention on the carriage of goods
by sea,
Noting that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law considered and adopted the draft
articles taking note of observations and comments submitted by Governments, by the Working Group on International Shipping Legislation of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and by international organizations,
Taking note with appreciation of the comments of the
Trade and Development Board of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development that the revision of the law on carriage of goods by sea involves
consideration not only of legal but also of economic
and shipping trade aspects, and that these aspects should
be given due consideration at an international conference of plenipotentiaries,19
18 Jbid.,

Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17).
annex I.

19 TD/B/C.4/153,

( c) To arrange for the preparation of summary
records of the proceedings of the plenary meetings of
the Conference and of meetings of committees of the
whole which the Conference may wish to establish;
(d) To invite all States to participate in the United
Nations Conference on the Carriage of Goods by Sea;
( e) To invite representatives of organizations that
have received a standing invitation from the General
Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of
all international conferences convened under its auspices, in the capacity of observers, in accordance with
Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974;

(/) To invite representatives of the national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of African Unity, in the capacity of observers,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32,80
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(g) To invite the speciaJized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested
organs of the United Nations and interested regional
intergovernmental organizations, to be represented at
the Conference by observers;
2o Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17), chap. IV, sect. C.
