A/RES/46/36
Page 2

1.
Notea that, as a result of consultâtiona, a majority of States
parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile
Use of Environmental Modification Techniques have expressed their wish to
convene the Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention in
September 1992 and that, to that end, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, as Depositary of the Convention, will hold consultations with the
parties to the Convention with regard to questions relating to the Conference
and its preparation, including the establishment of a preparatory committee
for the Conference;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance
and to provide such services, including summary records, as may be required
-for the Second Review Conference and its preparation;
3.
Also notes that arrangements for meeting the costs of the Second
Review Conference and its preparation are to be made by the Conference.
65th plenary meeting
6 December 1991
В
study on charting potential uses of resources allocated to
military activities for civilian endeavours to protect the
environment
The General Assembly.
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General transmitting the study on
charting potential uses of resources allocated to military activities for
civilian endeavors to protect the environment, 2/
Desirous of benefiting from progress in disannament within the endeavours
to protect the environment,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;

2.
Reouests the Secretary-General to submit the report to the
Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the reproduction
of the study as a United Nations publication and to give it the widest
possible distribution;
4.

Commends the study to the attention of all Member States.

65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1991

2/

A/46/364.

a / r e s /46/36

Page 3

Relationehip between diBarmament and development
The General А в в е т Ы у .
Recalling the proviaiona of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Sesaion of the General А в в е т Ы у 3/ related to the relationship between
diBarmament and development,
Recalling alao the adoption on 11 September 1987 of the Final Document of
the International Conference on the Relationship between Diearmament and
Development, 4/
StresBing the growing importance of the relationship between diearmament
and development in current international relations,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 5/ and actions
undertaken in accordance with the Final Document of the International
Conference on the Relationehip between Disarmament and Development;
2.
ReguestB the Secretary-General to continue to take action, through
appropriate organs and within available resources, for the implementation of
the action programme adopted at the International Conference; 6/
3.
Also reouests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its forty-seventh session;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Relationship between disarmament and development".
65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1991

Prohibition of the production of fissionable material
for weapons purposes
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 45/58 L of 4 December 1990 and previous
resolutions, in which it requested the Conference on Diearmament, at an
appropriate stage of the implementation of the Programme of Action set forth

1/

Resolution S-10/2.

4/

United Nations publication. Sales No. B.87.IX.8.

5/

A/46/527.

6/

United Nations publication. Sales No. E.87.IX.8, para. 35.
.

/ •••

A/RES/46/Зб
Page 4

in section III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 3/ and of its work on the item entitled "Nuclear weapons in
all aspects", to consider urgently the question of adequately verified
cessation and prohibition of the production of fissionable material for
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices and to keep the Assembly
informed of the progress of that consideration,
Noting that the agenda of the Conference on D i s a m a m e n t for 1991
included the item entitled "Nuclear weapons in all aspects" and that the
prograuTune of work of the Conference for all three parts of its 1991 session
contained the item entitled "Cessation of the nuclear-arms race and nuclear
disarmament", 2/
Recalling the proposals and statements made in the Conference on
Disarmaunent on those items, 8/
Welcoming the improved relationship between the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America and their consequent announcements
of significant measures, which could signal the reversal of the nuclear-arms
race.
Considering that the cessation of production of fissionable material for
weapons purposes and the progressive conversion and transfer of stocks to
peaceful uses would also be a significant step towards halting and reversing
the nuclear-arms race.
Considering also that the prohibition of the production of fissionable
material for nuclear weapons and other explosive devices would be an important
measure in facilitating the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and explosive devices,
1.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament, under the item entitled
"Nuclear weapons in all aspects", to continue to pursue its consideration of
the question of adequately verified cessation and prohibition of the
productiort of fissionable material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear
explosive devices and to keep the General Assembly informed of the progress of
that consideration;
2.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Prohibition of the production of fissionable
material for weapons purposes".
esth..plensrY meeting
6 December 1991

1/
See Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-sixth Session.
S 4BPle|pent..jj<o. 27 (A/46/27), para. 6.
8/

Ibid.,

sect. III.A and B.

/•

a /r e s /46/36

Page 5

Prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling
and use of radiological weapons
The General Assemblv.
Recalling its resolution 45/58 F of 4 December 1990,
1.
Takes note of the part of the report of the Conference on
Disarmeunent on its 1991 session that deals with the question of radiological
weapons, in particular the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Radiological
Weapons; 9/
2.
Recognizes that in 1991 the Ad Hoc Committee made a further
contribution to the clarification and better understanding of different
approaches that continue to exist with regard to both of the important matters
under consideration;
3.
Takes note also of the recommendation of the Conference on
Disarmament that the Ad Hoc Committee on Radiological Weapons should be re­
established at the beginning of its 1992 session;
4.
ReguestB the Conference on Diearmament to continue its substantive
negotiation on the subject with a view to the prompt conclusion of its work,
taking into account all proposals presented to the Conference to this end and
drawing upon the annexes to the report of the Ad Hoc Committee as a basis of
its future work, the result of which should be submitted to the General
Assembly at its forty-seventh session;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Conference on
Disarmament all relevant documents relating to the discussion of all aspects
of the issue by the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Prohibition of the development, production,
stockpiling and use of radiological weapons".
65th plenary meeting
6 December 1991

F
Regional disarmament, including confidence-building measures
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 44/116 S, 44/116 U and 44/117 В of 15 December
1989 and 45/58 M and 45/58 P of 4 December 1990,

9/

Ibid., Supplement Wo. 27 (A/46/27), para. 95.

A/RES/46/36
Page 6

Considering that the adoption of regional disarmament measures is one of
the most effective means by which States can contribute to international
security, arms limitation and disarmament.
Recognizing that the regional and global approaches to disarmament
complement each other and can be pursued simultaneously in the promotion of
regional and international peace and security.
Noting that the recent events in the Middle East have underlined the
importance of regional disarmament and that they justify in particular the
search for a comprehensive and balanced control of armaments in the region,
notcÜ3ly through a dialogue among the States of that region.
Convinced that disarmament can be carried out only in a climate of
confidence based on mutual respect and aimed at ensuring better relations
founded on justice, solidarity f.ud cooperation.
Noting also that the volume of resources consumed for potentially
destructive purposes is in stark contrast to social and economic development
needs but that reduction in military expenditure following, inter a l i a , the
conclusion of regional disarmament agreements could entail benefits in both
the social and economic fields.
Considering that regional disarmament measures should be aimed at
establishing a military balance at the lowest level while not diminishing the
security of each State and at eliminating as a matter of priority the
capeüsility for surprise attacks and large-scale offensive action.
Noting further that disarmament measures in one region should not lead to
increased arms transfers to other regions.
Considering also that measures of transparency are one of the essential
elements in the implementation of regional disarmament.
Persuaded that verification measures are important to ensure compliance
with regional agreements on arms control and disarmament,
1.
Reaffirms that the regional approach to disarmament is one of the
essential elements in the global process of disarmament;
2.
Is convinced of the importance and effectiveness of regional
disarmament measures taken at the initiative of States of the region and with
the participation of all States concerned and taking into account the specific
characteristics of each region, in that they can contribute to the security
and stability of all States, in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and in compliance with international law and existing
treaties;
3.
Stresses the importance of confidence-building measures in ensuring
the success of this process;
4.
Notes with satisfaction the important progress made in various
regions of the world through the conclusion of peace, security and cooperation
agreements and following from the implementation of measures intended to
enhance confidence in the fields of political, economic and military
cooperation;

A/RES/46/Зб
Page 7

5.
Affirme- that regional and subregional agreements on arms control and
disarmament can contribute to the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflicts;
6.
Recognizes the useful role played by the regional centres of the
United Nations;
7.
Encourages States of the same region to examine the possibility of
creating, on their own initiative, regional mechanisms and/or institutions for
the establishment of measures in the framework of an effort of regional
disarmeunent or for the prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflicts with the assistance, if requested, of the United Nations;
8.
Stresses that confidence-building measures, including objective
information on military activities and capabilities, are essential to the
promotion of arms control and disarmament at the regional level;
.
9.
Believes that regional initiatives should enjoy the support of all
States of the region concerned and the respect of those outside that region;
10.
Invites and encourages all States to conclude, whenever possible,
agreements on disarmament and confidence-building measures at the regional
le v e l .
65th plenary meeting
6 December 1991

Confidence- and security-building measures and conventional
disarmament in Europe
The General Assembly.
Determined to achieve progress in disarmament,
Stressino that confidence-building and disarmament measures have a
positive impact on international security and are facilitated by the reduction
of tensions.
Noting the work accomplished in 1991 by the Disarmament Commission within
the framework of the Working Groups on its agenda items 4 and 6, 10/
Expressing the hope that the improved international climate will
facilitate the necessary efforts to build confidence, to lessen the risk of
military confrontation and to enhance mutual security.
Recalling its resolutions 43/75 P of 7 December 1988, 44/116 I of
15 December 1989 and 45/58 I of 4 December 1990,
.
Reaffirming the great importance of increasing security and stability in
Europe through the establishment of a stable, secure and verifiable balance of
conventional armed forces at lower levels, as well as through increased
openness and predictability of military activities.

13/
See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortv-aixth Session.
Supplement No. 42 (A/46/42), paras. 39 and 41.

/...

A/RES/46/36
Page 8

conaiderina that the positive results of the negotiations on confidenceand security-building measures, as well as of those on conventional armaments
and forces, both within the framework of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, have considerably increased confidence and improved
security and cooperation in Europe, thereby contributing to international
peace and security.
Welcoming the prospects for the early implementation of the measures
agreed upon and the continuation of negotiations in these fields among the
States participating in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe,
1.
Notes with satisfaction the progress achieved so far in the process
of disarmament and the strengthening of confidence and security in Europe;
2.
Welcomes the determination of the States signatories of the Treaty
on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe fully to implement its provisions and
the determination of all the States participating in the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe fully to implement the provisions of the
Vienna Document of the negotiations on confidence- and security-building
measures, as well as the decision of these States to continue negotiations in
these fields;
3.
Invites all States to consider the possibility of taking appropriate
measures with a view to reducing the risk of confrontation and strengthening
security, taking due account of their specific regional conditions.
65th plenary meeting
6 December 1991

H
International arms transfers
The General Assembly.
Realizing the urgent need to resolve underlying conflicts, to diminish
tensions and to accelerate efforts towards general and complete disarmament
with a view to maintaining regional and international peace and security in a
world free from the scourge of war and the burden of armaments.
Recognizing that the international transfer and production of
conventional arms, including advanced weapons, delivery systems and military
technology, have in recent decades acquired a dimension and qualitative
characteristics that can give rise to serious and urgent concerns.
Greatly concerned by the illicit arms trade, a most disturbing and
dangerous phenomenon, because of its destabilizing and destructive effects,
particularly for the internal situation of affected States and the violation
of human rights.
Recalling that in paragraph 85 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly 1/ it urged major arms supplier -and recipient
countries to consult on the limitation of all types of international transfers
of conventional arms.

/...

A/RES/46/Зб
Page 9

Reaffirming the role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament
and the commitment of Member States to take concrete steps in order to'
strengthen that role,
'
Realizing that arms obtained through the illicit arms trade are most
likely to be used for violent purposes, and that even small arms when so
obtained, directly or indirectly, by terrorist groups, drug traffickers or
underground organizations can pose a danger to regional and international
security, and certainly to the security and political stability of the
countries affected,
Considering that the illicit arms trade, representing a distinctly unique
phenomenon, by its clandestine nature defies transparency and could not be
dealt with by an arms transfers register.
Recalling its resolution 43/75 I of 7 December 1988,
Welcoming the study submitted by the Secretary-General, pursuant to
paragraph 5 of resolution 43/75 I and prepared with the assistance of
governmental experts, on ways and means of promoting transparency in
international transfers of conventional arms, IjL/ as well as the problem of
the illicit arms trade,
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the study on
ways and means of promoting transparency in international transfers of
conventional arms;
2.
Calls upon all States to give high priority to eradicating the
illicit
trade in all kinds of weapons and military equipment, a most
disturbing and dangerous phenomenon often associated with terrorism, drug
trafficking, organized crime and mercenary and other destabilizing activities,
and to take urgent action towards this end, as recommended in the study
submitted by the Secretary-General;
3.
Urges Member States to exercise effective control over their weapons
and military equipment and their arms imports and exports to prevent them from
getting into the hands of parties engaged in
the illicit arms trade;
4.
Also urges Member States to ensure that they have in place an
adequate body of laws and administrative machinery for regulating and
monitoring effectively their transfer of arms, to strengthen or adopt strict
measures for their enforcement, and to cooperate at the international,
regional and subregional levels to harmonize, where appropriate, relevant
laws, regulations and administrative procedures as well as their enforcement
measures, with the goal of eradicating the illicit arms trade as stated in the
recommendations in the study 2£/;
.
, 5.
Invites Member States to provide the Secretary-General with relevant
information on their national legislation and/or regulations on arms exports.

11/

A/46/301, annex.

12/

Ibid., paras. 161-165.

A/RES/46/Зб
Page 10

importe and procurement, and administrative procedures, as regards both
authorization of arms transfers and prevention of the illicit arms trade;
6.
Calls upon affected States to provide the Secretary-General, in
accordance with national judicial procedures, information regarding arms and
military equipment, seized by authorities, destined for the use of terrorists,
drug traffickers and organized crime and for mercenary and other destabilizing
activities, when this would assist the eradication of the illicit arms trade;
7.
Reoueats the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements to
make available for consultation by Member States the information referred to
in paragraph 5 above, and to publish the information provided in connection
with paragraph 6 above;
8.
Also requests the Secretary-General to assist, upon request and
within available resources, in holding meetings and seminars at the national,
regional and international levels, as pertinent, with a view to:
(a)
measure;

Promoting the concept of transparency as a confidence-building

(b)
Increasing the awareness of the destructive and destabilizing
effects of the illicit traffic in arms and to exploring ways and means for its
eradication;
(Ç)
Promoting the development of internationally harmonized laws and
administrative procedures relating to official arms procurement and arms
transfer policies;
(d)
Promoting regional and international efforts to eradicate the
illicit traffic in arms and providing advisory assistance to Member States,
when so requested, on measures for enforcement of relevant rules and
administrative procedures as recommended in the study, with e view to, inter
alia, facilitating cooperation between Member States in the training of their
customs and other appropriate officials;
9.
Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-seventh session on progress made in implementing the
present resolution;
10.
Requests the Disarmament Commission, at its organizational seseion
in 1992, to consider including the issue of international arms transfers in
the agenda of its substantive session in 1993;
11.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "International arms transfers".
^Sth plenAlFY me^tl,nq
6 Pecembey

A/RES/46/Зб
Page 11

Regional disarmament
The General Assemblv,
Recalling its resolution 45/58 P of 4 December 1990 on regional
disarmament.
Believing that the efforts of the international community to move towards
the ideal of general and complete disarmament are guided by the inherent human
desire for genuine peace and security, the elimination of the danger of war
and the release of economic, intellectual and other resources for peaceful
pursuits.
Affirming the abiding commitment of all States to the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations in the conduct of
their international relations.
Noting that essential guidelines for progress towards general and
complete disarmament were adopted at the tenth special session of the General
Assembly, 3/
Welcoming the prospects of genuine progress in the field of diearmament
engendered in recent years as a result of negotiations between the two super­
powers.
Taking note of the recent proposals for disarmament and nuclear non­
proliferation at the regional and subregional levels.
Recognizing the importance of confidence-building measures for regional
and international peace and security.
Convinced that endeavours by countries to promote regional disarmament,
taking into account the specific characteristics of each region and in
accordance with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of
armaments, would enhance the security of smaller States and would thus
contribute to international peace and security by reducing the risk of
regional conflicts,
1.
Stresses that sustained efforts are needed, within the framework of
the Conference on Disarmament and under the umbrella of the United Nations, to
make progress on the entire range of disarmament issues;
2.
Affirms that global and regional approaches to disarmament
complement each other and should therefore b e pursued simultaneously to
prcMBote regional and international peace and security;
3.
Calls uvon States to conclude agreements, wherever possible, for
nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and confidence-building measures at
regional and subregional levels;
4.
Welcomes the initiatives towards disarmament, nuclear non­
proliferation and security undertaken by some countries at the regional and
subregional levels;

A/RES/46/36
Page 12

5.
Supporta and encouragea efforts aimed at promoting confidencebuilding measures at regional and subregional levels in order to ease regional
tensions and to further disarmcunent and nuclear non-proliferation measures at
regional and subregional levels;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Regional disarmament".
65th plenary meeting
6 December 1991

Bilateral nuclear-arms negotiations
The General Assembly.
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions.
Mindful that it is the responsibility and obligation of all States to
contribute to the process of the relaxation of tension and to the
strengthening of international security.
Stressing the importance of the strengthening of international security
through disarmament and the halting of the qualitative and quantitative
escalation of the arms race.
Stressing also that general and complete disarmament under effective
international control is by its very nature unattainable unless all States
have the responsibility and join in adopting and implementing measures towards
that objective.
Emphasizing that nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war
remains one of the principal tasks of our times.
Concerned that the world is still threatened by the significant nuclear
arsenals and that the primary responsibility for nuclear disarmament, with the
objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons, rests with the nuclearweapon States, in particular those which possess the largest nuclear arsenals,
Bot:l,Dq w;tÜl-Bfttiq£açtjLoD the positive developments in the current
international scene, in particular the cooperation between the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America, which contributes to the
process of general and complete disarmament and the strengthening of
international security.
Recalling that, at their meeting in Washington in 1990, the leaders of
the two major nuclear Powers, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
United States of America, agreed to pursue, among other efforts, new talks on
the relationship between strategic offensive and defensive arms.
Welcoming the decision of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to
suspend all nuclear tests throughout the next twelve months as a contribution
towards the achievement of a comprehensive test-ban treaty,

!...

A/RES/46/36
Page 13

Convinced that the international community should encourage the
Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Government of
the United States of America in their endeavours in the process leading to the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Affirming that bilateral and multilateral negotiations on disarmament
should facilitate and complement each other,
1.
Expresses its satisfaction at the continued implementation of the
Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range
Missiles, 13,/ in particular at the completion by both parties of the
destruction of all their declared missiles subject to elimination under the
Treaty;
2.
Welcomes the signing of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation
of Strategic Offensive Arms by the President of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the President of the United States of America in Moscow on
31 July 1991;
3.
Also welcomes the unilateral decision announced by the President of
the United States of America on 27 September 1991 significantly to reduce the
size and nature of United States nuclear deployments worldwide and to enhance
stability, as well as the similar steps announced by the President of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on 5 October 1991, in response to that
decision;
4.
Recalls the stated intention of the two Governments concerned to
intensify, following the signature of the Treaty on the Reduction and
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, further negotiations on other issues,
in particular on preventing an arms race in space and achieving a
comprehensive nuclear-test ban;
5.
Encourages and supports the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America in their efforts to reduce their nuclear
armaments and to give future negotiations the highest priority;
6.
Invites the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America to keep other Members of the United Nations duly informed of
progress in their negotiations.
65th plenary meeting
6 December 1991

13/
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 12:
Nations publication. Sales No. E.88.IX.2), appendix VII.

1987

(United

A/RES/46/36
Page 14

К
Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes
The General Assembly.

.

Bearing in mind resolutions CM/Res.1153 (XLVIII) of 1988 \±/ and
CM/Res:1225 (L),of 1989 15/ concerning the dumping of nuclear and industrial
wastes in Africa, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity,
.
,
Welcoming resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/509 on the dumping of nuclear
wastes, adopted on 29 September 1989 by the General Conference of the
International Atomic Energy,Agency at its thirty-third regular session,

.>
16/

W e l c o m i n g .also, resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/530 establishing a Code of
Practice on t h e ,International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste,
adopted on 21 Septeoiber 1990 by the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-fourth regular session, 17/
.
Considering its resolution 2602 .С (XXIV) of 16. December 1969, in which it
requested the Conference of the .Committee on Disarmament, 18/ inter a l i a , to
consider effective methods of control against the use of radiological methods
of warfare,
.
Recalling resolution CM/Res.1356 (LIV) of 1991, adopted by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, on :the Bamako Convention on
the Ban on the Import of Hazardous Wastes 'into Africa and on the Control of
Their Transboundary Movements within Africa, 1^/
Aware of the potential hazards underlying any use of radioactive wastes
that would constitute radiological warfare and its implications for regional
and international security and in particular for the security of developing
countries,
:
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph 76 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 3/
Aware also of the consideration of the question of dumping of radioactive
wastes in the Conference on Disarmament during its 1991 session.

14/

See A/43/398, annex I.

15/

See A/44/бОЗ, annex I.

16/:
See International Atomic Energy Agency, Resolutions and Other
Decisions of the General Conference. Thirty-third Regular Session. 25— 29
September 1989.
17/

Ibid., Thirty-fourth Regular Session. 17-21 September 1990.

18/
The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on
Diearmament as from 7 February 1984.
19/

See A/46/390, annex I.
/...

A/RES/46/Зб
Page 15

its resolution 45/58 К of 4 December 1990, in which it
requested the Conference on Disarmament to include in its report to the
General Assembly at its forty-sixth session the developments in the ongoing
negotiations on this subject,
1.
Takes note of the part of the report of the Conference on
Disarmament relating to a future convention on the prohibition of
radiological weapons; 20/
2.
Expresses grave concern regarding any use of nuclear wastes that
would constitute radiological warfare and have grave Implications for the
national security of all States;
3.
Calls upon all States to take appropriate measures with a view to
preventing any dumping of nuclear or radioactive wastes that would infringe
upon the sovereignty of States;
4.
Reguests the Conference on Disarmament to take into account, in the
ongoing negotiations for a convention on the prohibition of radiological
weapons, radioactive wastes as part of the scope of such a convention;
5.
Also reouests the Conference on Disarmament to intensify efforts
towards an early conclusion of such a convention and to include in its report
to the General Assembly at its forty-seventh session the progress recorded in
the ongoing negotiations on this subject;
6.
Takes note of resolution CM/Res.l356 (LIV) of 1991, adopted by the
Council
of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, on the Bamako
Convention on the Ban of the Import of Hazardous Wastes into Africa and on the
Control of Their Transboundary Movements within Africa;
7.
Expresses the hope that the effective implementation of the
International Atomic Energy Agency Code of Practice on the International
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste will enhance the protection of
all States from the dumping of radioactive wastes on their territories;
8.
Reguests the International Atomic Energy Agency to continue keeping
the subject under active review, including the desirability of concluding a
legally binding instrument in this field;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-eeventh
session the item entitled "Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes".
65th .p?..ej3ar Y „.n>eetuna
6 DecepJaçy,JL.9?_1.

Transparency in armaments
The G e n e r al Assemblv.
Realizing that excessive and destabilizing arms build-ups pose a threat

20/ See Official Records of _the_Genera_l_Assembly. Forty-sixth Session,
Supplement;JWq . 27 (A/46/27), para. 95.
/.

A/RES/46/36
Page 16

to national, regional and international peace and security, particularly by
aggravating tensions and conflict situations, giving rise to serious and
urgent concerns.
Noting with satisfaction that the current international environment and
recent agreements and measures in the field of arms limitation and disarmament
make it a propitious time to work towards easing tensions and a just
resolution of conflict situations, as well as more openness and transparency
in military matters.
Recalling the consensus among Member States on implementing confidencebuilding measures, including transparency and exchange of relevant
information on armaments, likely to reduce the occurrence of dangerous
misperceptions about the intentions of States and to promote trust among
States,
Considering that increased openness and transparency in the field of
armaments could enhance confidence, ease tensions, strengthen regional and
international peace and security and contribute to restraint in military
production and the transfer of arms.
Realizing the urgent need to resolve underlying conflicts, to diminish
tensions and to accelerate efforts towards general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control with a view to maintaining
regional and international peace and security in a world free from the scourge
of war and the burden of armaments.
Recalling also that in paragraph 85 of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly 3/ it urged major arms supplier and
recipient countries to consult on the limitation of all types of international
transfer of conventional arms.
Disturbed by the destabilizing and destructive effects of the illicit
arms trade, particularly for the internal situation of affected States and the
violation of human rights.
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, Member States have undertaken to promote the establishment and
maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion for
armaments of the world's human and economic resources, and that the reduction
of world military expenditures could have a significant positive impact for
the social and economic development of all peoples,
Reaffirming the important role of the United Nations in the field of
disarmament and the commitment of Member States to take concrete steps in
order to strengthen that role.
Recalling its resolution 43/75 I of 7 December 1988,
Welcoming the study submitted by the Secretary-General, pursuant to
paragraph 5 of resolution 43/75 1 and prepared with the assistance of
governmental experts, on ways and means of promoting transparency in
international transfers of conventional arms, Ц / as well as the problem of
the illicit arms trade, taking into account views of Member States and other
relevant information.

A/RES/46/36
Page 17

Recognizing the major contribution of an enhanced level of transparency,
in armaments to confidence-building and security among States, and also
recognizing the urgent need to establish, under the auspices of the United
Nations, as a first step in this direction, a universal and non-discriminatory
register to include data on international arms transfers as well as other
interrelated information provided to the Secretary-General,
Stressing the importance of greater transparency in the interest of
promoting readiness to exercise restraint in accumulation of armaments.
Considering that the standardized reporting of international arms
transfers together with the provision of other interrelated information to a
United Nations register will constitute further important steps forward in the
promotion of transparency in military matters and, as such, will enhance the
role and effectiveness of the United Nations in promoting arms limitation and
disarmzunent, as well as in maintaining international peace and security;

of

Recognizing also the importance of the prevention of the proliferation
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,

1.
Recognizes that an increased level of openness and transparency in
the field of armaments would enhance confidence, promote stability, help
States to exercise restraint, ease tensions and strengthen regional and
international peace and security;
2.
Declares its determination to prevent the excessive and
destabilizing accumulation of arms, including conventional arms, in order to
promote stability and strengthen regional or international peace and security,
taking into account the legitimate security needs of States and the principle
of undiminished security at the lowest possible level of armaments;
3.
Reaffirms the inherent right to individual or collective self­
defence recognized in Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
implies that States also have the right to acquire arms with which to defend
themselves;
4.
Reiterates its conviction, as expressed in its resolution 43/75 I,
that arms transfers in all their aspects deserve serious consideration by the
international community, inter alia, because of:
(a)
Their potential effects in further destabilizing areas where tension
and regional conflict threaten international peace and security and national
security;
(b) Their potentially negative effects on the progress of the peaceful
social and economic development of all peoples;
(Ç)

The danger of increasing illicit and covert arms trafficking;

5.
Calls игюп all Member States to exercise due restraint in exports
and imports of conventional arms, particularly in situations of tension or
conflict, and to ensure that they have in place an adequate body of laws and
administrative procedures regarding the transfer of arms and to adopt strict
measures for their enforcement;

/...

A/RES/46/36
Page 18

6.
Ехргеввее its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his study on
ways and means of promoting transparency in international transfers of
conventional arms, which aleo addressed the problem of the illicit arms
trade;
7.
RequeatB the Secretary-General to establish and maintain at United
Nations Headquarters in New York a universal and non-discriminatory Register
of Conventional Arms, to include data on international arms transfers as well
as information provided by Member States on military holdings, procurement
through national production and relevant policies, as set out in paragraph 10
below and in accordance with procedures and input requirements initially
'
comprising those set out in the annex to the present resolution and
subsequently incorporating any adjustments to the annex decided upon by the
General Assembly at its forty-seventh session in the light of the
recommendations of the panel referred to in paragraph 8 below;
8.
Aleo reguests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a panel
of governmental technical experts to be nominated by him on the basis of
equitable geographical representation, to elaborate the technical procedures
and to make any adjustments to the annex to the present resolution necessary
for the effective operation of the Register, and to prepare a report on the
modalities for early expansion of the scope of the Register by the addition of
further categories of equipment and inclusion of data on military holdings and
procurement through national production, and to rejrart to the General Assembly
at its forty-seventh session;
9.
Calls upon all Member States to provide annually for the Register
data on imports and exports of arms in accordance with the procedures
established by paragraphs 7 and 8 above;
10.
Invites Member States, pending the expansion of the Register, also
to provide to the Secretary-General, with their annual report on imports and
exports of arms, available background information regarding their military
holdings, procurement through national production and relevant policies, and
requests the Secretary-General to record this material and to make it
available for consultation by Member States at their request;
11.
D e c ides, with a view to future expansion, to keep the scope of and
the participation in the Register under review, and, to this end:
(a)
Invites Member States to provide the Secretary-General with their
views, not later than 30 April 1994, on;
(i)

The operation of the Register during its first two years;

(ii)

The addition of further categories of equipment and the elaboration
of the Register to include military holdings and procurement through
national production;

(b) Reguests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a group of
governmental experts convened in 1994 on the basis of equitable geographical
representation, to prepare a report on the continuing operation of the
Register and its further development, taking into account the work of the
Conference on Disarmament as set forth in paragraphs 12 to 15 below and the
views expressed by Member States, for submission to the General Assembly with
a view to a decision at its forty-ninth session;
/...

A/RES/46/36
Page 19

12.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament to address, as soon as
possible, the question of the interrelated aspects of the excessive and
destabilizing accumulation of arms, including military holdings and
procurement through national production, and to elaborate universal and nondiscriminatory practical means to increase openness and transparency in this
field;
13.
Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to address the problems
of, and the elaboration of practical means to increase, openness and
transparency related to the transfer of high technology with military
applications and to weapons of mass destruction, in accordance with existing
legal instruments;
14.
Invites the Secretary-General to provide to the Conference on
Disarmament all relevant information, including, inter alia, views submitted
to him by Member States and information provided under the United Nations
system for the standardized reporting of military expenditures, as well as on
the work of the Disarmament Commission under its agenda item entitled
"Objective information on military matters";
15.
Further requests the Conference on Disarmzunent to include in its
annual report to the General Assembly a report on its work on this issue;
16.
Invites all Member States, in the meantime, to take measures on a
national, regional and global basis, including within the appropriate forums,
to promote openness and transparency in armaments;
17.
Calls upon all Member States to cooperate at a regional and
subregional level, taking fully into account the specific conditions
prevailing in the region or subregion, with a view to enhancing and
coordinating international efforts aimed at increased openness and
transparency in armaments;
18.
Also invites all Member States to inform the Secretary-General of
their national arms import and export policies, legislation and administrative
procedures, both as regards authorization of arms transfers and prevention of
illicit transfers;
19.
Recniests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its forty-seventh session on progress made in implementing the present
resolution, including relevant information provided by Member States;
20.
Notes that effective implementation of the present resolution will
require an up-to-date database system in the Department for Disarmament
A ffairs of the Secretariat;
21.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session an item entitled "Transparency in armaments".
66th Plenary meeting
9 December 1991

/...

A/RES/46/36
Page 20

ANNEX
Reoister of Conventional Arms
1.
The Register of Conventional Arms ("the Register") shall be
established, with effect from 1 January 1992, and maintained at the
Headquarters of the United Nations in New Yor)c.
2.

Concerning international arms transfers:

(â) Member States are requested to provide data for the Register,
addressed to the Secretary-General, on'the number of items in the following
categories of equipment imported into or exported from their territory;

I.

Battle tan)cB

■

A tracked or wheeled self-propelled armoured fighting vehicle with
high cross-country mobility and a high level of self-protection,
weighing at least 16.5 metric tonnes unladen weight, with a high
muzzle velocity direct fire main gun of at least 75 millimetres
calibre.
II.

Armoured combat vehicles
A tracked or wheeled self-propelled vehicle, with armoured
protection and cross-country capability, either:
(a) designed and
equipped to transport a squad of four or more infantrymen, or
(^) armed with an integral or organic weapon of at least
20 millimetres calibre or an anti-tank missile launcher.

III.

Large calibre artillery svstems
A gun, howitzer, artillery piece combining the characteristics of a
gun and a howitzer, mortar or multiple-launch rocket system, capable
of engaging surface targets by deliyering primarily indirect fire,
with a calibre of 100 millimetres and aboye.

IV.

Combat aircraft
A fixed-wing or yariable-geometry wing aircraft armed and equipped
to engage targets by employing guided missiles, unguided rockets,
bombs, guns, cannons, or other weapons of destruction.

V.

Attack helicopters
A rotary-wing aircraft equipped to employ anti-armour,
air-to-ground, or air-to-air guided weapons and equipped with an
integrated fire control and aiming system for these weapons.

VI.

Warships
A yessel or submarine with a standard displacement of 850
metric tonnes or above, armed or equipped for military use.

VZI.

Missiles or missile avstems
A guided rocket, ballistic or cruise missile capable of delivering a
/...

A/RES/46/36
Page 21

payload to a range of at least 25 kilometres, or a vehicle,
apparatus or device designed or modified for launching such
munitions.
.
(b)
Data on imports provided under the present paragraph shall also
specify the supplying State; data on exports shall also specify the recipient
state and the State of origin if not the exporting State;
(Ç)
Each Member State is requested to provide data on an annual basis by
30 April
each year in respect of imports into and exports from
their
territory in the previous calendar year;
(d)
The first such registration shall take place by 30 April 1993 in
respect of the calendar year 1992;
(e)
State;

The data so provided shall be recorded in respect of each Member

(£) Arms "exports and imports" represent in the present resolution,
including its annex, all forma of arms transfers under terms of grant, credit,
barter or cash.

3.

Concerning other interrelated information:

(a)Member States are
invited also to provide to the Secretary-General
available background information regarding their military holdings,
procurement through national production, and relevant policies;
(b) The information so provided shall be recorded in respect of each
Member State.
4.
The Register shall be open for consultation by representatives of
Member States at any time.
.
5.
In addition, the Secretary-General shall provide annually a
consolidated report to the General Assembly of the data registered, together
with an index of the other interrelated information.
