General Assembly --Thirty-eighth Session

230

------------------------

social conditions and to pay particular attention to overcoming problems of unemployment, public housing,
health care, education and crime and, in that connection,
notes with satisfaction the efforts to revitalize health care
programmes and to discouragc juvenile delinquency, the
measures to improve crime prevention and the action
taken to expand and upgrade school facilities:
13. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue thc
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to thc
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Asscmbly at its thirty-ninth scssion.

3. Requcsts thc administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prcscribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullcst possiblc information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the
expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Rcquests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrustcd to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedurcs. and to report thcreon to the Assembly
at 1ts thirty-ninth session.
86th plenary meeting
7 Decemher /983

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
in Namibia and in ali other Territories under
colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assemhly,
Having examined the chapter ofthe report ofthe Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations 21
and the action taken by the Committee in respect of that
information,
Having a/so examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question, 26
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee to
study the information transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with Article 7 3 e of the Charter and
to take such information fully into account in examining
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling a/so its resolution 3 7/29 of 23 Novembcr
1982, in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Noting the decision of the Government of the United
Kingdom ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland to resume
transmission of information with respect to Anguilla,
under Article 73 e of the Charter, 27
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government under
the terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information
under Article 73 e ofthe Charter with respect to that Territory;

rhc e,'en eral Asscmh/_1·.
Having considcrcd the item entitled "Activities of forcign economic and other interests which are impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Namibia and in ali other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and
racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter ofthe report ofthe Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question, 28
Taking into consideration the relevant chapter of the
rcport of the United Nations Council for Namibia, 29
Having considcred the report ofthe United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, 30 relating to the preparation of a register indicating the profits that transnational corporations derive from their activities in colonial
Territories, submitted in pursuance of General Assembly
resolution 37 /31 of 23 November 1982,
Recalling its rcsolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of I 2 October 19 70, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation ofthe Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation ofthe Declaration, as well as ali other resolutions of the United Nations
relating to the itcm,
Rea_tfirming the solemn obligation of the administering
Powers under thc Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational
advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under
their administration and to protect the human and natural
resources of thosc Territories against abuses,
Taking into account the relevant provisions ofthe Paris
Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia, 31 adopted at the International Conference in

86th plenary meeting
7 Decemher 1983

38/49.

25 /bid., chap. VII.
26 N38!477.

27 See Officia/ Record., of the <ieneral Assemhh·, Th,rtv-ei¡;hth Se.rnon,

su¡¡iement No. 23 (A/38/23). chap. Vil, para. 8
!bid., chap. V.

38/50.

29 /bid., Supp/emcnr V,1 :'4 (A/38124), part lwo, chap. IV.
lO A/381444. annex.
\1 Repon of the lntcrnational Conferen,·e ,n Support of the Strugg/e o( th,•
Vamihian l'cop/efi,r lndepcndcnce, Pari.1·. :,5.:,9 .·1pnl /983 (Al('ONF.1201
11). paras. 165-195 and 220-242.
