S/2003/550

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 May 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 30 April 2003 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to refer to your letter of 16 April 2003 (S/2003/431),
attaching for the consideration of the members of the Security Council a letter dated
26 March 2003 from the President of the International Tribunal for Rwanda, Judge
Navanethem Pillay. In her letter, President Pillay requests extensions of the term of
office of four non-elected permanent Judges of the International Tribunal in order to
allow them to dispose of a number of ongoing cases.
The letter has been carefully considered by the members of the Security
Council. As a result, I have been asked to convey to Judge Pillay, through you, the
views of the members of the Security Council on the proposals in her letter.
While the members of the Security Council shared the view that the Statute of
the International Tribunal and Security Council precedents allow in principle the
endorsement of requested extensions of the terms of office of the Judges, in order to
authorize them to finish any cases which they may have begun, there was also the
view that each request raises a different set of legal and practical issues.
With regard to the request of Judge Pavel Dolenc, there was general agreement
that the requested extension could be endorsed by the Security Council as referred to
in your letter.
In relation to Judge Yakov Arkadyevich Ostrovsky, a national of the Russian
Federation, the members of the Security Council were aware that, on 31 January
2003, the General Assembly elected Judge Serguei Aleckseievich Egorov, a national
of the Russian Federation, as a permanent Judge of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda for a four-year term of office commencing 25 May 2003. The members of
the Security Council shared the view that the requested extension of the term of
office of Judge Ostrovsky, as referred to in your letter, to finish the Cyangugu case
could be endorsed on the understanding that the unique circumstances of such
request justifies a temporal and limited exception of article 11, paragraph 1, of the
Statute of the Tribunal.
With regard to President Pillay’s request that the term of office of Judge
Winston Churchill Maqutu be extended so that he might finish the Kajelijeli,
Kamuhanda and Butare cases, the members of the Security Council concluded that it
is desirable that Judge Maqutu finish the Kajelijeli and Kamuhanda cases, scheduled
to be completed in December 2003. In relation to the Butare case, the members of
the Security Council are of the view that the requested extension until December

03-36309 (E)

200503

*0336309*

S/2003/550

2005 was far too long. The Security Council members noted that the precedents in
this area did not warrant an extension of the term of office beyond one year.
Therefore, the members were not inclined to endorse this request. In this connection,
the members of the Security Council would appreciate from Judge Pillay
confirmation that it would indeed be necessary to begin again the Butare case, and if
so, the financial and practical consequences of the transfer of the Butare case to a
differently constituted Trial Chamber, including the implications for the Tribunal’s
completion strategy.
With regard to Judge Pillay’s request for the extension of her term of office
until the completion of the Media case, the members of the Security Council
concluded that this raised a different set of issues that would require further
clarification before the Council endorsed her request. The members of the Security
Council were aware that, on 4 February 2003, she was elected a Judge of the
International Criminal Court by the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court and that her term of office commenced on
11 March 2003. It was the view of the members that before the Council proceeds to
consider her particular situation, the members would appreciate seeing a written
undertaking from her to be fully available as Judge of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda and that she would not be engaged in any substantive work as a Judge of
the International Criminal Court during the period of time that would be required for
her to complete the Media case.
Additionally, I wish to inform you that the members of the Security Council
have asked me to seek the view and advice of the President of the International
Criminal Court on this specific issue.
Before the Security Council takes appropriate action on the requests of
extensions of the terms of office of the four non-elected permanent judges of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda as contained in your letter dated 16 April 2003,
the members of the Security Council would appreciate clarification from President
Pillay on the above-mentioned issues.
Once the Security Council takes appropriate action on such requests, its
members would be grateful to receive quarterly reports on the progress of the cases
referred to in your letter of 16 April 2003.
Finally, the Council members have asked me to express to President Pillay and
her colleagues their continued support for the International Tribunal and their
appreciation for the work which it is doing.
(Signed) Adolfo Aguilar Zinser
President of the Security Council

2
