S/2004/225

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 March 2004
English
Original: English/French

Letter dated 18 March 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to inform you that today I received a letter from Mr.
Mohammed Bahr Al-Uloom, Interim President of the Iraqi Governing Council (see
annex II), and a letter from Mr. L. Paul Bremer, Administrator of the Coalition
Provisional Authority (see annex IV), both of which were dated 17 March 2004. The
letters which I sent in reply to those communications are reproduced in annexes I
and III to this letter.
You will note that the Governing Council has requested the assistance of the
United Nations in the formation of an interim Iraqi government, to which
sovereignty will be transferred on 30 June 2004, as well as in the preparations for
direct elections to be held before the end of January 2005.
You will also note that the Coalition Provisional Authority is fully supportive
of the Governing Council’s request, and has assured me that it will cooperate closely
with the United Nations and the Governing Council to provide the security required
for the United Nations to carry out these missions.
It is my intention, therefore, in line with the mandates authorized by the
Security Council, and in keeping with the commitment of the United Nations to
assist the people of Iraq, as they request, to ask my Special Adviser, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, and his team, as well as an electoral assistance team, to return to Iraq as
soon as possible.
The success of their efforts will, of course, require the full support and
assistance of the members of the Security Council.
I should be grateful if you could bring this letter and its annexes to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-27758 (E)

190304

190304

*
0
4
2
7
7
5
8
*

S/2004/225

Annex I
[Original: English]

Letter dated 18 March 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the Interim President of the Iraqi Governing Council
I would like to thank you for your letter dated 17 March 2004, which I
received today. I would also like to thank you for sending me a copy of the
Transitional Administrative Law.
I have taken note of the Governing Council’s request for the United Nations to
lend advice and assistance in the formation of an interim Iraqi government, to which
sovereignty will be transferred on 30 June 2004, as well as in the preparations for
direct elections to be held before the end of January 2005.
The United Nations remains committed to doing everything within its capacity
to assist the people of Iraq, when and as they request. I have therefore asked my
Special Adviser, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and his team, as well as an electoral
assistance team, to return to Iraq as soon as possible, in order to lend the advice and
assistance you have requested.
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my thanks, in advance, to the
Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority for providing the
security required for the United Nations to carry out these missions.
I am concurrently informing the members of the United Nations Security
Council of my intention and am copying this exchange of letters to its President.

(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2004/225

Annex II
[Original: Arabic]

Letter dated 17 March 2004 from the Interim President of the
Iraqi Governing Council addressed to the Secretary-General
The Governing Council is pleased to send you a copy of the Transitional
Administrative Law of the Iraqi State, which provides a foundation for Iraq’s
democracy and paves the way to a permanent constitution. The Law was approved
by the Governing Council unanimously and signed on Monday, 8 March 2004.
This Law represents an important step towards the establishment of a
democratic, pluralist, federal system. It safeguards basic human rights, which has
been a goal of the Iraqi people for years.
We continue to believe that the United Nations must play an important role in
Iraq. We thank you, on behalf of the Iraqi people, for sending the United Nations
delegation led by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi to Iraq and for the efforts it exerted. The
Governing Council appreciates the advice and assistance of the United Nations as
we look to the next challenge in the political transition: the formation of an interim
Iraqi government to which sovereignty will be transferred on 30 June 2004. We
welcome United Nations consultation in the efforts we are exerting in the broad
national dialogue regarding the shape and scope of this interim government.
We also look forward to United Nations assistance in providing advice and
observations needed to ensure that direct elections are held before the end of
January 2005. The experience and capability of the United Nations will be
invaluable both in the creation of the infrastructure and in the conduct of the
elections.
Time is of the essence to ensure the credible national direct elections take
place as scheduled in the Transitional Administrative Law of the Iraqi State.
Please accept our deepest appreciation for the past efforts of the United
Nations. We hope that the United Nations will be able to return to Iraq as soon as
possible.
(Signed) Mohammed Bahr Al-Uloom
President, Governing Council

3

S/2004/225

Annex III
Letter dated 18 March 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the Administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority
I would like to thank you for your letter dated 17 March 2004, which I
received today.
I have taken note that the Coalition Provisional Authority is fully supportive of
the Governing Council’s request for the United Nations to lend advice and
assistance in the formation of an interim Iraqi government, to which sovereignty
will be transferred on 30 June 2004, as well as in the preparations for direct
elections to be held before the end of January 2005.
The United Nations remains committed to doing everything within its capacity
to assist the people of Iraq, when and as they request. I have therefore asked my
Special Adviser, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and his team, as well as an electoral
assistance team, to return to Iraq as soon as possible, in order to lend the advice and
assistance that has been requested. They will be in contact with you in the coming
days to discuss the details of their arrival.
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my thanks to the Coalition
Provisional Authority, in advance, for providing for their security and other logistics
support.
I am concurrently informing the members of the United Nations Security
Council of my intention and am copying this exchange of letters to its President.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

4

S/2004/225

Annex IV
Letter dated 17 March 2004 from the Administrator of the
Coalition Provisional Authority addressed to the
Secretary-General
Thank you for sending the fact-finding mission led by Mr. Brahimi to Iraq last
month. The Coalition Provisional Authority is deeply grateful for the willingness of
the United Nations to respond so quickly to the Iraqi Governing Council’s request
for assistance.
The Governing Council took an important step towards the establishment of an
independent, democratic state with the adoption of the Transitional Administrative
Law on 8 March 2004. In a letter dated 17 March addressed to you, it has now
invited the United Nations to return to Iraq urgently to assist with both the formation
of the interim government and in the preparations for national direct elections. The
Coalition Provisional Authority also believes that the United Nations has a
significant role to play in assisting Iraq as it continues with this process.
We hope that Mr. Brahimi and his team will be able to return to Iraq as soon as
possible to help build consensus among Iraqis on the powers, structure and
composition of the interim government and the process for its establishment. We
also welcome the advice and assistance of the United Nations in the creation of the
electoral infrastructure and hope that the United Nations elections experts will arrive
in Iraq early in the week of 21 March.
Let me assure you that we will cooperate closely with the United Nations and
the Governing Council to provide the security required for the United Nations to
carry out these missions.
We greatly value the commitment of the United Nations to assisting the Iraqi
people. I look forward to the return of the United Nations to Iraq as soon as
possible.
(Signed) L. Paul Bremer III
Administrator, Coalition Provisional Authority

5
