A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/250
13 July 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 36
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/52/L.53/Rev.2 and Add.1)]
52/250. Participation of Palestine in the work of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, in which, inter alia, it recommended the
partition of Palestine into a Jewish State and an Arab State, with Jerusalem as a corpus separatum,
Recalling also its resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, by which it granted observer status
to the Palestine Liberation Organization,
Recalling further its resolution 43/160 A of 9 December 1988, adopted under the item entitled
"Observer status of national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or
by the League of Arab States", in which it decided that the Palestine Liberation Organization was entitled
to have its communications issued and circulated as official documents of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 43/177 of 15 December 1988, in which it acknowledged the proclamation of
the State of Palestine by the Palestine National Council on 15 November 1988 and decided that the
designation "Palestine" should be used in place of the designation "Palestine Liberation Organization" in
the United Nations system,
Recalling also its resolutions 49/12 A of 9 November 1994 and 49/12 B of 24 May 1995, through
which, inter alia, arrangements for the special commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the
occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations, in addition to applying to all Member and
observer States, were also applied to Palestine, in its capacity as observer, including in the organizing
process of the list of speakers for the commemorative meeting,
98-77311

/...

A/RES/52/250
Page 2

Recalling further that Palestine enjoys full membership in the Group of Asian States and the
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia,
Aware that Palestine is a full member of the League of Arab States, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and the Group of 77 and China,
Aware also that general democratic Palestinian elections were held on 20 January 1996 and that the
Palestinian Authority was established on part of the occupied Palestinian territory,
Desirous of contributing to the achievement of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, thus
attaining a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
1. Decides to confer upon Palestine, in its capacity as observer, and as contained in the annex to
the present resolution, additional rights and privileges of participation in the sessions and work of the
General Assembly and the international conferences convened under the auspices of the Assembly or other
organs of the United Nations, as well as in United Nations conferences;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly, within the current session, about
the implementation of the modalities annexed to the present resolution.
89th plenary meeting
7 July 1998
ANNEX
The additional rights and privileges of participation of Palestine shall be effected through the
following modalities, without prejudice to the existing rights and privileges:
1.

The right to participate in the general debate of the General Assembly.

2. Without prejudice to the priority of Member States, Palestine shall have the right of inscription
on the list of speakers under agenda items other than Palestinian and Middle East issues at any plenary
meeting of the General Assembly, after the last Member State inscribed on the list of that meeting.
3.

The right of reply.

4. The right to raise points of order related to the proceedings on Palestinian and Middle East
issues, provided that the right to raise such a point of order shall not include the right to challenge the
decision of the presiding officer.
5. The right to co-sponsor draft resolutions and decisions on Palestinian and Middle East issues.
Such draft resolutions and decisions shall be put to a vote only upon request from a Member State.
6. The right to make interventions, with a precursory explanation or the recall of relevant General
Assembly resolutions being made only once by the President of the General Assembly at the start of each
session of the Assembly.

/...

A/RES/52/250
Page 3

7. Seating for Palestine shall be arranged immediately after non-member States and before the other
observers; and with the allocation of six seats in the General Assembly Hall.
8.

Palestine shall not have the right to vote or to put forward candidates.
