S/2012/150

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 March 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 9 March 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the attached letter dated 6 March 2012, from the
Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Anders Fogh
Rasmussen, forwarding a report on the operations of the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan, covering the period from 1 November 2011 to
31 January 2012 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its attachment to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-26115 (E) 160312

*1226115*

S/2012/150

Annex
Letter dated 6 March 2012 from the Secretary General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1943 (2010),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from 1 November 2011 to 31 January 2012 (see enclosure). I
would appreciate it if you would make this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Anders Fogh Rasmussen

2

12-26115

S/2012/150

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
This report, pursuant to the request in Security Council resolutions 1386
(2001) and 1943 (2010), informs the United Nations on the progress of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), covering the period from
1 November 2011 to 31 January 2012. As at 9 January 2012, total ISAF strength
stood at 130,236 personnel provided by all 28 NATO countries and 22 non-NATO
countries. Bahrain became the fiftieth ISAF troop-contributing country and
operational partner to ISAF in December 2011. NATO and ISAF reiterate their
invitation to additional United Nations Members to support this United Nationsmandated mission by providing advisers and trainers for the Afghan National
Security Forces as well as increasing their support for the civilian sectors of
governance and development.
2.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF continued to assist the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions. From 1 November 2011 to 31 January 2012, ISAF suffered 1,432
casualties, including 76 killed in action, 876 wounded in action and 11 non-battlerelated deaths.
3.
During this reporting period, enemy-initiated attacks continued to trend
downwards and the nationwide change was 9 per cent lower in 2011 when compared
to 2010. However, in the eastern part of the country, the enemy-initiated attacks
increased, owing primarily to deliberate operations of ISAF and the Afghan security
forces to push the insurgency further beyond the population centres. The operational
effectiveness of the Afghan security forces improved from the previous quarter and
is advancing at a pace acceptable to sustain transition. The number of partnered and
Afghan-led operations continued to increase, with the Afghan security forces
becoming more capable of conducting security operations across the country.
According to the recent Asia Foundation survey, the Afghan public is becoming
increasingly confident in the ability of its forces to provide for its security. The
security incidents this quarter were marked by the suicide attacks in Kabul and
Mazar-e-Sharif on 6 December 2011, which caused a large number of civilian
casualties by targeting Shia Muslims commemorating the holiday of Ashura.
4.

Additional noteworthy events for this reporting period:

(a) From 16 to 19 November, the consultative Loya Jirga was conducted in
Kabul. The Afghan National Security Forces successfully managed the security
arrangements with minimal support from ISAF. In the opening speech, President
Karzai underlined the necessity of continued international military and economic
support beyond 2014, while also asserting Afghan sovereignty.
(b) On 26 November, while conducting clearance of a suspected insurgent
training camp close to the Pakistan border, ISAF and Afghan security forces units
came under fire from the overlooking ridgeline in Pakistan. Owing to a series of
miscommunications, Pakistani military positions were mistakenly engaged by ISAF
close air support. The incident resulted in the destruction of two border posts, and
26 Pakistani soldiers were killed in action. As a result of the close border incident, a

12-26115

3

S/2012/150

series of prevention and mitigation measures have been put in place to prevent a
similar incident from occurring. Pakistan authorities have since closed the border
crossing points for ISAF logistical transports.
(c) On 27 November, the second tranche of areas to enter transition was
announced by President Karzai. The second tranche comprises a further 18 areas.
Implementation of the second tranche began in Parwan Province on 1 December
2011 and is now under way in all tranche 2 areas, except for Sari Pul Province
(Regional Command North), which has been postponed.
(d) On 5 January, President Karzai ordered the Constitutional Oversight
Commission to complete the transfer of the United States-run detention facility in
Parwan to Afghan authorities within a month. The President’s decision came after
the Commission reported violations of the Afghan Constitution, which provides that
no foreign countries can maintain and run prisons in Afghanistan, as well as of the
Afghan Criminal Code. In February 2012, President Karzai extended the timeline to
9 March 2012.
(e) On 20 January, soldiers from a French operational mentoring and liaison
team in Regional Command East, Kapisa Province, were engaged by an Afghan
National Army soldier, resulting in 4 ISAF soldiers killed in action and 14 wounded
in action (all casualties French). ISAF troop-contributing countries have expressed
strong concerns about the loss of life and consequences of the incidents that have
involved Afghan security forces personnel attacking ISAF troops, and have asked
the Afghan authorities to improve their screening and vetting of recruits.
Security situation
5.
Enemy-initiated attacks a have declined when compared to the same quarter of
2010/11. Insurgent efforts to maintain operations into the winter with high-profile
attacks and assassinations have been largely ineffective. The insurgency failed to
achieve this objective, owing to a combination of persistent Afghan and ISAF
conventional and special forces operations, ongoing clear, hold and build operations,
reintegration efforts, and the expansion of local defence initiatives.

__________________
a Enemy-initiated attacks comprise enemy action (enemy-initiated direct fire, indirect fire,

surface-to-air fire) and explosive hazard events, including executed attacks only (improvised
explosive device explosions/mine strikes).

4

12-26115

S/2012/150

6.
Insurgents continue to rely on improvised explosive devices as the principal
means to execute their campaign. During the reporting period, the insurgency was
accountable for 84 per cent of civilian casualties, of which 60 per cent were caused
by the indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices. More than half of the
improvised explosive devices and mines were found and cleared rather than
detonated.
7.

Regionally, the security situation is as follows:

(a) Regional Command Southwest. In Regional Command Southwest,
enemy-initiated attacks in 2011 were 29 per cent lower than in 2010. Deliberate
combined team operations maintained pressure on insurgents during the beginning
of the winter season, which helped to reduce insurgent capacity. Improved
governance from the Provincial Governor, Gulab Mangal, and combined team
efforts have strengthened and expanded the security bubble centred on Lashkar Gah.
Operations continue in northern and southern Helmand to disrupt insurgent
strongholds. The small ISAF force reductions during the final quarter of 2011 have
not affected operations, but future significant reductions may well test the
capabilities of the Afghan security forces, who to date have performed well.

(b) Regional Command South. The improving capability of the Afghan
security forces and the success of combined team operations maintained pressure on
insurgents and limited their ability to operate. A small increase in the number of
security incidents during the reporting period and recent resurgence in suicide
attacks in the Kandahar area reiterates the importance of the south to the insurgency.
Insurgents increasingly targeted Afghan security forces and Government officials in
an effort to regain influence over the population.

12-26115

5

S/2012/150

(c) Regional Command East. Security incidents in Regional Command
East have followed a general winter decline, but persisted at higher levels than
previously seen and are spread across the Regional Command because of a
geographically diverse enemy. Supplies and fighters originating in Pakistan and
moving across the border have enabled the insurgents in the region to maintain their
operational capability and tempo. Increased pressure from ISAF and the Afghan
security forces, coupled with Afghan local security initiatives, are working to
disrupt these supply routes and therefore hamper insurgent operations. Strained
relations during the reporting period between ISAF/Government of Afghanistan and
Pakistan underline the importance of cooperation for security and stability in the
border region.

(d) Regional Command North. Insurgent networks in the north still
represent a threat to combined team forces and the Government of Afghanistan, but
to a smaller degree than in the other Regional Commands. Actual numbers of
security incidents decreased during the last quarter, demonstrating the insurgents’
inability to transform their rhetoric into actions. Though a positive attitude towards
security forces has been reported among the populace, corruption within those
representing the Government remains of great concern.

6

12-26115

S/2012/150

(e) Regional Command West. The success of combined team operations
and improved popular support towards both the Government of Afghanistan and
ISAF have resulted in an overall decrease in the number of security incidents. These
contributing factors have resulted in the degradation of both the morale and
capabilities of the insurgents in Regional Command West. Enemy-initiated attacks
have remained largely uncoordinated, ineffective and will likely decrease
throughout the winter until the 2012 fighting season begins.

(f) Regional Command Capital. The improved capabilities of the Afghan
security forces, significant cache finds, the expansion of the Kabul security zone
and coalition forces operations in Regional Command East have limited the
effectiveness of insurgent activities in the capital, culminating in a virtual lack of
insurgent kinetic activity in January 2012. Although security incidents are most
likely to remain stable in the next quarter, insurgents will intermittently attempt to
challenge the perception of security in Kabul Province as a kinetic incident in the
capital is likely to garner significant media attention.

12-26115

7

S/2012/150

Afghan National Security Forces
8.
The development of the Afghan National Security Forces is on track in terms
of both size and quality. The forces are on a glide path to meet the strength goals of
October 2012, while command and control capacities continue to be built up and
improved. One of the main efforts of ISAF is towards further professionalization of
the forces. Substantial progress in reliability and sustainability of the Afghan
National Army and the Afghan National Police has been achieved.
9.
In 2011, the Afghan security forces added 57,000 soldiers and police to their
numbers. Currently, almost 40 per cent of conventional and special forces operations
are led by Afghan forces, and approximately 90 per cent of the operations are
partnered with ISAF.
10. Strong recruitment has allowed the Afghan forces to remain on track towards
the next strength target of 352,000 by October 2012. In addition to growing combat
forces, the Afghan security ministries made substantial progress in increasing the
quality of their forces. With the support and advice of the Coalition, the Afghan
security force units are becoming more capable and have improved their ability to
conduct autonomous operations in the field. Efforts are being made to establish
proficient headquarters at national and regional levels and to improve planning and
coordination capacity. In addition, the Afghan forces are progressively assuming
more responsibility for self-training.
11. The establishment of training institutions is close to completion and fosters the
progressive professionalization of the Afghan National Army and the Afghan
National Police. The development of the security forces continues to focus on five
key areas: training Afghan trainers and instructors; accelerating leader development;
building literacy and vocational skills; inculcating an ethos of stewardship; and
developing enduring institutions, systems and enablers. Additional trainers and
advisers from the international community are still required to accelerate
professionalization further and help to create effective and sustainable Afghan
security forces. Furthermore, ISAF and the Government of Afghanistan are now
reinforcing the vetting process for the security forces to improve safety for ISAF
embedded personnel and prevent a deterioration of confidence between international
trainers and advisers and their Afghan counterparts.

8

12-26115

S/2012/150

Afghan National Army
12. The Afghan National Army currently constitutes the most robust and selfsufficient organization in the Afghan security forces. The Afghan Army has entered
the last fielding phase, the goal of which is to reinforce the sustainability of a more
balanced professional force able to assume the security lead. To this end, combat
support and combat service support units, along with corps and brigade troops b are
being created and trained. Fielding of these new enabling units should be completed
by the end of 2013. Furthermore, a more autonomous logistics branch continues to
be developed. Finally, significant efforts are being made to finalize the
establishment of a complete training institution allowing the Afghans to
professionalize the force by themselves. An Afghan Army training command was set
up to this end and 12 army branch schools permanently work at full capacity with
more than 20,000 trainees. The overall training level for the army is increasing
slowly but steadily.
13. The Afghan National Army remains on track to achieve its growth target of
195,000 by October 2012. Its current strength is around 184,000 soldiers. Army
recruiting remains strong and ethnically balanced, and gender equity is permanently
promoted by ISAF through the NATO Training Mission — Afghanistan. c The
percentage of all Afghan Army kandaks (battalions) rated “effective with advisers”
or higher increased to 44 per cent during this reporting period. As mentioned in the
previous reports, the attrition rates are decreasing slowly but remain high and
continue to generate additional recruitment and training costs. A comprehensive
plan, including midterm and long-term solutions, has been developed in partnership
with Afghan leaders to address this persistent issue.
14. Regarding the fielded Afghan Army, the issues to be solved remain leadership
skills, high attrition, staff planning, tactical coordination and logistics.
Afghan Air Force
15. The development of the Afghan Air Force is under way and, in addition to the
personnel recruitment and professionalization highlighted in the previous reports,
infrastructure building has made significant process. New facilities have been
delivered in support of a self-sustaining force. Important investments are foreseen to
improve Air Force training sites and infrastructure, which are critical conditions for
sound development and self-sustainability. The Afghan Air Force still faces some
major challenges, with an important corruption level and recruiting issues, in
particular in the ability to obtain qualified recruits.
16. Afghan Air Force strength reached 5,172 personnel in December 2011 and the
attrition rates are lower than in the Army and national police. A total of 82 aircraft
are in service within the Air Force, including 42 helicopters, and there are plans to
reach up to 145 aircraft in total when the Air Force is fully fielded in 2016.
International support remains critical for Air Force development, training and
support to autonomously led Afghan security force operations.
__________________
b Military police companies, military intelligence units, engineer battalions, signal battalions,

route clearance companies, and mobile strike force battalions.
c There are currently 333 women serving in the Afghan National Army, nearly all of them in

Kabul.

12-26115

9

S/2012/150

Afghan National Police
17. Overall, the Afghan National Police is currently on track for the October 2012
target. Its current strength is around 144,000 police officers. Authorized manning for
both Afghan uniformed police and Afghan Border Police patrolmen is full;
recruiting has been adjusted to focus on recruiting direct entry non-commissioned
officers and to balance growth with training of non-commissioned officers and new
patrolmen. The focus on training continues as the training seat capacity surpassed
15,000 and the training fill rate stood at around 65 per cent.
18. The personnel establishment for 2011 provides over 1,500 additional female
billets. There are currently 1,244 women serving in the Afghan National Police. The
recruitment of women is lagging behind for a variety of reasons, mainly
commanders’ reluctance to accept female officers.
19. The operational effectiveness of the Afghan National Police showed
remarkable progress within the force. The report of December 2011 is the first one
in which any police units were rated “independent with advisers”. For the uniformed
police, 40 per cent of units were rated “effective with advisers” or higher, while for
the Afghan Border Police and the Afghan Civil Order Police, the rates were 53 per
cent and 57 per cent, respectively.
Institutional capacity
20. The security ministries, with the assistance of the NATO Training Mission, are
sustaining their continuous effort to build capability to generate and sustain the
Afghan security forces. The Ministry of Defence and the General Staff still require
assistance to accomplish their mission. During the reporting period, the Ministry of
Defence confirmed an improved capability at the managerial level as demonstrated
by the effective management of the initiation of transition tranche 2.
21. The Ministry of the Interior still requires significant assistance and is expected
to progress to requiring only some assistance by the end of 2012. Key issues
remaining include shortcomings in filling civilian positions because of the lack of
civil service pay and grade reform.
Private security companies/Afghan Public Protection Force
22. Nine months after the signature of the bridging strategy (March 2011), the
Afghan Public Protection Force remains largely non-existent. The strategy calls for
the dissolution of private security companies conducting development and convoy
protection by 20 March 2012 and those conducting protection of ISAF bases and
construction by 20 March 2013. The Joint Programme Executive Office has been
established to support the transition from private security companies and to mentor
the Public Protection Force, building adequate capability to support the bridging
strategy. The Office could thus encourage development implementing partners to
take the decision to continue development and infrastructure works. In order to
accelerate the development of a business capability, command and control structure,
and guard training capacity, several private security companies are mutating into
risk management companies as a stopgap solution. The risk management companies
will assist with management, oversight, training and operational standards until the
Public Protection Force is fully capable of managing security operations. Assistance
from the ministerial partners of the Public Protection Force (timely issuing of visas

10

12-26115

S/2012/150

by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, work permits from the Ministry of Labour,
communication licences from the Ministry of Communication, armoured vehicle
licences from the Ministry of the Interior to ensure no gap in security) is still critical
to achieve President Karzai’s deadline.
Civilian casualties
23. The protection of the Afghan population remains the highest priority for ISAF
and every civilian casualty is detrimental to the ISAF mission. Among several
initiatives, ISAF has dedicated special attention to the understanding and prevention
of events that could result in civilian casualties. New tactical directives were issued
this quarter and the entire ISAF force was retrained on them. The ISAF Deputy
Commander became Chair of a new ISAF Civilian Casualties Avoidance and
Mitigation Board to provide constant senior staff oversight of this issue. The
Commander of ISAF held a conference at ISAF headquarters on 17 and 18 January
2012, in order to gather lessons learned from NATO operations in Libya,
synchronize commanders’ understanding of the ISAF Commander’s Tactical
Directive (Rev.4), and evolve future air support to partnered and non-partnered
Afghan National Security Force units from a combat aviator’s perspective.
24. Reporting this quarter indicates that the insurgents are responsible for 84 per
cent of overall incidents relating to civilian casualties, which represents an increase
of 7 per cent. The total number of civilian casualties is down by 19 per cent when
compared to the previous reporting period. ISAF actions were attributed to only
6 per cent of all civilian casualty-related incidents, which is representative of the
continued decreasing trend when compared to previous reports. December 2011
represents the lowest number of ISAF-caused civilian casualties since accurate
record-keeping began in January 2009. It remains very apparent that the insurgency
can still exploit and manipulate civilian casualty events to their advantage, since
ISAF is perceived by the Afghan population to be accountable for all incidents
where casualties occur. The figures reported in the chart reflect incidents of conflictrelated civilian casualties (deaths and wounded) that have been confirmed through
investigation to have been caused by either ISAF or insurgents. The data reported
here is consistent with ISAF policy, which directs that all credible allegations of
civilian casualties be reviewed.

12-26115

11

S/2012/150

Counter-narcotics
25. Afghan security forces, with the support of their ISAF partners, seized a record
amount of narcotics and precursor chemicals in 2011, especially morphine, well in
excess of the total seized in 2010. While disruption to the trade is significant,
operations are not having a long-term impact on narcotics networks, as they are able
to adapt and move, returning to pre-operational levels of activities once operations
are complete.
26. Initial indications show opium cultivation decreasing in areas of better
security. Near-record high opium prices drove farmers to plant poppy in large
numbers, including in new areas where cultivation had previously been financially
prohibitive. Cultivation has also migrated to more remote areas with limited security
and small Coalition footprints as a result of successful operations in 2011.
27. Programmes to prepare Afghan security forces and improve capabilities at all
levels are vital to ensure that Afghanistan is able to sustain counter-narcotics
operations post-transition. ISAF will continue to provide support to Government
counter-narcotics programmes and operations in order to disrupt, neutralize and
influence the narcotics industry and its funding of the insurgency in Afghanistan.
ISAF will continue to synchronize operations to the poppy cultivation cycle, in
order to maximize disruptive effects and further support this aim.
Governance
28. ISAF continues to provide support to Afghan-led governance efforts,
particularly in key areas of transition, reintegration, counter-corruption and rule of
law improvement.
Transition
29. The implementation of tranche 2 is now under way. The Government
continued to work jointly with NATO on the implementation of tranche 1 and 2
areas of transition as well as the planning for tranche 3. With tranche 2 now started,
roughly 50 per cent of the Afghan population is in an area where security has been
shifted to Afghan lead. ISAF continues to support the Afghan security forces in
transition areas through various levels of oversight, training and provision of key
enabler capabilities. The Joint Afghan-NATO Inteqal Board (JANIB) has endorsed
the security, governance and development, strategic communication, and Provincial
Reconstruction Team evolution components of all the transition implementation
plans for tranche 2 areas. Transition ceremonies, organized and led by the Transition
Coordination Commission, are now under way in all tranche 2 areas, except for Sari
Pul Province in Regional Command North, which has been postponed. Transition
implementation will be held off until Afghan processes have time to resolve the
issues. United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
Anti-corruption
30. A NATO building integrity training team visited Kabul from 2 to 15 December.
The team delivered a defence leadership in building integrity course to 45 students
at the Afghan Police College followed by a building integrity train the trainers
course for 12 students at the National Military Academy. The team then mentored
Afghan trainers as they delivered a defence leadership in building integrity course to

12

12-26115

S/2012/150

35 students at the National Military Academy. This is the first time that Afghan
trainers have delivered building integrity training and is a significant milestone in
the implementation of the programme. With Task Force Shafafiyat (transparency),
ISAF has been supporting Government efforts to reduce corruption in the
government.
31. The NATO Public Affairs Conference on Afghanistan was held in Dubai on
10 December 2011. Around 100 spokespersons and press officers from NATO, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the European Union and ISAF
headquarters and key Afghan Government spokespersons and media representatives
attended the Conference. In addition, the Afghan Government Media and
Information Centre undertook to host a workshop in Kabul for communicators in the
capital to further explore ways of increasing the Afghan voice in all
communications.
Support to rule of law development
32. Through the NATO Rule of Law Field Support Mission, ISAF is providing
liaison and field capabilities to assist the Government and international civilian
experts in improving capacity. The Support Mission focuses its efforts on helping
the Government to expand rule of law outreach into key provinces and districts.
Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme
33. Afghan-led reconciliation and reintegration efforts met with mixed success
over the past few months. Reintegration continued to show steady incremental
progress as small groups of Taliban entered the process over the quarter, particularly
in Regional Commands North and West. ISAF is actively supporting its Afghan
partners’ efforts to accelerate reintegration, in an effort to make it an increasingly
attractive alternative for insurgents. As at the end of January, the Afghan Peace and
Reintegration Programme had formally reintegrated a total of 3,028 insurgents. This
represents an increase of around 300 reintegrated persons over the previous quarter.
Development
34. As the link between security, governance and development, the Provincial
Reconstruction Teams in Afghanistan will gradually change focus from direct
delivery of services to technical assistance and capacity-building, including
improvement of Afghan national and subnational governance institution linkages.
Provincial Reconstruction Teams will hand over their functions to either the Afghan
local administrations, the private sector or other stakeholders, such as
non-governmental organizations, national consulates and aid agencies. The
evolution of the Teams will lead to an ultimate dissolution scheduled by the end of
2014. The office of the NATO senior civilian representative, the lead for Provincial
Reconstruction Team evolution, and ISAF headquarters have produced and
disseminated assistance documents and guidance, a Provincial Reconstruction Team
Evolution Planning Toolkit and “Guidance to JANIB transition plans” to help troopcontributing countries to identify Provincial Reconstruction Team evolution
dependencies and how to hand off activities. As part of transition implementation
plans, evolution plans for tranches 1 and 2 were approved by JANIB and their
preparation for the remaining provinces is ongoing.

12-26115

13

S/2012/150

Children affected by armed conflict
35. The North Atlantic Council met on 22 February 2012 with its ISAF partners to
discuss the issue of children affected by armed conflict and the ongoing cooperation
between NATO and the United Nations on this issue. The Under-Secretary-General
and Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Radhika
Coomaraswamy, shared her views via videoconference. The North Atlantic Council
agreed on a series of additional concrete and practical steps to be taken, including
the development of guidelines for strategic commanders and a review of the NATO
policy on contractor support to operations to ensure that NATO does not do business
with contractors using child labour. Specific reporting on children affected by armed
conflict will be included in future NATO quarterly reports to the United Nations on
ISAF operations. NATO also appointed a high-level focal point on children affected
by armed conflict to further interact with the United Nations on this topic.

14

12-26115
