S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4898

th meeting
Tuesday, 20 January 2004, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Alvear Valenzuela/Mr. Muñoz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Chile)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Benmehidi
Mrs. Bento
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Cardoso
Ms. Jiang Ning
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Thuemmel
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Nikiforov
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Lake
Mr. Olson

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2003/1053)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-21364 (E)

*
0
4
2
1
3
6
4
*

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.40 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Kenya, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
If there is no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the representative of Kenya to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
I wish to remind all speakers of what I indicated
at the morning session, in other words, that they limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. In addition, I will not be individually
inviting speakers to take seats at the table, and inviting
them to resume their seats on the side. When a speaker
is taking the floor, the conference officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table. I thank you for
your understanding and cooperation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list under rule
37 is the representative of Israel. I now give him the
floor.
Mr. Mekel (Israel): Madam President, at the
outset, please allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of January
and to express our satisfaction with your efforts in
initializing this debate. We would also like to extend
our congratulations to your predecessor and to the
newly elected members of the Council.
In spite of numerous developments, aptly detailed
in the report of the Secretary General (S/2003/1053) on
children and armed conflict, the general situation for
children remains grave and unacceptable. Placing
children on the front lines as active participants in
violence, as aggressors or as victims, has dire shortterm and long-term consequences for children, for the

2

societies they live in and for the hopes and dreams of a
stable peace.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
contains shocking information about the abuse and
harm to which children continue to be subjected. We
cannot allow ourselves to be desensitized to it.
Unfortunately, many of the gains described in the
report relate to developments on paper rather than in
the field. In this regard, the deployment of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping missions and the
practice of naming parties to armed conflict that are
recruiting or using children, if properly implemented,
seem to us to be of particular importance because of
their potential for bringing about positive change on
the ground.
In word and in deed, Israel has supported
international initiatives aimed at protecting children
from the devastation of armed conflict, including the
landmark Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
protocols, to which we became a signatory two years
ago. Israel’s accession to the Convention was followed
by our adoption of “Basic Law: Human Dignity and
Liberty”, a law that ensures that the rights of the child
are guaranteed constitutional protection. The adoption
of the Basic Law sparked a flurry of judicial and
legislative activity that broadened the commitment of
Israeli society to the principles of the Convention.
It goes without saying that the formal practice of
forced conscription of children is abhorrent and must
be outlawed. But the participation of children in armed
conflict is not limited to formal military service.
Children have also been recruited for roving militias,
armed gangs and terrorist groups. In our region,
children have been recruited and exploited by terrorist
organizations as human shields, for the placing of
explosives, as gunmen and even as suicide bombers. It
is regrettable that the Secretary-General’s report fails
again to make specific mention of this reprehensible
tactic in our region. We regret also that the report does
not address in more direct terms the plight of Israeli
children suffering from a relentless terrorist campaign.
Both Israeli and Palestinian children continue to
be the greatest victims of the terrorism that plagues our
region. Over the last two years, Palestinian children
have been increasingly used as human shields and have
been mobilized for terrorist attacks, while the average
age of suicide bombers has dropped significantly. For

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

an ever-increasing number of Israeli children as well,
growing up is becoming a painful experience.
Indeed, Israeli children are often the intended and
preferred victims of terrorists. Palestinian terrorist
groups, such as Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigade have directed many terrorist attacks
specifically against children, including attacks on
school buses, discotheques, pizza parlours and other
locations where large numbers of children are known to
gather.
In the conflict that plagues our region, as in any
conflict, no one has a monopoly on the status of victim.
The suffering of Israeli and Palestinian children must
be acknowledged. If we deny the suffering and
victimhood of the other side, we undermine the
prospects of mutual understanding and tolerance that
are the foundations of any lasting peace.
Recently in the General Assembly, unfortunately,
there was an attempt to do just that. The General
Assembly adopted for the second year in a row a
resolution pertaining specifically to the situation facing
Palestinian children. While Israel shares this concern
for the plight of Palestinian children, we continue to
believe that the issue of children should not be
politicized and the situation of any group of children
should not be singled out in this way, let alone
distorted. Once this resolution was adopted and in
order to rectify this imbalance, Israel reluctantly
introduced a mirror resolution to draw attention to the
suffering of Israeli children from terrorism.
Unfortunately, a group of delegations, determined not
to acknowledge that Israeli children were also victims
in this conflict, sought to distort this resolution beyond
recognition. As a result, Israel was compelled to
withdraw its text. In doing so, we expressed the hope
that Member States would see this unfortunate incident
as a wakeup call to end the politicization and double
standards in United Nations debates on issues of
universal concern, such as the plight of children. We
continue to hold to that hope today.
In conclusion, Israel welcomes the discussion of
specific issues concerning the protection of children in
armed conflict and the opportunity to express our firm
support for the continuation of the monitoring process
to that effect. We yearn for the day when peace is the
prevailing global condition and there is no longer any
need to deal with the specific impact of armed conflict
on children. But, until that day, the international

community must continue to act with resolve in
extending protection to those who are most vulnerable
and confronting with courage the factors that continue
to feed this ugly phenomenon.
Madam President, in concurrence with your
desire, I have read only a shortened version of our
statement, and a full version is being distributed.
The President: I thank the representative of
Israel for his statement and for having adhered to the
time allotted for statements. I now call on the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr.
Chowdhury
(Bangladesh):
Madam
President, may I begin by complimenting your skilful
stewardship of the Council’s deliberations today and
Chile’s leadership during the current month. We also
express our deep appreciation to Mr. Olara Otunnu and
Ms. Carol Bellamy for their comprehensive briefings.
During the past decade and a half, the
international community has taken some significant
measures to alleviate the sad plight of millions of
children in armed conflict. The Convention on the
Rights of the Child has provided a tool at the national
and international levels for the protection and
development of children worldwide. The Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the involvement of
children in armed conflict has strengthened these
universal norms. At the special session of the General
Assembly in 2002, world leaders reiterated their
determination to ensure a world fit for children. The
Security Council in its successive resolutions has
further consolidated international standards for the
protection of children in conflict and post-conflict
societies.
These achievements took considerable efforts on
the part of all concerned, including the United Nations
and its agencies, the Member States, international civil
society and parties to conflicts. The dedication of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr.
Olara Otunnu, in raising awareness of the protection
regime deserves special mention. Bangladesh has
consistently
advocated
bringing
the
Special
Representative’s Office under the United Nations
regular budget.
As we deliberate today, some 300,000 children
are still being used as child soldiers around the world.
Millions remain physically disabled. Many have been
gravely psychologically traumatized. Twenty million

3

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

children have been uprooted from their homes due to
wars. Entire generations of children are growing up
permanently scarred by the brutalities of conflict. The
most vulnerable are the girl children. They fall victim
to sexual abuse, other violence and the deadly
HIV/AIDS. Haunted by horrific memories of atrocities,
the children often find little scope for healing as they
witness the perpetrators getting away with impunity.
The vicious cycle of their sufferings continues into the
post-conflict stage as they inexorably descend into
poverty, illiteracy, hunger, malnutrition, trafficking or
foreign occupation.
Far more, as all will agree, needs to be done
urgently to protect every child victim of conflict. The
era of application in international child-protection
standards must replace the era of rhetoric. The Council
must ensure that parties involved in a conflict respect
global standards of protection of children in conflict.
The specific needs and vulnerability of children,
particularly of the girl child, must be integrated into
peace processes and post-conflict disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration,
recovery
and
reconstruction.
We strongly support the incorporation of child
protection advisers and related provisions into the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The practice of zero tolerance for violations of codes of
conduct by United Nations peacekeepers and
associated personnel must continue. Children in postconflict societies must be ensured access to trauma
counselling, education and health services. The illicit
flow of small arms into conflict areas must be curbed.
The culture of impunity for violators of children must
also be brought to an end.
Bangladesh has always kept the question of the
protection and development of children high on its
national and international agendas. We were among the
first countries to have ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child as well as its two Optional
Protocols. The protection and promotion of children’s
rights, particularity those of the girl child, and
allocations of the highest budgets for their education
and health have been the priority policy thrust of our
Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia. We have adopted a
national plan of action for children. The decade 2001 to
2010 is being observed in Bangladesh as the Decade of
the Rights of the Child.

4

Our civil societies and private sectors work
shoulder to shoulder with the Government to promote
the best interests of children. Our peacekeepers receive
special training on child protection as they carry the
message of peace to conflict-ridden societies across
continents. As Ms. Carol Bellamy stated, a leading
Bangladeshi non-governmental organization, the
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee, is
contributing significantly to the rehabilitation of child
soldiers and girl children through involvement in nonformal
education
in
Afghanistan.
Ironically,
Bangladesh, a developing nation itself, has done more
than its share in spreading stability and values to
conflict-ridden parts of the world, including Africa. We
believe that societal change must come from within or
from positive examples derived from comparable
milieus. Efforts to impose alien values will risk
evoking the same sentiments as those of the Trojan
priest Laocoon, who feared the Greeks even though
they came bearing gifts.
We must prevent today’s victim from becoming
tomorrow’s perpetrator by inculcating a culture of
peace and non-violence in the mind of every child.
Bangladesh calls upon the Council and the United
Nations system to lend support for the observance of
the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and
Non-Violence for the Children of the World through
concrete programmes on peace education and conflict
prevention. Robust pursuit of these goals will most
certainly alter the future of the child for the better. It
will also help usher in a new dawn of hope for
humanity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Bangladesh for the kind words he
addressed to the presidency.
I now call on the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): The European Union (EU),
Madame, warmly welcomes your decision to mark the
high importance of today’s debate by presiding over
our deliberations.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia; the candidate
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process; potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

and Montenegro; and the European Free Trade
Association country, Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.
I thank you, Madame, for providing us with an
opportunity to debate this important issue and I also
wish to express my appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol
Bellamy, for their briefings.
The European Union strongly endorses the
continued commitment demonstrated by the Security
Council in giving high priority to the protection of
children in its regular dialogue on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Regrettably, young boys
and girls continue to be pulled into outright combat and
exploitation by armed forces and groups. We welcome
in particular the adoption of resolution 1460 (2003) on
30 January 2003.
The European Union also wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on children and armed
conflict of 10 November 2003 and agrees that
“the annual review and debate by the Security
Council on this issue should be mainly devoted to
a comprehensive review of the state of
compliance on the ground” (S/2003/1053,
para. 83).
The recommendations contained at the end of the
report warrant careful consideration, in particular when
it comes to non-compliance. Targeted measures should
be taken by the Council where insufficient progress has
been made by parties in accordance with resolutions
1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003), as proposed in the
Secretary-General’s report. All relevant parts of the
United Nations system must shoulder their respective
responsibilities in a coordinated manner, both for
systematic monitoring and reporting of violations and
compliance, and for preventative and rehabilitating
actions for these child victims of armed conflict.
We reiterate again that the recruitment and use of
girls and boys in armed conflict is an atrocity that must
end, violating as it does international humanitarian law
as well as human rights law. The EU strongly urges the
States and other parties to armed conflict listed in
annexes I and II of the Secretary-General’s report to
immediately stop the recruitment and/or use of girls

and boys in situations of armed conflict. In this
context, we urge States to accelerate the process of
ratification or accession to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which includes, as a war
crime, conscripting or enlisting children under the age
of 15 or using them to participate actively in hostilities
in both international and non-international armed
conflicts. As such, we fully subscribe to the views and
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report with respect to the role of the International
Criminal Court in this arena and endorse the statement
that concrete steps should be taken to ensure the early
prosecution of persons responsible for war crimes
against children.
In the last decade, more than 2 million children
have been killed in armed conflict and more than 6
million have suffered physical mutilation. Reliable
estimates suggest that some 300,000 child soldiers are
currently engaged in war operations. Millions of
children have become orphans or have been left
homeless as a result of war. The cruel irony that, in
armed conflict, it is the innocent who are often the first
casualties remains intact.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocols set out clear legal standards
pertaining to the protection of children. The European
Union urges those States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention as a matter of priority and to
sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict.
Allow me to reflect briefly on some recent
initiatives undertaken within the European Union.
First, the General Affairs Council of the European
Union approved, on 8 December 2003, the European
Union Guidelines on Children and Armed Conflict.
These Guidelines, the culmination of many months of
deliberation, were drafted in collaboration with the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative
for
Children and Armed Conflict, and with UNICEF and a
group of relevant non-governmental organization
experts. The implementation of these Guidelines and
their immediate, effective and sustained mainstreaming
throughout all relevant European Union policies and
actions is a priority of the European Union.
The European Union will address the short-,
medium- and long-term impact of armed conflict on
children in an effective and comprehensive manner,

5

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

making use of the variety of tools at its disposal and
building on past and ongoing activities.
These objectives will be pursued through a
number of specific initiatives, including, importantly,
the monitoring of and reporting on conflict area
situations and the continuation and development of
technical
cooperation
programmes
for
the
disarmament, rehabilitation and reinsertion into
civilian life of children.
These newly adopted Guidelines were also
discussed in Rome on 10 and 11 December 2003 in the
presence of governmental and non-governmental
organization representatives from 27 European
countries on the occasion of the European Union
Forum on Human Rights, organized by the Italian
Presidency of the European Union and the European
Commission. The Forum elaborated a number of
proposals aimed at preventing the trafficking and
sexual exploitation of minors and their involvement in
armed conflict. The European Union has already
indicated that it will attach priority to children and
armed conflict under the European Union’s human
rights agenda in the next six months.
Secondly, I would like to mention the European
Union Council conclusions on cooperation between the
European Union and the United Nations on crisis
management, specifically on the protection of civilians
in European Union-led crisis management operations,
which call for mainstreaming a strong child protection
perspective in European Union-led crisis management
operations.
The European Union also applauds the efforts of
the Secretary-General and the Council to integrate
child protection advisers into United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building operations. The
European Parliament has also played a prominent role
in the protection of children affected by conflict. At its
most recent meeting in October 2003, the African,
Caribbean and Pacific Group-European Union Joint
Parliamentary Assembly adopted a resolution on the
rights of children and child soldiers in particular.
The European Union continues actively to
support and work closely with the Office of the Special
Representative, UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
actors, including non-governmental organizations,
aimed at relieving, to the greatest extent possible, the
suffering of children in situations of armed conflict and

6

ensuring that those responsible for horrific crimes are
held accountable. We look forward to receiving and
giving due consideration to the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive assessment of the scope and
effectiveness of the United Nations system’s response,
including
recommendations
for
strengthening,
mainstreaming, integrating and sustaining activities in
relation to children affected by armed conflict.
Addressing the issue of children victimized in
armed conflict must increasingly take place
collectively at national, regional and international
levels. Momentum generated must not be lost. The
Security Council will shortly begin deliberations on a
new draft resolution. It is our hope that a new draft
resolution — among other things — will result in a
continuation of the list of all parties to armed conflict
that recruit or use soldiers in violation of international
obligations in all situations. Guidance from the Council
on how to strengthen further monitoring and evaluation
of the situation of children in armed conflict would
also be useful. We hope that many of the concerns
articulated today will resonate in these ongoing
deliberations and will find voice in the draft resolution
to follow.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Sierra Leone,
to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): We are grateful for
your decision, Madam, to be present here today to lead
our discussion on one of the most pathetic situations in
the world today — that of children affected by armed
conflict.
I should also like to extend my delegation’s
sincere appreciation to two leading and dedicated
advocates for children in the United Nations family:
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and
the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy, for
their informative and, indeed, instructive, account and
picture of the situation of children victims of armed
conflict.
This meeting is the logical follow-up to that
convened by the Security Council yesterday on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. In our
statement yesterday, my delegation spoke of the need
to acknowledge that the illicit trade in those weapons
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

It is a threat that must been seen in the context of the
unnecessary suffering that it has caused and that it
continues to inflict on innocent children throughout the
world, especially in developing countries such as Sierra
Leone.
From what we have experienced in Sierra Leone
and other parts of the West African subregion, one has
every reason to conclude that the illicit trade in and
circulation of small arms and light weapons promotes
extreme cruelty against and by children. It helps to
create child combatants and child perpetrators of
heinous crimes against not only adults, but also
children. In short, it creates the condition in which
children become the victims and perpetrators of such
practices as rape, abduction, amputation, sexual slavery
and wanton and indiscriminate killing.
All children, whether or not they are currently
affected by armed conflict, will be the principal
beneficiaries of measures now under way to prevent,
combat and eradicate the scourge of the illicit trade in
these weapons — what one could describe as weapons
of mass destruction because of the magnitude and
devastation they have caused to human life and
property. We are by no means exaggerating the linkage
between the illicit flow of small arms and the terrible
situation in which children find themselves in areas of
conflict. This linkage is a reality; it is a challenge
which we must all accept.
My delegation welcomes with appreciation the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of children in armed conflict. The list of
advances made over the past few years towards the
protection of children affected by armed conflict is
encouraging. It covers many of the important legal and
political measures taken by States and international and
regional organizations. The list and the report as a
whole also affirm the crucial role that public advocacy,
such as that undertaken by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and non-governmental
organizations, can continue to play in the complex task
of ensuring effective protection of war-affected
children.
In this regard, we note some of the measures
contained in the report that pertain directly to the
situation in Sierra Leone. Reference is made, for
example, to the establishment of the National
Commission for War-Affected Children, which was
initiated Mr. Otunnu, and the organization of the

Children’s Forum Network. Reference is also made to
the “Voice of Children” radio project, which provides a
platform for one of the 10 imperatives endorsed in the
worldwide “Say Yes for Children” campaign organized
by UNICEF about two years ago — namely, “Listen to
children”.
An important development that is not in the
Secretary-General’s report, but that my delegation
would like to highlight, is the fact that among the
crimes alleged in the recent indictments at the Special
Court for Sierra Leone is the use of child combatants.
The crime of conscripting and enlisting and/or the use
of boys and girls to participate in active hostilities is
punishable under article 4 (c) of the Statute of the
Special Court. This could serve as a deterrent to future
attempts to recruit children for combat and for the
purpose of perpetrating acts of sheer brutality.
Just over a year ago, a young Sierra Leonean — a
former child combatant — appeared before the Council
to relate the story of his abduction and participation in
what the Special Court for Sierra Leone has
characterized as the “criminal enterprise”. Articulating
his vision of life after a brutal conflict, the young man
also brought a message — a signpost, so to speak —
which the Security Council should follow in devising
ways and means of advancing the promotion and
protection of the rights of children, especially those
affected by armed conflict. This is a very important
development in the area of accountability that should
not go unnoticed.
Although the rebel war in Sierra Leone and the
recruitment and participation of child combatants is no
longer an issue, and although disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
are under way in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, we are
seriously concerned about the cross-border movement
of armed children and youth in the subregion. These
are “the new home-grown mercenaries” who, for one
reason or the other, slip through DDR programmes,
regroup and create new pockets of armed rebellion
aimed at ruthless and protracted destabilization of the
subregion. They are also the precursors of urban
criminal elements in post-conflict situations.
We note that on the list of recent advances
towards the protection of children in armed conflict,
the Secretary-General highlights, among other things,
the fact that children’s issues have been incorporated
into peace agreements and peace accords. This is

7

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

commendable, since those agreements also include
provisions for disarmament and demobilization.
The Sierra Leone delegation endorses the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report, especially those relating to concrete measures
that the Security Council can take in the context of its
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security. These measures
should include, where necessary and appropriate,
targeted arms embargoes and travel restrictions.
However, effective monitoring mechanisms would have
to be put in place.
We wish also to recall Ms. Bellamy’s statement
this morning that funding should not entirely depend
on voluntary contributions. She stated that resources
need to be made available for child demobilization as
early as possible, well before the DDR process. We
attach great importance to this.
In his final recommendation, in paragraph 105,
the Secretary-General rightly suggests that greater and
more concerted efforts should be deployed to end
ongoing conflicts — conflicts that we agree are
destroying the lives of millions of children. He adds
that efforts should be made to address “the key factors
that facilitate the occurrence and recurrence of
conflicts”.
My delegation interprets this as a call for
concerted efforts for the prevention of armed conflict.
If indeed we are committed to the promotion and
protection of children, particularly those affected by
armed conflict, we should also deal with the root
causes of armed conflict, especially those that are
directly linked to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, and in precious natural resources, such
as diamonds from Sierra Leone. The prescriptions we
are preparing and administering are essential, but they
must be accompanied by preventive measures. As the
saying goes, prevention is better than cure.
Since the United Nations is now fully aware of
the international dimensions of these phenomena, and
in view of their implications for international peace and
security, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to appeal to the Security Council to assume
a more proactive role in the search for concrete and
effective solutions, as well as preventive measures, for
our children’s sake.

8

Meanwhile, my delegation looks forward to the
results of the comprehensive assessment now being
undertaken by the Secretary-General of the scope and
effectiveness of the response by the United Nations
system to the issue of children in armed conflict, with a
view to strengthening, mainstreaming, integrating and
sustaining these activities.
Mr. Wagaba (Uganda): I would like to thank the
Security Council for allowing my delegation to address
it on this important issue of children and armed
conflict.
My delegation has carefully studied and taken
note of the fourth report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict, contained in document
S/2003/1053. The report covers a wide range of
conflict situations in which children have faced grave
human rights violations, including abduction, forced
recruitment into armed groups, rape, maiming and
killing. The report also proposes a number of measures
aimed at addressing those violations and punishing the
perpetrators. The report also contains, in annexes, two
lists of alleged violators.
Uganda is a strong supporter of the rights of
children. Uganda ratified the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on 16 September 1990; the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict on 6
June 2002; and acceded to the Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography on
18 January 2002. Uganda therefore applauds all
measures meant to ensure the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. In fact, the Government
signed, on 4 December 2003, a memorandum of
understanding with Save the Children/Denmark’s
Uganda Country Programme to implement a project on
strengthening the capacity of the Uganda People’s
Defence Forces (UPDF) in the area of child rights.
My delegation wishes specifically to address
paragraph 63 of the report, as well as the list contained
in Annex II to the report, in which references are made
to the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and to Local
Defence Units allied to the UPDF. Paragraph 63 reads
as follows:
“The Uganda People’s Defence Forces
(UPDF) and its allied Local Defence Units
(LDUs) recruit and use children. UPDF has also
re-recruited children who have escaped or been

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

rescued from LRA. In a UNICEF/Office for
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs screening,
120 recruits in the UPDF Lugore military training
camp were reported to be children under the age
of 18, some of whom had been demobilized.”
It is the policy of the Uganda Government not to
recruit anyone under the age of 18 into the Uganda
armed forces, including the Local Defence Units. This
policy is strictly observed by the UPDF, and this fact is
well known even to the Uganda Office of the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). In those few cases
in which recruits are discovered to have sneaked in
because of lack of proof of age, such as birth
certificates, they are always thrown out as soon as they
are discovered. That was the case in the incident
referred to in the Secretary-General’s report, where, at
Lugore military training camp in the Gulu district, a
screening done in conjunction with UNICEF last
August uncovered a number of underage recruits into
the LDUs. Those recruits were promptly discharged.
However, it should be noted that, with the high
rate of unemployment in the Ugandan countryside,
coupled with the low standard of education, many
people view military service as the easiest way of
getting a job. Therefore, it is common for members of
the community to deceive recruiters about their age in
order to be enlisted. Additionally, in the face of the
constant abductions of children by the so-called Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) in that area, many parents feel
it is much safer to have them join the local militia or
the army rather than the rebels.
The situation in northern Uganda, where the
Government has been battling a bandit outfit, the socalled Lord’s Resistance Army, for many years, is wellknown to the international community. In this regard,
my delegation is grateful to the representatives of the
United States and of the United Kingdom, who, in their
statements this morning, gave graphic and accurate
accounts of the atrocities being perpetrated against
children in northern Uganda by the LRA.
That organization, which has been placed on the
list of terrorist organizations by the United States State
Department, has been carrying out, and continues to
carry out, horrendous and savage acts of brutality
against innocent people in northern Uganda, including
women and children. Over the years, tens of thousands
of children, boys and girls, have been abducted from
their homes or schools and taken into captivity by the

LRA. They are forcibly recruited into fighting. Girls
are forced to become sex slaves by the rebel leaders.
Others have been savagely maimed or brutally
murdered. All of those acts are well known and have
been documented by UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and other international agencies and non-governmental
organizations active in the region.
In his statement to the Council on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland had this to say on the situation in northern
Uganda:
“For example, on my recent mission to
Uganda, I saw a stark picture of what the absence
of humanitarian access means. Outside the main
northern and eastern towns, access has been
dramatically reduced by the increased activity of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). Some 1.3
million people have been displaced by the war.
Many of those people are living in ‘resettlement
camps’ in inaccessible areas, with severely
limited access to their lands, to their livelihoods,
and to humanitarian assistance”. (S/PV.4877, p. 3)
This is the humanitarian tragedy that has been
forced on our people by the inhuman acts of the LRA.
The Government of Uganda is dedicated to ending
those terrorist acts, and in fact President Museveni has
been stationed in northern Uganda for more than one
year now to personally oversee the efforts towards
ending the reign of terror of the LRA.
It is therefore right and proper that the LRA
should appear on the list contained in annex II of the
Secretary-General’s report. That organization should be
condemned by all right-thinking people, and every
pressure should be brought to bear on it and its
leadership so that it ceases its inhuman actions. Its
leaders should be apprehended wherever they are and
brought to justice to answer for their crimes against
humanity.
However, my Government is outraged that the
Secretary-General’s report should purport to mention
the UPDF in the same breath as the LRA. It is
outrageous not only because the allegations against the
UPDF are not true and have been repeatedly denied by
the Uganda Government but also because the author of
the
report,
the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Under-Secretary-General Olara Otunnu, has been

9

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

invited on numerous occasions by the Uganda
Government to visit Uganda or send a team there to
investigate the situation on the ground. On all those
occasions, Ambassador Olara Otunnu did not find it fit
to go to Uganda or to send a mission there but instead
has chosen to rely on hearsay information gathered on
visits to neighbouring countries.
The Uganda Government is baffled by this hostile
attitude on the part of Ambassador Olara Otunnu. This
concern of my Government has been brought to the
attention of the Secretary-General by my President,
President Museveni, when he met the SecretaryGeneral in May 2002 and by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs in his letter to the Secretary-General in May
2002. The same concern has been expressed by the
former Permanent Representative of Uganda to the
United Nations in his letter to the President of the
Security Council dated 16 January 2003 (S/2003/124),
as well as the current Permanent Representative in his
letter to the President of the Security Council dated 4
December 2003 and circulated as Security Council
document S/2003/1160. In all those communications,
the Uganda Government has reiterated its open
invitation to the Special Representative to visit Uganda
or to send an investigative mission, but the invitation
has been ignored to date.
The Government of Uganda is left with no
alternative but to assume that Ambassador Olara
Otunnu has an axe to grind with the current
Government in Uganda. It must be remembered that
Ambassador Otunnu was born in Uganda and is a
native of the very area in northern Uganda where the
LRA is carrying out those atrocities. Ambassador
Otunnu was, as a matter of fact, Foreign Minister in the
brutal military regime which was removed in 1986
through popular resistance and replaced by the present
Government. Since 1986, Ambassador Otunnu has not
stepped inside Uganda for reasons best known to
himself. Furthermore, he has ignored the plight of the
people of northern Uganda during his tenure as Special
Representative.
If the recommendations contained in the report
were to be implemented against the Uganda
Government, it would certainly weaken the
Government’s capacity to protect its citizens against
the attacks of LRA. It is the sincere hope and
expectation of the Uganda Government that the
Council will not allow Ambassador Otunnu to use the
cover of the authority and office of the Secretary-

10

General to advance his own personal hostile agenda
against Uganda. My delegation strongly urges the
Security Council to reject the listing of the Uganda
People’s Defence Forces, as well as the Local Defence
Units allied to the UPDF, in annex II to the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We further urge the Security Council
to demand that the Special Representative send a
mission to Uganda to specifically investigate the
allegations contained in paragraph 63 of the report
before taking action on it.
The President: I call on the representative of
India.
Mr. Nambiar (India): Your delegation has been
sedulous, Madam President, in pursuing this month an
agenda of important though sombre thematic issues for
the consideration of the Council. This open meeting of
the Council on children and armed conflict deals with
one such issue. For those who believe the poet who
said that “Heaven lies about us in our infancy”, the
“shades of the prison-house” that “begin to close upon
the growing boy” would appear to have a context not
quite apposite to the theme of today’s debate. But they
most certainly describe the plight of many children in
different parts of the world caught up in the vicious
grip of conflicts they hardly understand but find
themselves hopelessly enmeshed in.
Children have become increasingly involved in
conflicts, both as targets of violence and as combatants.
During the last few years, more than 500,000 children,
recruited in 87 countries, with approximately 300,000
actively participating in combat, have been involved in
conflict in some form or another. Aged generally
between 15 and 18 and some as young as seven, child
soldiers are often in support services. The rise in intraState conflicts, compounded by conditions such as
internal displacement and refugee situations, has
caused the phenomenon of the child-soldier. It is often
impossible to make a distinction between a forced and
a voluntary child soldier. Whereas some children join
armed groups for food, survival or to avenge atrocities
committed in their communities, others are physically
abducted for war by armed groups. Enticed by
promises of food, shelter and security and sometimes
plied with drugs, child soldiers are at times led to
commit atrocities against other armed groups and
civilian populations, sometimes even against their own
communities.

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

The use of children in armed conflict has been
aggravated by the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons worldwide. These weapons are inexpensive,
durable, small, lightweight, easy to maintain and small
enough for them to handle. Illegal arms trafficking and
poor monitoring of the legal trade make it easy for
them to gain access to such weapons. It cannot be
denied that in many conflict situations, the most
vulnerable members of the population, particularly
women and children, are targeted with impunity. While
no leniency should be shown on crimes perpetrated
against innocent children, we need to see in perspective
the fact that many children responsible for
reprehensible crimes have often been manipulated by
unscrupulous adults to take part in armed conflicts.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, deserves our commendation for his statement
and comprehensive report (S/2003/1053). We note his
recommendations on the road ahead, including the
challenge of launching the campaign for an “era of
application”. The report demonstrates that significant
progress has been made in the mandate of
incorporating the impact of armed conflict on children
in the international peace and security agenda.
Before commenting on the specifics in the report
of the Secretary-General, a few general points made in
the past by the Indian delegation may need reiteration.
The first relates to salience. How useful is it to
have thematic debates in the Security Council on
subjects such as the present one? It is true that a large
number of children are victims of armed conflicts. But
it is also a fact that malaria and AIDS kill more
children than conflicts do, but in the Council we do not
deal separately with children and malaria or children
and AIDS or request reports from the SecretaryGeneral on them. An unconscionable number of
children have died as a result of sanctions, but we do
not recall the Council holding a debate on the effect of
sanctions on children or seeking a report from the
Secretary-General on that subject either. A sense of
balance and perspective should be retained in order to
make sure that too narrow a focus does not blot out the
larger picture of what the Secretary-General has
designated as the soft challenges to international peace
and security.
The second point relates to applicability. There
are recommendations relating to the Convention on the

Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol and to
international humanitarian law. No role is envisaged in
any of these conventions or other legal instruments for
the
Security
Council
in
promoting
their
implementation. While only States are parties to
conventions, non-State actors are not bound by them.
More important, most armed groups obey no laws,
national or international. In some cases of internal
conflict, non-State actors or rival political groupings
may make offers to adhere to such instruments
precisely to gain legitimacy or a political locus standi.
Who is to decide whether they are entitled to that or
not?
The
report
of
the
Secretary-General
(S/2003/1053) refers to the comprehensive body of
instruments, norms and commitments that provide a
basis for enforcement of the protection and rights of
children exposed to armed conflict. While adhering
States stand automatically committed and accountable
to such norms, the accountability of non-State actors
has not been adequately considered or documented.
Many of them are infused by religious or political
ideology, economic interests or simply outmoded or
feudalistic social beliefs and are known for their gross,
massive and systematic violations of the rights of
children. We would urge the Special Representative to
pay greater attention to that aspect, for it, in our view,
is the root cause of many of the problems in this area.
Similarly, we would sound a note of caution on
the recommendation to establish a dialogue and engage
in negotiations with parties to armed conflict,
particularly when such parties are non-State actors.
Non-State actors are not bound by any legal obligations
or commitments, as they have not assumed any such.
By initiating a dialogue and engaging in negotiations,
we should not encourage a process that would confer
on them any legitimacy that they should not have.
The report does catalogue the deployment of
child protection advisers in many peacekeeping
operations. It is not clear, however, whether any
assessment has been made of their work in the area of
child protection and the involvement of children in
armed conflict. A purposive audit of the efforts
undertaken so far in the area is missing in the report. It
could have been more useful if the recommendations
had built on the lessons learned after providing a
critical assessment of the work accomplished in this
area. That would have added to the efficacy of the
recommended measures.

11

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

In the subsection on monitoring and reporting,
there is a conclusion that a body of standards
constitutes the basis for monitoring. The list consists of
a number of instruments that do not command
universal acceptance or adherence. How does the
Special Representative expect to deal with monitoring
the situation of a Member State that is not party to the
Optional Protocol, the Statute of the International
Criminal Court or ILO Convention 182? The Member
State in question — while otherwise committed to the
norms and commitments concerning the promotion and
protection of the rights of children — would be right in
maintaining that it was not bound by any instrument to
which it was not a party. The Special Representative
must recognize that neither he nor anyone else, for that
matter, can seek to impose on Member States the
standards
derived
from
these
non-universal
instruments.
We should like to voice one more concern about
the agenda for monitoring and reporting. There is wellestablished machinery for dealing with alleged
violations of human rights by the Government of a
State that is party to a specific human rights
instrument. The procedures in that respect are wellknown and time-honoured. The likely interface
between that procedure and the monitoring-reporting
mechanism that would come into existence as a result
of the Special Representative’s recommendations is not
at all clear to us. Moreover, the treaty bodies have their
own system of dealing with non-compliance by parties
with their treaty obligations. There is the ever-present
danger of duplication and overlap.
With respect to information gathering and data
collection, the report seeks to set much store by
information
collected
from
non-governmental
organizations. But it is not clear which nongovernmental organizations would be depended on,
how they would be chosen, how their credentials would
be vetted or which type of reliability test would be
applied to the information and data provided by the
non-governmental organizations.
In the area of monitoring and verification, the
report recommends that increasing use be made of the
field presence of the United Nations. That raises some
pertinent questions. Do the country teams —
particularly the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) — have the necessary expertise to perform
that function? Would it be within their mandates? Will
UNICEF have the necessary expertise at the field level

12

to perform such functions wherever it is called upon to
do so?
One final point relates to the attempts to expand
on the areas of consideration of the Security Council to
include, for example, effective monitoring of
“especially egregious violations”, as mentioned in
paragraph 81 of the report. While one cannot but
recognize the motives behind the strenuous efforts to
cover the entire gamut of violations that could affect
children directly or indirectly, it must be said that there
are other United Nations bodies — such as the
Commission on Human Rights — that are mandated to
undertake such tasks. By taking a continuously
expansionist role for itself, the Security Council would
not only overlap its functioning with that of other
mandated United Nations bodies, but would also be
committing its valuable time and resource allocations
to functions best handled elsewhere.
These concerns are not raised with a view to
belittling the importance of the problem or the urgency
of the need to deal with it. Any breakdown of peace
and security and the ensuing conflict can be expected
to have a tragic impact on children. All Member States
have a duty to soften the effects of armed conflicts on
children, because they are innocent and vulnerable and
should not be made to suffer. However, we feel that we
ought to make decisions and act in ways that will lead
to effective results. We should also bear in mind the
need for obtaining the most efficient and optimal
results, as the resources that are dedicated to any of
these mandates are finite and inelastic, especially in an
era of zero-nominal growth in most United Nations
budgets. We should strive for increasing efficiency,
cost-effectiveness and impact while dealing with this
important question of protecting children from the
effects of armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We warmly welcome you, Madam, as you
preside over this meeting. Your concern demonstrates
the attention that you and your friendly country, Chile,
devote to the grave challenges facing future
generations and the need to confront them.
We should like to thank Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), and Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

and Armed Conflict, for their briefings this morning.
We believe that the contents of those briefings will
help us to make progress in confronting the challenge
of the plight of children in armed conflicts.
My delegation has carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/1053) now before us, and
we believe that we should all pay heed to it. We thank
the Secretary-General and all those who helped to
prepare and enrich the report.
International conventions on the protection and
well-being of children, Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on the protection of children in
armed conflict and the final document of the special
session of the General Assembly devoted to children
(resolution S-27/2), held in 2002, all strengthen and
supplement international norms and should be
respected by everyone.
Progress made in the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, as described in the
Secretary-General’s report, is a source of satisfaction,
and we welcome it. We have noted a strong will by the
parties concerned with this issue to face up to the
challenges before them. Nevertheless, and most
regrettably, we see no concrete progress in protecting
the children affected by the Israeli occupation of Arab
land, including the occupied Syrian Golan. The grave
situation remains and has indeed deteriorated.
The international community has been unable, to
date, to implement international provisions of the 1949
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, let alone the Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions related to
the protection of Palestinian children, who, for
decades, have been living a miserable life. Let me
mention that, while we highly appreciate the reference
in the report (S/2003/1053) to the fact that the situation
of Palestinian children remains serious and
unacceptable, we had hoped that the report would
devote some ink to the issues related to the effects of
preventing humanitarian assistance from reaching
children affected by armed conflicts.
The report of the Secretary-General contains
proposals and recommendations that are worthy of
study, particularly in light of practices and lessons
learned. While we believe that there is a need for a
coordinated and systematic mechanism for monitoring
and reporting in order to present objective, regular and
accurate reports on violations by parties to armed

conflicts, we believe that such a question should not be
politicized and that selectivity and double standards
should be avoided. Furthermore, all possible means for
dialogue and negotiation with the parties concerned
ought to be used to solve all problems in accordance
with agreed norms.
Let me again stress the importance of the role of
all United Nations bodies, particularly the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, in
confronting the effects of conflicts and wars on
children. In addition to the agencies and funds of the
United Nations, in particular the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), let me also stress the role
of non-governmental organizations, which are
fundamental in complementing and promoting
international efforts in the appropriate manner and in
strengthening our collective efforts to resolve this
problem.
Allow me to conclude my statement by stressing
that Syria attaches the utmost importance, at all levels,
to the issues of children. Syria was one of the first
States to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Last year, we ratified the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and the
second Optional Protocol on sexual abuse of children.
These commitments stem from our belief that such
international instruments are a fundamental basis for
the international community to take action to protect
and promote the rights of children for a better future
for mankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Madam President, I should like, at the outset, to
express the appreciation of the Egyptian delegation to
you and your friendly country for having convened this
important meeting. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for their efforts and their precious
contribution to promoting and protecting the rights of
children in armed conflicts. I should also like to pay
tribute to Ms. Carol Bellamy, the Executive Director of
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), for the
efforts she continues to make in promoting and
protecting the rights of the child. My country is fully
committed to supporting all efforts in that regard.

13

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

For a number of years now, the Security Council
has been paying particular attention to the issue of
refugee children, internally displaced children forced to
flee their homes and those who have been forcefully
recruited or sexually abused, with particular attention
to girls, because they are most vulnerable to threats,
particularly sexual violence. This is a commendable
effort that we support and look forward to continuing.
However, I should like to draw the attention of this
Council to a category of children who seem to have
been forgotten, that is, children under foreign
occupation, particularly those children in occupied
Palestinian territory who die daily because of
continuing violations of their human rights and the
brutal use of force. It is sufficient to quickly look at the
numbers of child victims of the conflict to see the
importance of taking up this issue and shedding light
on it. We therefore call on the Security Council to take
up the issue of children under foreign occupation. We
call on the Council not to politicize the issue and to
deal with this category of children with the same
attention that it devoted to other groups of children in
armed conflicts.
I should like to express my appreciation for the
call for the deployment of advisors on child protection
and for increasing their role in peacekeeping operations
in order to effectively incorporate the rights of children
and their protection and welfare in those operations.
The experience of advisors in peacekeeping operations
in Sierra Leone, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Côte d’Ivoire has shown their
effectiveness. We hope that this will continue, that
more advisors will be deployed to confront the issues
of children. Experience shows that they are most
effective in awareness-raising regarding children’s
rights and the need to protect children in peacekeeping
operations, as well as in training personnel, both
military and civilian, in peacekeeping operations. Their
presence has been most effective in giving priority to
children’s issues through better monitoring and
reporting, through the provision of services and by
facilitating the flow of information between various
elements of peacekeeping operations.
Perhaps one of the most important steps taken by
the Security Council since the issuance of the
Secretary-General’s report last year on the issue of
children and armed conflict (S/2002/1299) was the
setting up of a list of particular countries and parties
that violate the rights of children. This issue requires

14

further study in order to ascertain the way to deal with
those parties that violate the rights of children, how to
prosecute such parties and how to ensure that such
violations do not occur in the future.
We regret the continuing violations of the rights
of children in Burundi, in Côte d’Ivoire, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Liberia and in
other countries. This proves the importance of further
intensifying efforts in the future to eradicate such
violations. In this regard, we would stress the
importance of the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report as well as the measures
proposed, including mainstreaming the issues of
children in a systematic manner in all peace
negotiations and agreements and rendering them
essential in all post-conflict programmes. We would
also stress the need for a systematic mechanism for
monitoring and reporting for the presentation of
objective, accurate and regular reports on violations of
the rights of children by parties to conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Diarra (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me, Madame, to express my delegation’s
pleasure at seeing you personally presiding over this
meeting. Your presence here — in addition to the fact
that your country, Chile, is a member of the Human
Security Network, on behalf of which I have the
honour to speak — attests to your interest to human
rights in general and in the rights of the child, in
particular.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the States
members of the Human Security Network, namely
Austria, Canada, Chile, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Norway, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Switzerland,
Thailand and my own country, Mali — which holds the
chairmanship of the Network — and South Africa in its
capacity of observer on the item under review, entitled
“Children and armed conflict”.
Allow me to congratulate the Secretary-General
of our Organization, as well as his Special
Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, on the high quality
of the report published in document S/2003/1053,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1460 (2003). I
should also like to thank Ms. Carol Bellamy for her
statement.

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

Resolution 1460 (2003), adopted just under a year
ago, noted with alarm the persistence of the
phenomenon of children’s recruitment and use by
parties to armed conflicts. The Security Council invited
the Secretary-General to enter into dialogue with those
parties with a view to putting an end to such practices.
To that end, the parties were to provide information on
steps they had taken to halt the recruitment or use of
children in armed conflicts. The Council also expressed
its intention to consider taking appropriate steps to
resolve this issue it if deemed that insufficient progress
had been made upon the review of the next SecretaryGeneral’s report.
It is evident, however, that, a year since that
warning was issued, little has been achieved in the way
of results. In fact, the recruitment and use of children
have persisted over the course of the period under
review. The Secretary-General’s report even mentions
new parties that have taken up those criminal practices.
Of course, there have been perceptible advances
in recent years in terms of the scope of international
instruments. I refer, notably, to the nearly universal
Convention on the Rights of the Child and to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
The Rome Statute and the International Labour
Organization’s Convention No. 182 (1999) on the
worst forms of child labour also merit mention, as do
regional conventions, such as the African Charter on
the Rights and Welfare of the Child. The Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols are a
reference point for international humanitarian law on
the subject. This legal arsenal is supplemented by the
Plan of Action — best known under the name “A
World Fit for Children” — adopted in 2002 by the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh special
session, as well as by Security Council resolutions, the
latest of which is resolution 1460 (2003). The Human
Security Network’s member countries encourage those
States that have not yet done so to ratify the
instruments aimed at protecting children exposed to
armed conflict.
The development of international standards is not
an end in itself. The ultimate objective and major
challenge lie in their implementation. To that end, in
2002 the Secretary-General proposed the ushering in of
an era of application. The report submitted to the
Council highlights some of the concrete measures

adopted, such as the inclusion of children’s concerns in
peace accords; civil society involvement in actions
aimed at raising public awareness and advocacy; the
adoption of guidelines and plans of action, such as
those adopted by the Economic Community of West
African States in 2000 and by the European Union in
2003; the establishment of national commissions for
the benefit of war-affected children; the adoption of
measures aimed at curbing the illicit exploitation of
natural and other resources in war zones; the
consideration of children’s specific needs in
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes; and the deployment of child protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations.
Those measures, however systematically applied,
should not make us lose sight of the particularly
egregious violations and abuses committed against
children over the past year. I call to mind not only the
phenomenon of child soldiers — an occurrence further
aggravated by the illicit proliferation of small arms —
but also the massacre and mutilation of children,
particularly of girls, that have taken place. Armed
groups have continued to abduct children, either to
forcibly enlist or sexually exploit them, as is often the
case for young girls, or to press them into forced
labour. Children also fall victim to landmines and
unexploded ordnance.
In the face of these overwhelming facts, the
Human Security Network has endorsed the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report. Its members are particularly convinced that
credible deterrence can be achieved in particular
through action by the Security Council, which we
invite to take measures targeting parties and their
accomplices, including the imposition of travel
restrictions on their leaders, their exclusion from any
governance structures and amnesty provisions before
the International Criminal Court, and a ban on the
export or supply of small arms. The recommendations
require, finally, addressing the key factors that
facilitate the occurrence and recurrence of conflicts —
their root causes.
The Human Security Network also urges
widening the scope of the list of parties that recruit or
use children in armed conflict to cover all situations
where these parties exist. Wherever they occur,
international crimes committed against children in a
situation of war merit the attention and action of the

15

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

international community, in particular those of the
Security Council.
The Network is committed to pursuing concrete
action in order to prevent violations of children’s rights
where conflict situations emerge, in the course of a
conflict or post-conflict, and in terms of assistance to
child victims of armed conflicts. This was inspired by
the overall goal of bridging the gaps between universal
human rights standards and their implementation and
between programmatic concepts and systematic
response on the ground. With this in view, the Human
Security Network has developed a support strategy that
identifies a set of operative principles, including
enhanced follow-up and training and an alarm function
in cases of child rights violations.
The Network has also developed a child rights
training curriculum which serves as a comprehensive
check list that contains relevant principles, guidelines
and references, as well as exemplary training modules,
so as to be adaptable to specific situations on the
ground and to target groups to be trained. The
programme has been made available to the SecretaryGeneral and to intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. We express the hope that
it will be used effectively in training courses held by
all the agencies and programmes of the United Nations
and other interested organizations and Governments.
In this regard, in its medium-term work plan for
2003-2005 — adopted in Graz, Austria — the Human
Security Network has committed itself to working with
United Nations bodies, Governments that share its
vision, regional and subregional organizations and civil
society towards the implementation of current
commitments, which for the most part are integrated
into the Secretary-General’s report.
Finally, the Human Security Network welcomes
the reaffirmation, contained in paragraph 15 of the
report under review, of its commitment to children in
armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Mali for his kind words addressed to
the presidency.
The next speaker is the representative of Japan, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Ozawa (Japan): My delegation would like to
express its gratitude to you, Madam, and to the
Security Council, for having provided us with an

16

opportunity to address the issue of children and armed
conflict. This debate comes at an opportune time, as
new post-conflict situations are emerging in Africa,
and as new actions — in the form of the creation of
political missions or peacekeeping operations — may
be taken by the Security Council.
Currently, a major newspaper in Japan is running
a series of feature articles on the real experiences of
child soldiers in Sierra Leone and Liberia,
accompanied by photographs showing them carrying
Kalashinikov rifles. For many of us living in peace, the
concept of child soldiers — 11-year-old girls and
10-year-old boys — is almost surreal, almost
incomprehensible. Yet those images are real. We need
to help, and we can do so more effectively once the
conflicts have ended.
Japan believes that the “Back to School”
campaigns run by the United Nations Children’s Fund
are among the most important ongoing efforts to
rebuild societies in post-conflict situations. We are
proud to be supporting those programmes in
Afghanistan and, now, in Iraq. They help alleviate the
trauma of individual children who have endured so
much during armed conflict and give hope to their
communities for a better future. As a nation promoting
the concept of human security, Japan will continue to
work together with relevant United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes to promote the empowerment of
communities, with an emphasis on children and
women.
A number of international instruments exist that
aim to protect children in armed conflicts: I need
hardly mention the historic significance of the
comprehensive framework of the Geneva Convention.
The international community has striven to improve the
level of protection for children in armed conflict. Two
Protocols additional to the Geneva Convention — for
which we intend to obtain parliamentary approval this
year — include specific provisions concerning the
protection of children. The basic principle behind such
provisions evolved into the Rome Statute establishing
the International Criminal Court. The Rome Statute,
the establishment of which Japan consistently
supported, stipulates that the use of children as soldiers
in armed conflict is a war crime. In line with such
developments on the legal front concerning the
protection of children, Japan signed, in May 2002, the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

conflict, and we intend to obtain parliamentary
approval for its ratification this year. We sincerely hope
that other nations that have not yet ratified that
important instrument will do so soon.
My delegation would like to thank Mr. Olara
Otunnu, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, for the
exemplary work he has done over the past six years in
raising the awareness of the international community of
the issue of children and armed conflict. Child
protection advisers are now appointed to relevant
peacekeeping operations, and United Nations agencies
are now better prepared to deal with this issue.
At the same time, the issue of children and armed
conflict is becoming more and more complex. In order
to better tackle those complexities, a more
comprehensive approach and better collaboration
among United Nations agencies are necessary. In this
context, we welcomed the decision of the General
Assembly, at its fifty-seventh session, to request the
Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive
assessment of the United Nations system response to
this issue. That report has yet to be submitted. We hope
that it will be issued in the near future and that it will
provide us with useful guidance in our discussions on
this issue.
We believe that on the issue of children and
armed conflict, the time has come for us to move from
advocacy to implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Costa Rica,
to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like first of all to express my
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you, Madam
Minister, presiding over the Security Council’s debate
on this very important issue. I would also like to
express my gratitude for the briefings provided this
morning by Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund.
The protection of children during armed conflict
must occupy a priority position on the Security
Council’s agenda. The world’s children are the most
vulnerable group in times of war, and they therefore
deserve to be the first to be protected. Today, almost

300,000 boys and girls are direct participants in armed
conflict, whether as combatants, spies or in another
capacity. Millions more are indirect victims of conflict.
Thousands of children are killed or wounded as part of
the collateral damage of armed encounters. Many
suffer from hunger and thirst; thousands more are
orphaned or abandoned, or become refugees or
internally displaced persons. Hundreds of minors are
victims of sexual abuse. Furthermore, the great
majority of children caught up in armed conflict lose
the chance of an education, and almost all of them are
scarred by the psychological trauma of war.
A year ago, when adopting resolution 1460
(2003), the Security Council called upon the entire
international community to abide by international
standards and principles concerning the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. There is no doubt
that over the past year there has been some progress.
The Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has been working tirelessly to make
the parties to conflict sensitive to the suffering of
minors who are combatants and victims of war.
Efforts have been made to include the problems
of children in the peace processes in Sri Lanka and the
Sudan. Efforts have been made to establish a better
dialogue with regional organizations, and national
commissions for war-affected children have been set
up. The General Assembly has strengthened and
secured the budget of the Special Representative’s
Office.
The
report
of
the
Secretary-General
(S/2003/1053) also represents an important step
forward, as it provides an updated list of groups that
recruit children in situations under the Council’s
purview, as well as a list relating to situations not yet
on the Council’s agenda.
In some parts of the world, however, the situation
of minors worsened considerably over the past year.
Several non-governmental organizations have reported
massive increases in the kidnapping and forced
recruitment of minors in parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and
Myanmar, by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia and by the Tamils in Sri Lanka. Much work
certainly remains to be done.
I should like to point out just some of the
measures that the Security Council will have to adopt
as a result of this debate in order to protect minors in

17

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

armed conflict. First, this body must demand that all
the entities on the two lists annexed to the SecretaryGeneral’s report refrain from recruiting minors and
demobilize those already recruited. The Council must
give such entities a deadline for presenting evidence of
having taken measures to halt the recruitment of
minors, to punish those who continue to recruit them
and to demobilize child combatants. If no positive
response is received, the Council should impose
sanctions, such as embargoes on arms and funds,
against entities that continue to use child soldiers. It is
crucial, in this context, that the Secretary-General
maintain and periodically update the two lists of
entities that recruit minors or use child soldiers.
Secondly, it is indispensable that the topic of the
protection of minors be systematically incorporated
into all the activities of the United Nations. Any
resolution adopted by the Security Council must
include clear and comprehensive provisions aimed at
protecting the safety and the fundamental rights of
minors. Plans for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of combatants and peace-building
programmes must seek the rehabilitation of minors
who are combatants or victims of conflict.
Every peacekeeping operation must include child
protection advisers to deal with the problems of
children victims of conflict. Before any sanctions
regime is adopted, the Security Council should
evaluate the possible impact of such sanctions on
children. Every sanctions regime must include
exceptions aimed at minimizing the detrimental effects
it might have on children.
Thirdly, the Council should create permanent
institutional machinery that will enable it regularly to
monitor in a proactive and comprehensive manner the
situation of minors in armed conflict. Such a body
should receive periodic reports on violations of the
rights of children in situations of armed conflict and
must be able to rely on an independent group of experts
that can evaluate any information objectively,
undertake fact-finding missions to verify allegations,
and sound the alarm whenever a situation arises in
which the safety of minors is endangered.
Fourthly, the Council must support and lend
momentum to the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his special representatives to sensitize the parties to
conflict to the problems affecting minors.

18

Finally, as we said last year, it is indispensable
for the Secretary-General to refer to the Security
Council for its consideration, in keeping with Article
99 of the Charter, any situation of armed conflict in
which children under 18 are being recruited or used as
combatants.
A year ago, the Security Council committed itself
to adopting the necessary to protect minors in armed
conflicts. The time has now come to do so, and we
must take action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Costa Rica for the kind words he
addressed to the presidency.
Mr. Savua (Fiji): Madam President, my
delegation congratulates you and your delegation on
your assumption of the presidency and for the
consecutive open debates on small arms and light
weapons yesterday and on children and armed conflict
today.
We would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol
Bellamy, for their briefings.
Both issues — small arms and light weapons, and
children in armed conflict — complement the broader
question of women and peace and security. These
concerns are of key importance to this body, reflecting
the Council’s maturity and wisdom and its desire to
“look behind the veil” of international peace and
security. This trend is aiding the Council to consolidate
its mandate, as stated in the Charter of the United
Nations, resolutely partnering in its actions with the
General Assembly, with the ultimate goal finally to
make a difference in the lives of people.
When the Council’s deliberations on these
subjects empower vulnerable citizens and give voice to
the weak, these outcomes become the measure of its
success. The Secretary-General’s report on the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict shows a genuine
change in attitudes and political commitments as to
how children fare in armed conflict. The improved
understanding of the political economy of armed
conflicts, particularly their impact on children, is also

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

cause for celebration. We also note that more work
remains.
We draw courage from the regional strategy of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
However, my delegation believes that, while
Commonwealth efforts will eventually filter down to
its constituent subregions, the Pacific Islands Forum
region needs to be flagged in the Special
Representative’s calendar in his agenda for action. This
would work well in conjunction with the regional
security efforts taking shape within the Biketawa
Declaration and also promote the effectiveness of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific
Islands Forum.
Part of the success of the Organization’s mandate
on the subject is due to the recognition, in the
elaboration of international norms, of the impact of
armed conflict on children. We heard directly from
children from war-torn regions or from those coming
out of prolonged conflicts during the special session of
the General Assembly on children. They spoke with a
maturity and clarity that are often associated only with
adult experiences. No doubt, many more children have
been exposed to those kinds of experiences.
“Marie in the Shadow of a Lion” is a remarkable
compilation of real testimonies by children who have
undergone such experiences. We therefore support the
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to use it in a pilot programme and to include it
in educational curricula in this future era of
application. Existing mechanisms can be reconfigured
to support those efforts and obviate the need to
reinvent the wheel. As national human rights
institutions gain greater knowledge and expertise, they
can assist Governments and regional organizations in
incorporating the appropriate knowledge into national
educational systems and programmes.
This fourth open debate should serve to recall
Graça Machel’s plea to humankind to respect
childhood as inviolate and to consider children as
zones of peace. Today, unfortunately, the recruitment of
children continues unabated, and the abuse of children
occurs with alarming frequency, making it incumbent
on the Security Council to show results from — or at
least create mechanisms for the realization of — the
provisions of its resolutions. The Council needs, for
instance, to keep its focus current and dynamic.

Yearly updates of its child soldiers list, such as
the ones included in annexes I and II to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, represent a practical instrument for
monitoring the situation. However, those lists need to
reflect feedback from the parties on the list every year.
The Council may offer its expertise to those other
parties that need help in formulating and implementing
action plans. Member States, especially those that are
parties to the Optional Protocol, need a facility that
will enable them regularly to report on their
compliance in a less cumbersome format. Yesterday we
all heard calls to end the flow of weapons, a
phenomenon that is instrumental in the recruitment and
abuse of children.
Smart sanctions or bans of other targeted
measures may be invoked by the Council as
expressions of its distaste for a phenomenon that, sadly,
has characterized our lifetime. We hope that this stage
of human civilization will go down in history as one of
heightened
respect
for
human
dignity,
and
consciousness of, and sensitivity to, human rights. The
scourge of children in armed conflict taints the
enlightenment that has been achieved. We have to
consolidate our gains and forge ahead, in a holistic
manner, in the era of application, with the advocacy,
interventions, campaigns and other creative measures
which the Secretary-General has devised.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Fiji for the kind words he addressed
to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Ecuador, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like at the outset to ask you, Sir, to
convey to the Minister my country’s gratitude for her
presence in this Chamber, which is clear evidence of
the high priority she attaches to this issue, which is of
such importance to all of us.
Let me express my country’s gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his clear and detailed report on
children and armed conflict contained in document
S/2003/1053, in which he gives us an update of the
work done and achievements registered in this area.
These achievements are very significant, and have, as
the Secretary-General states in his report, been
particularly notable since 1998 when the item on
children and armed conflict was officially incorporated
in the Council’s agenda.

19

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

As the report notes, without doubt, a broad and
solid framework enabling the international community
to continue working to protect children affected by
armed conflict is provided by the machinery relative to
this question in the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court,
International Labour Organization Convention No. 182,
the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child, the relevant provisions of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and of the Convention of the Rights of the
Child and relevant Security Council resolutions.
In order to ensure the necessary protection of
children, especially given the persistence of conflicts
of all types in various regions of the world,
international instruments must be strengthened, their
scope must be extended and they must be effectively
implemented and complied with.
The right machinery must be established to
ensure that those legal instruments are binding not only
for Member States of the international community but
also for the irregular groups that exploit children by
involving them in armed conflicts. The international
community must condemn parties to conflicts that
violate the legal and moral norms relative to this issue.
Ecuador believes that the international community
must
work
with
those
demonstrating
their
determination not to involve children and must act
against those who defy that resolve of the majority.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his worthy initiatives, for the
commitments achieved in various countries to ensure
the welfare and protection of children in conflict and
for greatly raising awareness among authorities and the
public about the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. We also welcome Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of UNICEF, who requested that this
issue be included in all resolutions of the Security
Council.
One of the saddest and most tragic realities that
we have noted in various regions of the world is the
profound suffering to which children are exposed as a
result of armed conflicts. The report of the SecretaryGeneral takes note of this intolerable reality, including
the risks that children face: killings, orphanhood,
mutilation, abductions, the denial of education, the lack

20

of health care and grave psychological disorders and
trauma. The report also notes the grave situation faced
by child refugees and internally displaced children,
who are vulnerable to violence, recruitment, sexual
exploitation, disease, malnutrition and death.
The report of the Secretary-General underlines
the effects on children of the illicit trade in small arms,
landmines, munitions and unexploded ordnance and the
problems caused by the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflicts. We believe that allowing children to
bear arms and participate in violence, conflict and
destruction is inhuman and contrary to the highest
values of all societies.
Considerable progress has been achieved in
ending the recruitment of child soldiers, as noted in the
report. However, much remains to be done, many
challenges remain ahead. In these circumstances, the
international community must give priority attention to
this situation by taking more concrete measures to
ensure the most basic rights of children and to mitigate
and prevent the grave effects of armed conflicts on
children. Ecuador supports the proposal the President
made this morning on the specific measures that should
be adopted.
The results achieved in protecting the rights of
children in armed conflicts are praiseworthy.
Nevertheless, we hope that all the necessary efforts and
actions will be redoubled to alleviate the consequences
of armed conflicts on children the world over.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will convey
your greetings to the Minister, who had to leave
momentarily. I now give the floor to the representative
of Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): As stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict
(S/2003/1053), important advances have been made in
the efforts to ensure more effective protection of
children exposed to armed conflict in the course of the
past few years. Yet, the reality on the ground is that, in
many conflict situations worldwide, children continue
to be abused on a massive and appalling scale.
Against that backdrop, we welcome the increased
attention being paid to children’s rights and the
situation of children in conflicts. In our view, it is
especially important that the challenge of protecting
civilians in armed conflict, in particular children, takes
its rightful place as an integral part of all relevant

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

matters dealt with by the Security Council. We
welcome the progressive engagement of the Council.
The four resolutions devoted to the issue of waraffected children are milestones in our efforts to
safeguard children’s rights in armed conflict, and we
must
ensure
their
effective
follow-up
and
implementation.
We are deeply concerned about the situation in
northern Uganda, where children are being abducted
and recruited as soldiers in large numbers. Our hope is
that a peace agreement between the Sudanese
Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement may open a window of opportunity to solve
this issue. We commend and support recent initiatives
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator to bring the
situation in northern Uganda to the attention of the
international community.
Many children who have experienced armed
conflict have been traumatized emotionally and
physically. Not least girls, who are especially
vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence. We
must therefore take special account of children’s needs
in peace operations and negotiations. The rehabilitation
of war-affected children through trauma counselling,
health services and schooling is important in terms of
providing a future for those children. In Norway’s
view, it is therefore important to actively support
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes that address those challenges.
Experience has shown that education, as a
fundamental element in children’s development, can
prevent children from being used for fighting or other
military purposes. We are pleased to note that DDR
programmes have become an integral part of
peacekeeping operations, but we are concerned that the
specific needs of child soldiers have not yet been
sufficiently addressed within the overall planning and
implementation of those programmes. We therefore
welcome the suggestion for an assessment of best
practices, as referred to in the Secretary-General’s
report.
We also welcome the inclusion of child protection
advisers in the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone,
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Mission in Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Angola. It is important that we now assess
the working methods and the efforts made by those

advisers in order to maximize the effect derived from
best practices. Based on that assessment we should
consider the inclusion of child protection advisers in all
peacekeeping operations.
We welcome as highly appropriate the practice of
listing parties to armed conflict that recruit or use
children in situations of armed conflict. We call for the
list to be updated and circulated regularly. We are also
of the opinion that one should consider expanding the
list to cover other forms of egregious violations and
abuses against children in situations of armed conflict.
The
widespread
availability
of
modern
lightweight weapons enables children to become
efficient soldiers in combat. We must therefore
redouble our efforts to establish more efficient
mechanisms to reduce easy access to small arms.
Those who are responsible for exploiting children
during conflict should not enjoy impunity. The Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court classifies
the enlistment and use of children under age 15 in
hostilities, international attacks on hospitals and
schools, rape and other grave acts of sexual violence
against children as war crimes. We urge those States
that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute at
the earliest possible date.
The best way of protecting children is to prevent
armed conflict from breaking out in the first place.
That will require fundamental social change in many
countries. It will require action against poverty, a
breeding ground for human rights violations, that also
gives rise to conflicts and child abuse. Conflicts, in
turn, reinforce poverty. Therefore, we must intensify
our efforts to invest in conflict prevention,
humanitarian assistance, peace-building and long-term
development cooperation. In short, we must make sure
that children in conflict areas have a viable alternative
to military life.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Laurin (Canada): Canada welcomes this
open debate on children and armed conflict, which
comes at a critical juncture for child protection efforts.
We congratulate you, Mr. President, on having opened
this debate with a short video prepared by War Child
Canada. So often visuals are more persuasive than
words.

21

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

We wish to indicate our appreciation,
Mr. President, for the presence of your Foreign
Minister during the greater part of the day. That is a
clear indication of the importance that Chile attaches to
this issue.
The Security Council now has at its disposal a
substantial international framework for action. That
includes Security Council resolutions 1261 (1999),
1314 (2000), 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003), as well as
complementary resolutions on the protection of
civilians, conflict prevention, women and peace and
security, and the safety of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. Together with the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols,
those instruments provide us with the tools to ensure
the protection of children in armed conflict. Canada
encourages those Member States that have not done so
to ratify the Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflicts. Canada calls to the
attention of Member States that the use of child
soldiers is classified as a war crime under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Unfortunately, egregious violations of the rights
of children continue to take place. There is much work
that remains to be done. In that regard, we want to
thank the Secretary-General for his November report
on children and armed conflict (S/2003/1053). The
mention of specific conflict situations and the naming
of parties using children in conflicts represent
important steps in efforts to press parties to conflicts to
comply with their international obligations.
We were particularly encouraged to see that the
report and its annexes include not only country
situations already on the Council’s agenda — such as
those in Afghanistan and Somalia — but also situations
equally deserving of the Council’s attention, such as
the events taking place in northern Uganda. We must
think seriously about how we can further induce those
parties to conflict to cease their recruitment and use of
children. We must ensure that there are serious
consequences for those who refuse to comply.
We recognize, however, that the demobilization
of child soldiers is not enough. In his report, the
Secretary-General highlights the importance of
addressing the specific needs of children in our
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
efforts. Girls continue to be left out of DDR
programmes. Greater attention by United Nations

22

agencies and non-governmental organizations is needed
to ensure that girl and boy combatants — regardless of
how they were recruited or used — are demobilized
and gain access to country-specific child protection and
reintegration programmes. In addition, in order to be
deemed successful, the reintegration of children into
their families and communities must include effective
strategies to prevent their re-recruitment.
We must not forget that the violations of
children’s rights that occur in situations of armed
conflict are not limited to the conscription of boys and
girls into fighting forces. In recognition of that, the
Human Security Network has made — and will
continue to make — a comprehensive approach to
children and armed conflict a priority. In that regard,
we fully associate ourselves with the statement made
today by the representative of Mali, which holds the
chairmanship of the Network.
Similarly, discussions of small arms and light
weapons must directly address the implications for
children of the proliferation of these weapons. Our
work at the international and regional levels must not
lose sight of the staggering cost of the misuse of these
weapons for children and their communities, as was
highlighted by Member States at the First United
Nations Biennial Meeting of States on small arms.
(spoke in French)
We have learned that, for child protection
mechanisms to be effective, we need reliable
monitoring and credible reporting with well-articulated
follow-up for non-compliance with the standards
currently in place. We were pleased that the Council’s
resolutions on Liberia and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo contained important references to children,
but, on many occasions, the Council continues to
ignore child protection in its country-specific
deliberations. We realize that the Council must be
provided with relevant and timely information on
which to base its actions. To that end, Canada reiterates
its appeal to the United Nations Secretariat to
formulate concrete advice and recommendations to the
Council on country-specific situations, to report
systematically on child protection and to provide the
Council with the information it needs to act.
However, when such information is provided, the
Council must shoulder its responsibilities and take
action. For peace operations, its action should include
clear mandates and the financial and human resources

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

required for child protection at the country level. In
that regard, the deployment of child protection advisers
in peace support operations is an important way to
systematically monitor and remedy the specific effects
of conflict on children. For example, child protection
advisers have had a clearly positive impact on the
effectiveness of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
we believe they can also make a difference in other
United Nations missions. We urge the Council to
consider the deployment of child protection advisers in
the context of upcoming mandates — for example,
those for the missions in Sudan and Burundi. The
Council must also focus on child protection in the
framework of its own missions — particularly by
meeting with children themselves — and must be able
to follow up swiftly and effectively on reported cases
of egregious violations of children’s rights.
We eagerly await the outcome of the work of the
Office of International Oversight Services assessing the
United Nations system’s response to children and
armed conflict, in conformity with the SecretaryGeneral’s United Nations reform efforts. We hope that
the assessment will provide important guidance on
ways to address child protection in situations of armed
conflict in a sustainable and coordinated way.
Canada recognizes the contribution of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. The Special Representative is a
powerful voice for children victimized by armed
conflict. We encourage the Special Representative to
interact with special rapporteurs, United Nations
actors,
civil
society
and
non-governmental
organizations, and children and youth in his work.
We also wish to highlight the activities of those
who work on the front lines: the representatives of
United Nations agencies and of the partner nongovernmental organizations who — often at personal
risk — strive to meet the needs of children in armed
conflicts. Those efforts are essential to combat
violations of children’s rights and to ensure adherence
to relevant international law.
If the Council truly wants to protect children and
to suppress egregious violations of children’s rights in
situations of armed conflict, it must systematically
meet its commitments. The era of application proposed
by the Secretary-General is well upon us, and we, the
international community, are long overdue in

translating our commitments to the child protection
programme of action and its mechanisms into concrete
operations on the ground.
In conclusion, child protection is a shared
commitment, and we urge Council members —
together with Member States, United Nations agencies
and regional and civil society organizations — to make
good on our commitment to better protect the rights
and well-being of children and to build sustainable
peace for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Monaco.
Mr. Borghini (Monaco) (spoke in French): The
principality of Monaco is always very mindful of
anything that affects children. We have taken note of
the important report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/1053), and we thank him for it. We also thank
his Special Representative and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for
their briefings this morning and their work.
We noted with satisfaction some progress in the
report, particularly in defining norms, drafting reports,
establishing aid and monitoring mechanisms, raising
awareness among the public and authorities, continuing
negotiations and drawing up peace agreements,
working to promote child protection and reintegration,
and in the development of the situation of some
countries — unfortunately rare — all of that often with
the valuable participation of non-governmental
organizations.
However, as the Council is aware, children
continue to be killed, wounded, mutilated, tortured,
raped, prostituted, abducted, displaced, terrorized,
forcibly recruited, forced to become killers themselves,
and so on. As the report stresses, all of this takes place
in a general climate of impunity. The two lists that
appear in the annexes to the report (S/2003/1053) and
that include more than 50 groups and factions or even,
it seems, the armed forces of Member States of our
Organization, are very disturbing. Of course, we are
aware of all the difficulties encountered in trying to put
an end to the conflicts that lead to all of these crimes
and in trying to put an end the crimes themselves, and
we understand that action on these issues needs to be
varied, ongoing, persistent and coordinated. To that
end, we support, of course, the fundamental principles
that should be implemented in the area of the
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and

23

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

reintegration of children, both boys and girls, whether
disabled or not. We likewise support the
recommendations for establishing dialogue with the
parties to the conflicts and the commitments resulting
from this, to the extent possible.
Finally, we support the final recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, in
particular, the recommendations dealing with concrete
action decided on by the Security Council, with appeals
for compliance with norms, with condemnation of
violations committed and implementation of targeted
measures, and with the role of the International
Criminal Court in pursuing the perpetrators.
Before I conclude, I wish to reiterate the thanks
already addressed this morning to the French
delegation for its active role on this issue. And, truly
concluding at this point, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate Chile on the way you have organized and
facilitated this meeting of the Council. Since this is the
first time that I address the Council, I would like to
greet all members, whether permanent or nonpermanent, former or new, and I wish them courage,
determination and success in discharging their
responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Monaco for his kind words and I now
give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to publicly pay tribute to the initiative taken
by Chile in organizing this open debate on a topic as
sensitive and important as this — children and armed
conflict. I would also like to thank, on behalf of my
country, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Otunnu, for his report on children and
armed conflict, prepared in compliance with Council
resolution 1460 (2003), in the negotiations for which
my delegation actively participated.
At the time, Mexico insisted on the importance of
taking advantage of the experience acquired during
peace negotiations and on the inclusion of child
protection advisors in peacekeeping operations and in
the programmes being implemented on demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration and rehabilitation. That is
why we take note, with particular interest, of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2003/1053). For my country, the protection
and rehabilitation of children must be part of all peace
negotiations and of the ensuing agreements. The

24

demobilization of child soldiers should also be sought
at every point during the conflict, as well as the
adoption of special measures to prevent the resurgence
of recruitment and any possible reprisals.
Attention must also be focused on special needs,
such as the concrete and specific needs of girls, in
particular young fighters, as well as of disabled
children. The support and commitment of the
international community, in particular of donor
countries, is indispensable in this regard for the success
of our efforts for reintegration.
The complexity of the issue of children and
armed conflicts is a challenge for the United Nations. It
calls for a coordinated and effective response from
several organs and entities in the system, bearing in
mind their respective areas of competence. We must
also create mechanisms for receiving contributions
from civil society, which in many cases is a source of
privileged and direct information on the situation of
children in armed conflicts.
My delegation is prepared to actively participate
in the analysis of the evaluation prepared by the Office
of Internal Oversight Services on the effectiveness of
the United Nations system’s response to the problem of
children and armed conflict.
There has undoubtedly been progress in the
attention given by the Security Council to the question
of children in armed conflict. There are, however,
conflicts under consideration by the Council in which
the necessary attention to this issue has been lacking.
In compliance with resolution 1460 (2003), the
Secretary-General could include, in his reports to the
Council on conflict situations, a separate section on the
use of minors, which might perhaps point to those
responsible. Such an analysis should include the
repercussions of the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, trafficking in small arms and light weapons
and the use of anti-personnel landmines.
In Mexico’s opinion, the Council has an
important part to play. As determined by resolution
1460 (2003), it can contact the parties to the conflict
when missions are being carried out in the field and
can support the Secretary-General in the dialogues he
may undertake. It can also adopt measures to promote
compliance with international law and international
humanitarian law, in particular relating to children in
armed conflicts, and put an end to impunity for those
who continue to recruit children in violation of these

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

provisions. At the same time, we must recognize the
progress achieved by parties that have committed to
put an end to the recruitment and the use of children in
conflicts and to take all required measures to alleviate
the suffering of children.

We also commend the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the subject (S/2003/1053), which we view
as a considerable improvement over last year’s report
and which contains a series of concrete, clear-cut and
action-oriented recommendations.

Without a doubt, under the leadership of the
Chilean delegation, we are sure these types of issues
will be undertaken.

Azerbaijan
shares
the
view
that
the
comprehensive frameworks established for addressing
this issue in the United Nations need to be regularly
reviewed and updated. Overall, over the course of the
past few years, significant progress on this path has
been achieved, and we welcome the important
advances presented in the report.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Let me begin by
informing the Council that Azerbaijan commemorates
today the anniversary of the so-called “Black January”
tragedy that took place exactly 14 years ago in my
country. We are paying tribute to the innocent victims
of the Soviet invasion. On 20 January 1990, Soviet
troops, 35,000 strong, stormed the capital of
Azerbaijan, the city of Baku, in a desperate, extremely
brutal and yet futile attempt to strangle the evergrowing independence movement and to stop the
demise of the Communist regime in Azerbaijan.
One hundred and thirty-three persons were killed,
744 wounded: these are the tragic and telling figures of
the massacre committed by the brutal and totalitarian
Soviet regime. What is of special relevance to today’s
meeting is that a large number of those killed and
wounded that night were children. This scar is still
fresh in our memory and we mourn today, with
millions of Azerbaijanis around the world, those who
sacrificed their lives for the freedom and independence
of Azerbaijan.
Regarding the topic of today’s discussion, allow
me to join previous speakers in expressing our
gratitude to the Chilean presidency of the Security
Council for convening this debate on this agenda item,
which is of particular interest to the broader
membership. I would also like to thank Mr. Olaru
Otunnu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, and
Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), for the
outstanding
commitment
and
admirable
professionalism with which they have been discharging
their difficult but very important duties, and I thank
them for their very informative and interesting
briefings.

But there should be no room for complacency. We
have to admit that consistent application of this wideranging set of tools and standards on the ground
remains the ultimate challenge for the international
community, and in particular for the Security Council
as the organ bearing primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
clear to all that the gap between theory and practice
must be dealt with first.
Indeed, children continue to be the main victims
of conflicts and their suffering takes many forms,
including murder, imprisonment, recruitment as
soldiers and hostage-taking. Deep emotional scars and
traumas inflicted on children as a result of hostilities
are no less painful, especially among children who
have been forced into being refugees and internally
displaced children, whose number in Azerbaijan is in
the thousands. The consideration of situations of armed
conflict and their consequences for children is of acute
relevance and primary concern to Azerbaijan, due to
the realities of the ongoing conflict in which we are
involved with neighbouring Armenia.
In this regard, we fully support the proposals
contained in section III D of the report on systematic
monitoring, reporting and action, especially the
recommendation that the Security Council “should
encompass all situations of conflict” (S/2003/1053,
para. 83). In that regard, we appeal to the Council and
to the Secretary-General to take due note of the
continued grave situation of the conflict-affected
children of Azerbaijan. In this context, the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the Council should serve as an
important channel for conveying information gathered
through the monitoring framework. Such information
should serve as a trigger for action, which might range
from calls for compliance to condemnation of

25

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

violations and the application of targeted measures. In
order to put an end to the ever-growing culture of
impunity, it is critical that violations lead to concrete
measures being taken by the Council.
Although no active combat action is taking place
on the ground for the time being, one of the many
consequences of the aggression of Armenia against my
country is the fact that more than 50 Azerbaijani
children are still being held in Armenian captivity and
that many others have died after being subjected to illtreatment. These are figures of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, whose representatives
have been denied access to all the places where
Azerbaijani children are imprisoned. According to our
information, their number exceeds 100. Some of those
imprisoned Azerbaijani children have been forcefully
recruited by the Armenian side into the Armenian army
for participation in military activities against
Azerbaijan, which is not only inhuman, but also in
gross violation of many international instruments, in
particular the Optional Protocol to the Convention of
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, to which Armenia is a signatory.
This horrible fact was made known in the press
document issued on 15 January 2004 — a couple of
days ago — by the Committee on the Rights of the
Child, which last Thursday reviewed the second
periodic report of Armenia. The Minister of Social
Security of Armenia, admitting this fact in response to
a question, noted that
“there might have been cases where children
below the age of 18 were called up before 1994
when the conflict with Azerbaijan was sparked
over the Nagorno-Karabagh issue”.
While we expect the official records of that meeting of
the Committee on the Rights of the Child to be made
public, this fact deserves proper assessment not only by
the Committee, but also by the Security Council and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
Having said that, I would appreciate it if the
future reports of the Secretary-General on the matter
would reflect the situation of Azerbaijani children who
have suffered as a result of the conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan.
In conclusion, I would support the words of
Mr. Olara Otunnu, who earlier today said that only the

26

end of conflict is a sure way to start alleviating the
suffering of children in armed conflict. I could not
agree more with that statement and we again turn to the
Security Council, which 10 years ago adopted four
resolutions on the conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, with an appeal to make every effort to
ensure their implementation, which will open the way
to a resolution of that frozen conflict and immediately
disentangle many other knots, including that related to
the situation of children in armed conflict. Let me
repeat again here the concept that the notion of
forgotten conflicts is an insult to those who are
exposed to international neglect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I should like to begin
by extending the appreciation of my delegation to you,
Sir, for convening this meeting today on the agenda
item before us, which reflects the renewed
determination of the Council to protect children from
the ravages of armed conflicts. My delegation also
commends the Secretary-General for his timely report,
which details the advances made towards the protection
of children affected by armed conflict.
My delegation has noted with deep concern the
current deplorable situation of children in armed
conflict. According to statistics provided by the United
Nations Children’s Fund, approximately 20 million
children have been forced to flee their homes because
of conflict and human rights violations and more than 2
million have died as a direct result of armed conflict
over the last decade. At least 6 million children have
become permanently disabled or seriously injured and
more than 1 million have been orphaned or separated
from their families.
The rights of children in armed conflicts should
be acknowledged and respected. We believe that those
rights should be made an explicit priority and firmly
entrenched in peacemaking, peace-building and
conflict resolution processes, as well as in
demobilization and reintegration plans. In view of that,
we value the integration of child protection into the
mandates and reports of peacekeeping missions and the
training of personnel, as well as the appointment of
child protection advisers in United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
My delegation is concerned about the continuing
use and recruitment of children as child soldiers.

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

Statistics indicate that, currently, about 300,000 child
soldiers, including boys and girls under the age of 18,
are involved in more than 30 conflicts worldwide.
Once children are carrying guns and involved in armed
hostilities, their prospects for enjoying life with the
rights set out in the 1989 Convention on the Rights of
the Child will be severely undermined.
Indonesia continues to support concerted
international efforts to alleviate the sufferings of
children dragged into conflicts. Indonesia is a party to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which
upholds the political, socio-economic and civil rights
of children and strongly supports the Optional
Protocol, which strengthens that Convention by calling
for a minimum age of 18 for participation in hostilities.
We also pay particular attention to the importance
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes in addressing the issue of child
soldiers, especially in the post-conflict period. The
overarching considerations concerning the future DDR
for children proposed by the Secretary-General could
become a good basis for further reflection on the issue.
My delegation deplores the incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse of women and children,
especially girls, in humanitarian crises and conflict
situations. In this regard, we emphasize the importance
of special protection for children at refugee camps and
the observance of the Secretary-General’s bulletin on
special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse and those to improve
greater awareness of personnel’s responsibilities as
United Nations peacekeepers, especially in the
protection of vulnerable populations.
Armed conflicts have generally been kept alive
by a continuous supply of weapons. Children become
victims and victimizers when they are involved in
armed conflict. Statistics show that between 8,000 and
10,000 children are killed or maimed by landmines
every year. It is very pertinent in that regard that we
strengthen our commitment to address the impact that
landmines, unexploded ordnance and the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons have on children.
Complex emergencies have an impact on adults
and children that affects them in various ways. Such
situations create additional burdens for children when
they are displaced from their homes and communities
and become
separated
from
their
families.
Humanitarian
assistance
—
including
family

reintegration programmes — is important if we are to
address such situations.
In sum, the future of humanity depends on
children. The use of children in armed conflict casts a
dark shadow over their future, for children who are
exposed to violence often carry fears and hatred in
their hearts and minds that have profound and longterm effects. Hence, much needs to be done to alleviate
their suffering and to ensure that, through adequate
support programmes, they can take their rightful place
in their societies. We are duty bound to extend our
cooperation to the Secretary-General in his efforts to
address the issue of children affected by armed
conflict.
I would be remiss in my duty if I concluded my
statement without commending the role played by the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative
for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, who
has made significant contributions to uplift the lives of
less fortunate children — for many of whom life will
now be worth living — as well as the role of the United
Nations Children’s Fund in addressing the issue. As far
as fulfilling the mandate of the Special Representative
is concerned, my delegation stresses the importance of
close consultation and cooperation between the special
adviser and Member States.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We appreciate
this opportunity to contribute in the review of the
implementation of resolution 1460 (2003), as well as
the Council’s earlier resolutions, 1261 (1999), 1314
(2000) and 1379 (2001). These texts, indeed, provide a
comprehensive framework for addressing the
protection of children affected by armed conflict, as
was stated in resolution 1460 (2003) — a framework
that must be rendered meaningful by means of periodic
review and follow-up. The Council debates of past
years have been instrumental in creating norms and
standards for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. Similarly, new review processes such
as this debate should focus on moving forward with the
implementation of these norms and standards — the
one area where we clearly continue to fall short of the
goals that we have set ourselves.
Despite positive developments, the SecretaryGeneral states in paragraph 49 of his report, “all parties
mentioned in my previous report continued to recruit or
use children” during the period under review and, in

27

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

paragraph 22, that, indeed, “the general situation for
children remains grave”.

means that there must be no doubt who does what and
who is responsible for coordination.

The Council supported the Secretary-General’s
call for an era of application in its most recent
resolution on the subject, resolution 1460 (2003). A
series of concrete steps should now be taken so that we
can effectively enter this era. A first step would seem
to be to send the clear message that impunity for those
involved in child-related war crimes and abuse has to
come to an end. States are responsible for holding
accountable the perpetrators of violations of the rights
of children as contained, inter alia, in the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols
thereto, as well as the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols.

The Council needs to address the issue of
children
affected
by
armed
conflict
more
comprehensively in its daily work, in particular
through situation-specific resolutions. In the period
covered by the present report, of a total of 54 countryspecific resolutions, only nine resolutions, covering
five conflict areas, dealt with children and armed
conflict. Both the Council and the Secretary-General —
whose reports form the basis of action by the
Council — could ensure full coverage of the issue by,
for instance, designating focal points in charge of the
issue.

A number of violations, including the
conscription and enlistment of children under the age
of 15, have been classified as war crimes by the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). If —
and only if — States fail to prosecute crimes such as
the killing and maiming of children, rape and other
grave sexual violence against children, the abduction of
children and the denial of humanitarian access to them,
everything necessary must be done to make sure that
persons responsible for such crimes will be brought
before the ICC, in accordance with the principle of
complementarity.
We thus fully subscribe to the recommendation in
the Secretary-General’s report concerning the need for
proactive advocacy and public information on the role
of the ICC.
As in other areas, application and implementation
prove to be an almost intractable challenge which
requires the sustained resolve and involvement of the
relevant players within the United Nations system.
Children affected by armed conflict deserve and
require such sustained resolve and involvement. As has
become clear both from the report and the debate so
far, effective monitoring and, where necessary, followup action, will be crucial to advance the era of
application. Clear and improved coordination among
the players in New York and in the field will be
necessary if an effective system of monitoring and
reporting is to be established. Given its primary role in
the area of international peace and security, a special
responsibility falls on the Security Council for setting
such up an effective system of monitoring and followup action. There must be institutional clarity. That

28

At the same time, of course, monitoring must not
be limited to country situations on the agenda of the
Council, but, rather, must apply to children worldwide.
We believe that the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict can
play a continued central advocacy role in this respect. I
would like at this juncture to thank the Special
Representative for all the work he has done again over
the past year.
The monitoring of compliance with Council
resolutions and the application of the relevant
standards can be effective only if it is supplemented by
specific measures in cases where non-compliance
persists. Again, the Council has an obvious central role
to play in this respect, and we welcome the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General
regarding targeted measures against those responsible
for recruiting children or other crimes against children.
The existing legal framework for the protection
of children affected by armed conflict has rightly been
praised. But we must now recognize that all norms and
standards are only as good and useful as their
application. In our view, the current report clearly
reveals that implementation has been insufficient and
that much needs to be done in order to reach the level
that, in theory, we should already have attained.
Establishing clear structures within the United
Nations system is a first step and a prerequisite for
such progress, and we hope that the still-outstanding
assessment of the system-wide response to the
challenges in the area of children and armed conflict
will lead to clarity on the role of United Nations
players.

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

Given that significant advances in practice are
urgently needed, we very much hope that the Council
will adopt a strong and clear resolution that can form
the basis for the effective improvement of the situation
of children affected by armed conflict worldwide —
one that, in particular, enables the United Nations
system to take effective action in this respect.
Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): Let me first join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing and presiding over this open debate. We
also express appreciation for the presence earlier today
of the Foreign Minister of Chile.
The plight of children affected by armed conflict
merits the utmost attention on the part of the
international community, and their protection must be
the primary responsibility of all of us.
The delegation of Armenia takes note of some
positive trends in the field of the protection of children
in armed conflict in recent years. As outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report, the issue has gained
significant public and political recognition. A set of
legal instruments has been adopted, providing a
comprehensive framework for addressing the issue. We
welcome the recent entry into force of two major
instruments: the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, and the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. I would like
to inform the Council that Armenia is a signatory to
both instruments and that their ratification is under
way.
It is unfortunate that, despite the legal safeguards
in place, horrendous violations of children’s rights,
such as child soldiering and the killing, maiming and
rape of children, still continue in many parts of the
world. Obviously, it would have been naïve to expect
that problems of such gravity could have been resolved
by the mere provision of the relevant legal norms. My
delegation therefore fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call for “an era of application” of the
internationally agreed norms and standards for the
protection of children in armed conflict.
We believe that, since it is the primary
responsibility of Governments to ensure the protection
of children in armed conflict and to alleviate their
suffering, States’ reporting mechanisms to relevant
treaty bodies and to the Committee on the Rights of the
Child must be strengthened in order to ensure that the

necessary focus is maintained on the issue of children
affected by armed conflict.
Special measures must also be elaborated and
implemented by the international community, and by
the Council in particular, in order to ensure compliance
by non-State actors. In this regard, systematic
monitoring and reporting with respect to the situation
in the field take on particular importance. We view the
integration of child- protection mandates and the
deployment of special advisers in peacekeeping
missions as a positive step forward. However, the issue
of impunity remains critical, and decisive action is
needed in order to put an end to the vicious crimes that
are being perpetrated against children.
The issue of refugee children and their
rehabilitation and reintegration into society are other
important aspects of the problem. Related issues range
from demobilization to the provision of humanitarian
assistance and the ensuring of children’s physical and
psychological recovery. We believe also that the needs
of girls must be given special consideration in the
overall policy of addressing the problems of children
affected by armed conflict.
As a country hosting about 65,000 refugee
children from Azerbaijan, the Government of Armenia
deems these issues of particular concern. Despite the
current socio-economic difficulties facing the country,
the post-conflict rehabilitation of children, particularly
with respect to health care and education, are the focus
of the Government’s attention. The situation of these
children is also reflected in Armenia’s second periodic
report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child
(CRC), which was considered by the Committee on 15
January last.
I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express my Government’s appreciation to the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and to donor
countries for their assistance and support with respect
to child-related issues.
The protection of children affected by armed
conflict is a complex issue which requires a
comprehensive approach. Armenia therefore believes
that concerted action is necessary at the national,
regional and international levels. We believe also that
our efforts should complement each other, with all
stakeholders utilizing the comparative advantages of
their respective mandates and experience. The
Government of Armenia is committed to doing its

29

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

utmost and constructively to contribute to global
efforts to promote this noble cause.
Finally, having followed the discussions, which
evolved in a very constructive manner — something
that is particularly gratifying given the participation of
countries that are not often in agreement with each
other — I cannot but express my regret at the
continued repetition by the delegation of Azerbaijan of
its unchanged rhetoric.
The reference to the so-called military aggression
of Armenia is totally misleading. The resulting
situation is the forced reaction of the people of
Nagorno-Karabakh to Azerbaijan’s decision to use
military force to suppress the legitimate, just and
peaceful quest of the people of Nagorno-Karabakh to
exercise the right to self-determination, which is
guaranteed by international law and the United Nations
Charter.
The references to the four Security Council
resolutions on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict are a
clear attempt on the part of Azerbaijan to read those
resolutions and apply them selectively in a partial and
self-serving manner. Indeed, Azerbaijan itself is in
violation of those resolutions, which urge the parties
concerned to pursue negotiations within the framework
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Minsk group, as well as through direct
contacts between them.
Azerbaijan’s refusal to engage in direct
negotiations with the elected representatives of
Nagorno-Karabakh is one of the main impediments to
the resolution of the conflict. Meanwhile, what Azeri
representatives continue to fail to acknowledge is that
Armenia has done exactly what the relevant Security
Council resolutions have called on it to do — to use its
good offices with the leadership of Nagorno-Karabakh
to help find a peaceful solution of the conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Armenia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Kenya, to whom I give the floor.
Ms. Bahemuka (Kenya): On behalf of my
delegation, Sir, I would like to express our gratitude to
you for having found the time to preside over this very
important meeting. As we gather here today for the
annual debate on children and armed conflict, we need

30

to reflect seriously on the direction we should take in
the quest to protect our children — innocent victims of
the wars that continue to ravage the world.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for having established the
Office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, in order to address critical issues
pertaining to children affected by armed conflict.
We commend the good work which has been
carried out over the years by the Special
Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and his Office. We
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy, for
UNICEF’s continued efforts to address the plight of
children around the world.
We welcome the advances that have been made
since 1998, when this issue was formally taken up by
the Security Council. We are happy to note from the
Secretary-General’s report that children’s issues have
been incorporated into a number of peace accords. We
welcome also the efforts and progress made so far by
the Office of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict in creating awareness of the plight
of children in armed conflict.
We note with gratitude the role played by
regional and subregional organizations and a number of
civil society initiatives on this issue, and we call upon
those organizations that have not yet done so to
consider mainstreaming the protection of war-affected
children into their policies.
As we address this issue, which is very dear to us,
we should not lose sight of the continuing violations of
children’s rights. Despite the existence of a strong and
comprehensive body of legal standards which are
aimed at the protection of children generally, and more
specifically at children in armed conflict, Kenya regrets
that many parties to conflicts continue to ignore these
standards, often with impunity. This calls for a
strengthened and enhanced international enforcement
regime.
We recognize that much more needs to be done to
improve the situation of war-affected children. At a
glance, a number of the ongoing armed conflicts
around the world show a very disturbing picture of the
suffering of the children who are caught up in those
conflicts. The image of those suffering children
strengthens Kenya’s resolve to save them.

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

My Government therefore supports the measures
proposed by the Secretary-General to alleviate the
suffering of war-affected children. We recognize that
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes are key to the resolution of this issue. We
also support the deployment of child-protection
advisers in peacekeeping missions and the training of
peacekeeping personnel in child protection and child
rights.
We especially wish to thank UNICEF, other
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations such as Watchlist on Children and Armed
Conflict, which has taken a lead role in negotiating
with parties to conflicts to ensure the protection of
children.
Kenya continues to play an important role as
mediator in regional conflicts, especially in East Africa
and the Horn of Africa region. Many children affected
by those conflicts are indeed suffering. In that regard, I
wish to urge the incorporation of children’s concerns in
national and regional peace initiatives, agreements and
efforts. As a regular troop-contributing country, Kenya
supports pre-deployment training initiatives for
peacekeepers in regional and United Nations peace
operations.
My delegation is of the view that strengthening
subregional initiatives to end practices which are
harmful to children — including the illicit exploitation
of natural resources, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, cross-border recruitment and the use of
children in armed conflict — should be of paramount
importance to all concerned.
In view of the urgent need to strengthen child
protection measures in situations of armed conflict,
Kenya welcomes the proposals contained in the
Secretary-General’s report, and we hope that they will
provide a useful basis for the way forward. We
therefore look forward to working closely with the
Security Council as it seeks to endorse the proposals
for the establishment and implementation of an
effective monitoring and reporting system, as contained
in the fourth report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict.
Considering the alarming reports of grave
violations against the well-being of children and in
view of the fact that more children suffer from the
denial of humanitarian access, Kenya hopes that the
Council will support the proposal to expand the list of

violations under consideration beyond child-soldiering
to provide a more comprehensive assessment of the
situation of children affected by armed conflict.
We will continue to support every effort by the
Security Council and the United Nations to put an end
to the climate of impunity in which crimes are
committed against children in the context of armed
conflict. In that regard, all parties responsible for
crimes against children should be brought to justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I have now
come to the end of the list of speakers. I give the floor
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, to
respond to the observations and comments made by
delegations.
Mr. Otunnu: I have listened very attentively to
all the comments, critiques and suggestions. We shall
follow up on all these in the coming months, and we
shall stay in touch with both the Council and
delegations that are not on the Council.
Let me very briefly touch on a couple of things.
First, as the Council begins to discuss a resolution on
this issue, our clear preference and hope is that this
would be the occasion for the Council to act, and to act
in terms of the targeted measures that are outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2003/1053) —
targeted measures which would attach to the leadership
of fighting entities and measures which would attach to
organizations involved in fighting.
If it should prove impossible on this occasion for
the Council to act, then it would be exceedingly
important that a clear signal go forth from the Council
that this is not a pro forma postponement but that it is
part of very graduated measures the Council proposes
to take.
In that context, I think it would be very important
that the Council ask parties to conflicts to prepare in
collaboration with United Nations country teams — the
United Nations country presence on the ground —
specific action plans indicating how and within what
time frame they propose to end the recruitment and use
of children as child soldiers, to give a time frame that
would suggest a sense of urgency on this issue and to
come back to the Council within a reasonable period of
time with updated information. Otherwise, I fear that
the credibility of this agenda — the credibility of our
collective efforts to protect war-affected children — as

31

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

well as the credibility of the Council, might suffer as a
consequence.
My second point concerns my satisfaction in
hearing so many delegations underscore the fact that
there are other grave violations of the rights of children
beyond child-soldiering; that all these child victims of
armed conflict deserve the attention, support and
protection of the Council; and that in any monitoring
exercise we should keep most of these grave violations
in view in terms of action and compliance. I express
great satisfaction in hearing that.
The third point I would like to make concerns
monitoring and reporting. Again, I take note of the fact
that there is unanimous support for establishing a
monitoring and reporting system. The SecretaryGeneral’s report outlines most of the elements: the
instruments and standards, what kinds of violations
might be monitored and what actors within the United
Nations system might participate in such a monitoring
exercise — and there are other actors outside: nongovernmental and regional organizations. What we
now require is to deepen and intensify consultations,
discussions, about how the contributions of these
various stakeholders — the gathering and flow of
information,
the
added
value
of
various
contributions — how all these elements can be
coordinated, integrated and become an effective
system.
Fourthly, it is crucial that the Council should
underscore the important role of the United Nations
presence on the ground in relation to monitoring and
reporting and the era of application. United Nations
peace missions, as well as United Nations country
teams and, of course, the non-governmental
organizations — we rely on them to gather information
on the basis of which we then compile reports to the
Council for action.
And in that connection, I would like to say that
beyond the Security Council, there are other centres of
action — the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the International Criminal Court, the
Commission on Human Rights. They, too, should
become engaged in the campaign for the era of
application within their own areas of competence.
I should just like to refer briefly to two comments
by two delegations. First, I should like to thank very
much the delegation of India for a very systematic,
carefully constructed and serious critique of this

32

agenda and the response of the United Nations system
to the use of children in armed conflict. I may not agree
with all the views expressed, but I appreciate the
seriousness with which that critique has been put
forward. This is not the moment to engage in dialogue,
but I promise, following this, to engage in bilateral
dialogue with the delegation to discuss some of those
issues.
The second delegation that I would like to refer to
by name is the delegation of Uganda. I listened with
much interest and with deep sadness to the polemic by
the representative of Uganda, directed at a particular
individual. I know the Council has enough wars on its
hands, so I want to assure members that I am not to
embark on a response to that statement. I think the last
thing the Council wants is to add another civil war,
between the Ugandan delegation and Olara Otunnu, to
its list of conflicts to handle. I do not believe it
appropriate to do that here. Rather, I invite the
delegation of Uganda to join all of us — rather than
fighting each other — in ensuring that we can salvage
the children of northern Uganda, who are condemned
to abominable conditions of human rights abuses and
neglect.
With regard to the lists, I should like to say that
one can question what kinds of lists we might have, but
I think it is very difficult to question the criteria, the
vetting system and the method we use in producing the
lists. The Office of the Special Representative, in fact,
has no presence on the ground, so we rely entirely on
United Nations agencies on the ground and nongovernmental organizations to provide us with
information, on the basis of which we then convene a
group here in New York, which has within it all United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations,
to vet in the most thorough way possible all the
information in order to agree on a list to submit it to
the Secretary-General, who in turn submits to the
Security Council. And that is the same criterion we use
for all situations. So I just wanted to clarify that; I do
not want to embark on a response to the polemic.
Finally, I should like very much to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Foreign Minister for taking the
time to be with us personally today to underscore the
importance that she and Chile attach to this issue. I also
thank the delegation of France, which has taken the
leadership in the past several years in shaping and
guiding this issue within the Security Council. We

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

appreciate that leadership enormously. Again, I thank
the Council warmly.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Otunno for his comments. He may rest assured that
we shall take very much into account his observations
concerning the Security Council’s role on this
important subject.
I now give the floor, under rule 39, to Mr. Daniel
Toole, Director of the Division of Emergency
Programmes of the United Nations Children’s Fund, to
respond to comments made.
Mr. Toole: On behalf of Ms. Carol Bellamy, let
me join others in thanking you, Mr. President, your
Foreign Minister and your delegation for the expert
way in which you have handled these deliberations. In
addition, I thank the delegation of France for its
preparation of the draft resolution.
We welcome today’s action-oriented discussion
and support very warmly the era of application about
which members have spoken. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, he is the
person here; we are the people on the ground. As Ms.
Bellamy noted in her briefing, we are on the ground
before, during and after conflicts, and it is partly our
job to make sure that some of the comments and
observations that have been made today are followed
up on the ground.
We were very pleased by the strong support for a
strengthened system of monitoring and reporting, as
requested even this morning in Ms. Bellamy’s briefing.
The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
currently documents and reports on the situation of
women and children in all countries where we work, so
to add the issue of children and armed conflict has been
a major priority for us for the past 10 years. We
appreciate the interest of the Security Council in this
area, and we shall continue to do more in that regard.
Together with our partners, we shall develop
monitoring mechanisms at the country and field levels,
and we are also examining effective structures in order
to feed into appropriate forums such as the Security
Council, but also regional forums in which members
take part elsewhere.
I would also underline — as did the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General — that it is
important to note the various kinds of monitoring and
reporting that take place. Our aim is to feed into

existing human rights and other mechanisms to ensure
that children’s rights and particular information on
those rights are reflected. That is the mandate of
UNICEF, and that is what we shall continue to do.
UNICEF is also very pleased to hear of the strong
support for child protection advisers. We strongly
support their work in the four peacekeeping missions
where they are deployed. They serve an important
function in relation to, first, capacity-building within
the missions themselves, and secondly, monitoring
reporting within the mandates of peacekeeping
missions. In addition, they allow the situation of
children to be addressed within the complete
peacekeeping operation itself and report back to
Council meetings. As Ms. Bellamy mentioned, we
would support deploying child protection advisers in
all peacekeeping missions.
Moreover, we were very pleased with the strong
support for efforts to support disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). We are
encouraged by the Council’s interest in more sustained
DDR programmes. It is important that the DDR process
be automatically included in peacekeeping mandates.
As I mentioned, we are an operational agency. We
work with non-governmental organizations and other
agencies of the United Nations system on the ground,
and we shall strengthen our efforts to protect children,
to prevent their recruitment and to support their
reintegration once they have been demobilized.
There is also a need to ensure that the lessons
learned and the principles that come out of the DDR
process are endorsed once and for all. In that sense, we
believe that the demobilization of soldiers – as we said
this morning – should not wait for peace, for formal
DDR or for the required resources to be made
available. We would also underline that we recognize
that girls are particularly vulnerable and that they are
also recruited as child soldiers. They need specific
attention and assistance to be reintegrated. UNICEF is
also engaged in extensive dialogue with our partners,
and with partners to conflict, to ensure the release of
children from combat as quickly as possible.
We are pleased that a very large number of
representatives supported the list of countries —
including an updated list and an expanded list — on an
annual basis, including parties to conflicts who recruit
child soldiers. It is an important tool for advocacy and

33

S/PV.4898 (Resumption 1)

an important tool at the field level that we can use
when we return to the country level.

with all members here and to strengthen the protection
of children in armed conflict.

Finally, we are very pleased with the strong
support for action to prevent conflict. It is only when
we prevent conflict that we can truly protect children
against the recruitment, exploitation and abuse linked
to armed conflict. UNICEF is working at the country
level and with partners at the global level to promote
the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Toole for his comments.

As stated by many delegations, our future is our
children. UNICEF will continue to intensify its work

34

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of this
important matter.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.
