II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(a) To exert all their influence and efforts to oppose any
form of collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) To expand campaigns against banks and transnational
corporations collaborating with South Africa;

( c) To provide all forms of assistance to the oppressed
people of South Africa and to their liberation movements;
(d) To disseminate information on the inhumanity of
apartheid and on the righteous struggk of the oppressed people
of South Africa.

27. The General Assembly appeals to sports bodies and
sportsmen:
(a) To uphold the Olympic principle that no discrimination
be allowed on the grounds of race, religion or political affiliation;
( b) To refrain from all contact with sports bodies established on the basis of apartheid or with racially selected sports
teams from South Africa;
( c) To assist sportsmen and sports administrators persecuted in South Africa for their opposition to apartheid in
sports;
(d) To take appropriate action to expel racist South
African sports bodies from all international sports federations
and competitions.

IV. ACTION BY THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST Apartheid
28. The General Assembly requests the Special Committee
against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre against
Apartheid, to take all appropriate measures to encourage
concerted action against apartheid by Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. It invites
the Special Committee, in particular, to promote co-ordinated
international campaigns:
(a) For assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa
and their liberation movements;
(b) For an effective arms embargo against South Africa;
(c) Against all forms of ;cuclear co-operation with South
Africa;
(d) Against all collaboration by Governments, banks and
transnational corporations with South Africa;
( e) Against propaganda by the racist regime of South
Africa and its collaborators;
(f) For the unconditional release of South African political
prisoners;
(g) For the boycott of racially selected South African
sports teams.
29. The General Assembly invites all specialized agencies,
the Organization of African Unity and other intergovernmental
organizations as well as trade unions, churches and other nongovernmental organizations to co-operate with the Special
Committee in the implementation of this Programme of Action.

K
INVESTMENTS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid27 and its special reports, 28
Noting the increase of foreign investments in South
Africa which abets and encourages the apartheid policies of that country,
Welcoming as a positive step the decision of some
Governments to achieve the cessation of further investments in South Africa,
27 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/31/22).
28 Ibid., Supplement No. 22A (A/31/22/ Add.1-3).

19

Considering that a cessation of new foreign investments in South Africa would constitute one important
step in the struggL: against apartheid,
Urges the Security Council, when studying the problem of the continued struggle against the apartheid
policies of South Africa, to consider steps to achieve
the ce~sation of further foreign investments in South
Africa.
58th plenary meeting
9 November 1976

*

* *
The l'residmt of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/W that he had appointed as members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an lnternanational Convention against Apartheid in Sports six of the
seven States to be appointed by him in accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution F above, namely: BARBADOS, CANADA,
CONGO,
JA~fAICA,
l)NITED
REPUBLIC
OF
TANZANIA
and
YUGOSLAVIA.

As a result. the Ad Hoe Committee is composed of the
following /1,femher Stutes: ALGERIA, BARBADOS, CANADA, CONGO,
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBI IC, GHANA, GUINEA, HAITI,
HUNGARY, 1NDIA, 1ND01'ESIA, JAMAICA, MALAYSIA, NEPAL, NIGERIA, PERU, PHILIPPINLS, So~1ALIA, SUDAN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, TRINIDAD AND TOIJAGO, UKRAINIAN Sovmr SOCIALIST REPUBT TC, UNITED REPUIJLIC OF TANZANIA and YUGOSLAVIA.

31/11.

Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year 1975,:;o
A ware that the statement of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 9 November l 97frH provides additional information on the main
developments in the Agency's activities,
Considering the nearly unanimous projection of ever
increasing world demand for energy and noting that
in 1977, its twentieth anniversary, the International
Atomic Energy Agency will hold a major conference
on nuclear power and its fuel cycle at Salzburg, Austria,
to assess the over-all role to be played by nuclear energy
as an alternative energy source presently available,
Appreciating the efforts of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in helping developing countries, through
its expanded training programmes, to meet their manpower requirements for the management, safety and
engineering aspects of their nuclear power projects,
Noting with satisfaction that the report of the Ad
Hoe Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes, set up by the International Atomic Energy
Agency, will deal with the economic, technical, safety
and legal aspects of nuclear explosions for peaceful
purposes as well as the factors involved in the establishment and operation of an international service on
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes,
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
29See A/31/474 and Add.I.
Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report for
1975 (Vienna, July 1976); transmitted to the members of the
General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General (A/31/
171).
3! Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Plenary Meetings, 59th meeting, paras. 92-129.
30 International

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

20

2. Welcomes the important steps taken during t~e
year by the International Atomic Ei:iergy Agency 1~
concluding safeguards agreements with many States,
3. Urges all States to continue to co-operate with
the International Atomic Energy Agency and to take
all necessary measures to enhance the r~cognized _efforts
of the Agency in the fulfilment of its tas~s m the
various fields of the peaceful uses of atonuc energy,
in accordance with its statute;
4. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency on the role it played in the preparatio!1 of the
latest survey of uranium resources, product10n and
demand and urges that this survey should be kept
under constant review;
5 Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Internati~nal Atomic Energy Agency in connexion with its
work regarding the physical protection of nuclear 1!1aterials and its detailed study of the concept of regional
fuel cycle centres;
6. Requests the International Atomic_ En~rgy
Agency to inform the General Assembly at its th1rtysecond session of the results of the Salzburg conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to trans~it to
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency the records of the thirty-first se~sion _of
the General Assembly relating to the Agency s activities.
61st plenary meeting
JO November 1976

31/12.

Question of Cyprus 32

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Deeply concerned over the prolongation of the Cyprus crisis, which endangers international peace and
security,
Reiterating its full support for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity a~d non-align~ent of the
Republic of Cyprus, and callmg once agam for the
cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs,
Deeply regretting that the United Nations resolutions
on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
Mindful of the need to solve the problem of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974 and 3395 (XXX) of 20 November 1975;
2. Demands the urgent implementation of the
above-mentioned resolutions;
3. Calls upon all parties concerned to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General in this regard;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices for the negotiations between
the representatives of the two communities;
5. Expresses the hope that the Security Council will
consider appropriate steps for the implementation of
its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December 1974;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up the
implementation of the present resolution and report
thereon to the Gcncr:ll Assembly at its thirty-second
SeSSH>n;

7. Decides to include the item entitled "Question of
Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-second
session.

65th plenary meeting
12 November 1976

:{ I 13.

Co.operation hetwcen the United Nation!I
and thP Or~anization of African Unity

The General Asse,n/;/y,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity, including in particular resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its thirteenth
ordinary session, held at Port Louis from 2 to 6 July
1976,
Taking into account the statement made by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at
the 31 st plenary meeting of the General Assembly on
14 October 1976,:1~
A ware of the important role which the Organization
of African Unity is playing in helping to achieve the
objectives of the United Nations in the world in general
and on the African continent in particular,
Noting with smisfaction the continued efforts of the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system to help solve the serious
problems which principally affect southern Africa,
A ware of the urgent need to give increased assistance
to the victims of colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid resulting from the intensified acts of repression against the African peoples by the Government
of South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Conscious of the need to take effective steps for the
widest possible dissemination of information relating to
the struggle of the African peoples concerned for their
liberation from colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid,
Bearing in mind the positive results achieved in the
work of the United Nations bodies concerned as a
direct consequence of the participation of representatives of the national liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity in the relevant
proceedings of these bodies in an observer capacity,
I . Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African UnityH and commends his efforts in promoting such co-operation;
2. Again expresses its appreciation of the outstanding contribution made hy the Organization of African
:::: Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Scs-

2.lso sect. I above, foot-note 7, and sect. X.B.2 below,
decision 311403.
32 See

·°'io11. P/cnarv Meetings. 31 st meeting, paras. 74-97.
:ii

A/31/217.
