UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2560’”

MEETING:

,.
1 ~~~~

23 OCTOBER 1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2560), . , , . . , ..,.1..,,......,.....~...,.~...

1

Adoption of the agenda., . ..**.....1*,*.............,..........4...*...,

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 17 October 1984from the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16786). . .,......,..,...........................
. . . . . . . . ..I......

1

SIPV.2560

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicinl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security ‘Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2560th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 23 October 1984, at 4 p.m.
Mr. LCandre BASSOLE

President:

(Burkina

Faso).

Chairman of the Special Committee
which reads as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
Adoption

2.

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 17 October 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16786)
The meeting

“With reference to the letter dated 17 October
from the representative of Ethiopia addressed to the
President of the Security Council, I have the honour
to request the Council to permit me, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, to participate under the provisions of rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure in the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled ‘The question of
South Africa’.”

agenda (SIAgendaI2560)

1.

of the agenda

On previous occasions the Council has extended invitations to representatives of other United Nations bodies
in connection with the consideration of matters on its
agenda. In accordance with past practice in this matter,
I propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid.

was called to order at 4.50 p.m,

Adoption

against Apartheid,

of the agenda

It was so decided.

3. I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 23 October 1984 from the
representatives of Burkina Faso, Egypt and Zimbabwe,
which reads as follows:

The agenda was adopted.

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 17 October 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16786)

“We, the undersigned members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that during its
meetings devoted to the consideration of the item
entitled ‘The question of South Africa’ the Council extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to Bishop Desmond
Tutu, Secretarv-General of the South African Council of Churches and 1984 Nobel Peace Laureate”

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Ethiopia and South Africa in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

[S/16794].

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
decides to accede to this request.
It was so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia) took a place at the Council table, and Mr. von
Schirnding (South Africa) took the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

4. This meeting of the Council has been convened in
accordance with the request made by the representative of Ethiopia, on behalf of the Group of African
States, in a letter dated 17 October addressed to the
President of the Council [S/16786].

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 23 October from the

5. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/16764, which contains the
text of a note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
1

This charade is nothing but a further attempt at the
entrenchment of white supremacy. As such, it has been
rejected not only by the black majority of South Africans, but also by the vast majority of the so-called
Coloured people and those of Asian origin. Furthermore, this rejection has found clear and unequivocal
expression in resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council.

text of General Assembly resolution 3912 of 28 September 1984. Members of Ihe Council have before them
document 5116791, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India,
Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru and Zimbabwe.
6. The first speaker is the representative of Ethiopia,
who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as
Chairman of the Group of African States for the month
of October. I invite him to make his statement.

13. It is to be remembered that the Council, in its
resolution 554 (1984), declared the so-called new constitution not only contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, but also null and void. The
General Assembly, too, has rejected it as null and void
in its resolution 39/2 of 28 September 1984.

7. Mr. DINKA (Ethiopia): On behalf of the Group of
African States at the United Nations and on my own
behalf, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Council. We in the
African Group feel particularly fortunate to have you
presiding over the deliberations
on the situation in
South Africa, for we know full well your commilment
to the struggle of the South African people against the
evil system of institutionalized
racism. Let me also
express our appreciation to you and to the other members of the Council for responding to our request to
convene this meeting and for allowing me to address the
council to introduce the item.

14. As a result, the South African Government, which
is constituted on the basis of that so-called new constitution, is not merely racist but illegal as well. This
illegitimate and racist character of the r&gime has been
further underlined by the popular uprising that followed
the imposition of the racist constitution and the subsequent wave of violence and killings of defenceless
people by the Fascist forces. The institutionalized
racism and the illegal constitution are enforced and maintained today by State terrorism.

8. Decades have now passed since apartheid became
the national policy of the Government of South Africa
and a way of life for the people of that country.

15. This situation cannot continue. It will either deteriorate further, engulfing not only South Africa but
perhaps the entire region in a bloodbath, or it will have
to get better, with the dismantling of the racist apparatus and the establishment of a non-racial and democratic society. Many South Africans, such as Bishop
Desmond Tutu, the 1984 winner of the Nobel Peace
Prize, are striving for the peaceful elimination of nparlheid from South Africa. We know that the course of
action pursued by the Pretoria rtgime will inexorably
lead to racial conflagration in southern Africa.

9. In the name of separate development, the races of
South Africa have been compartmentalized,
with the
whites getting the best and the blacks the worst. The
whites have appropriated everything and the blacks
have been left with nothing. In one country we find
separate societies. In that same country we find the
settlers citizens and the indigenous people stateless.
10. In the warped logic of Pretoria, the blacks are not
stateless; they have their bantustans. To the racist rB
gime in Pretoria, the problem of the human and national
rights of the black South African people has been settled once and for all through the process of bantustanization. Accordingly, blacks will be uprooted from their
ancestral homes and will be settled in the barren wastelands of South Africa to form their caricature homelands, with all the trappings of an independent State,
What a mockery and what a travesty of justice! Fortunately, the world has rejected as illegal and of no consequence these counterfeit entities.

16. As far as Africa is concerned, the choice is not
difficult. The people of South Africa, and indeed of the
entire African continent, choose the path of peace. But
regrettably, that path has all along been blocked by the
racist rCgime, whose intransigence has been reinforced
by the political, economic and other forms of collaboration extended to it by certain Western States.
17, We believe that for the path to peace to be a viable
choice in this respect the international community must
totally isolate the racist regime. Unless our repeated
call for the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII
of the Charter meets with a positive response from the
Council, the people of South Africa will be left with no
other choice than the intensification
of the ongoing
armed struggle.

11. The odious Pretoria regime, however, immune as
usual to the precepts ofjustice and reason, has not only
continued to pursue this policy of bantustanization with
increased vigour but has recently endeavoured “to
solve” the problem of the so-called Coloured people
and those of Asian origin in its characteristic fashion.
We all know of the so-called constitutional
reforms
in South Africa, their substance and the motives
behind them, We also know of the subsequent so-called
referendums and elections.
12. This constitutional
example of the imperial

18. The General Assembly in its resolution 3912 requested the Council to consider the serious situation
in South Africa emanating from the imposition of the
so-called new constitution and to take all necessary
measures, in accordance with the Charter, to avert the

subterfuge is an excellent
dictum of “divide and rule”,
2

them with greater moral strength and fortified their
determination
and resolve to resist Pretoria’s thinly
veiled attempts further to entrench the obnoxious system of apartheid. It is eloquent testimony to the courage and wisdom of the vast majority of South Africans
-blacks,
Coloureds and Asians alike-that
the elections were treated with the contempt they deserved and
boycotted on a massive scale and that so many of them
should have risen in protest and courted detention and
torture rather than yield to injustice, We applaud their
unity and fortitude and salute their faith in sacrifice.

further aggravation of tension and conflict in South
Africa, We in the Group of African States requested the
convening of the Council on the basis of this provision
of that resolution of the general Assembly.
19. The Council now has before it a draft resolution
131167643 which we feel contains modest measures that
are the minimum demanded by the exigencies of the
situation and that could help defuse the tension currently prevailing in South Africa. Much as we believe in
the inevitable triumph of good over evil, ofjustice over
oppression, of freedom over subjugation, we cannot
but remain optimistic and look forward to a positive
result from the deliberations of this Council. I hope it
will not let us down,

24. The situation in South Africa has always been
volatile, with the policy of upurtheid lying at the very
root of this instability. The chain of events beginning
with the conception of the so-called new constitution
and the sham referendum of 2 November 1983 have
further exacerbated a state of acute tension. The outpouring of anger and frustration all over South Africa
before, during and in the wake of the recent charade of
elections must be seen as the inevitable reaction on the
part of the oppressed masses fighting for human dignity-indeed,
for their very survival. In characteristic
fashion, the Pretoria regime has carried out the arbitrary arrest and detention without trial of leaders and
activists of popular organizations; it has indulged ruthlessly in the wanton killing and maiming of defenceless
demonstrators
as well as of workers on strike; and it
has imposed virtual martial-law conditions in attempts
brutally to intimidate
into submission the forces of
change. It was against the background of these grave
developments that the General Assembly urgently considered the issue in September 1984 and adopted resolution 3912 of 28 September, in which, inter nlia, it reiterated its rejection of the new constitution as null and
void and condemned the continued massacre of the
oppressed people, as well as the arbitrary arrests and
detentions, It is against the same background and in the
light of the call by the Assembly to the Council that we
meet once again in urgent session here today.

20. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): At the outset, Sir, may
I say how pleased my delegation is to see you preside
over our deliberations. We have already benefited from
the rich experience of meeting under your presidency
during the month of August. While congratulating you,
I look forward to fruitful and constructive action by
the Council under your wise and impartial leadership.
May I take this opportunity also to pay a tribute to
Mr. Elleck Mashingaidze for his wise and skilful handling of the presidency of the Council during the month
of September.
21. It was barely two months ago that the Council,
under your presidency, Sir, convened [2548fh to 2551st
meetings] to take stock of the grave situation created by
the decision of the racist regime of South Africa to hold
so-called elections to constitute segregated chambers
for the Coloured people and the people of Asian origin.
On that occasion, the debate on this crucial and emotive issue culminated in the adoption of resolution 554
(1984). By that resolution, the Council declared, inter
niia, that the so-called new constitution was contrary to
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that
the results of the referendum of 2 November 1983 were
of no validity whatsoever and that the enforcement of
the new constitution
would further aggravate the
already explosive situation prevailing inside apartheid South Africa. The resolution strongly rejected
and declared as null and void the new constitution
and the impending elections, as well as all insidious
manoeuvres by the racist minority regime of South
Africa further to entrench white minority rule and
npcrrtheid.

25, The final communique adopted by the Meeting of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegation
of Non-Aligned
Countries to the General Assembly at
its thirty-ninth
session, held in New York from 1 to
5 October 1984, stated that they
“considered
that the principal cause of instability
and tension in the region was the South African racist
regime’s continued entrenchment of apartheid internally through brutal repression, dispossession and
exploitation,
intimidation
and constitutional
fraud”
[S/16773, annex, para. 181.

22. That clear and unequivocal message sent out by
the Council was treated by Pretoria with its customary
scorn and arrogance, Even while the debate in the
Council was in progress [2548th meeting], the representative of South Africa saw fit to reject in advance any
decision that the Council might take. Resolution 554
(1984) made no impact on South Africa, whose racist
rulers proceeded with the sham elections as scheduled
on 22 and 28 August 1984.

The Ministers

and Heads of Delegation

expressed

“deep indignation at the fact that, in blatant defiance
of the world community and in the face of opposition
by the overwhelming majority of the people of South
Africa, the Pretoria regime has sought to impose a
new racist ‘constitution’,
under the guise of ‘constitutional reform’, in a bid to dispossess the Afri-

23. The impact of the Council’s resolution was not
Lost on the oppressed people of South Africa. Indeed,
the outcome of the Council’s deliberations provided
3

can majority, divide the oppressed people of South
Africa and further entrench apartheid. . . . While
congratulating the oppressed people of South Africa
for their courageous and united resistance against
the new racist ‘constitution’,
the Ministers and
Heads of Delegation expressed grave concern at the
violation and repression of the racist rtgime against
them, resulting in the killing and wounding of hundreds of people, including children, and detention of
many leaders of the people.

32. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): Please
accept the congratulations of the South African delegation, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of this
Council,
33. Once again the Council has been convened-irregulal’ly convened-to
consider, in flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations, matters which
fall indisputably and solely within the sphere of South
Africa’s domestic affairs. But then, this hardly comes
as a surprise. The Security Council has previously violated its own statutes, most recently on 16 August 1984,

“They commended the oppressed people of South
Africa for their continuing heroism in the face of the
repressive violence and oppression against them”

34. It speaks volumes that those States whose own
record in human rights is more than dismal and which
do not themselves trouble to pay even lip-service to
article 21, paragraphs 1 and 3, of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights have the temerity to invoke that
article against South Africa. Coming from those quarters, the provisions of the relevant article lose their
meaning entirely. How dare these States presume to
prescribe how another sovereign country shouId run its
own affairs?

[ibid., pat-as. 22 and 231.

26. I can do no better than reiterate to the Council this
most recently stated position of the Movement of NonAIigned Countries.
27. In its resolution 554 (1984) the Security Council
solemnly declared that only the total eradication of
aparrlzeid
and the establishment of a non-racial democratic society based on majority rule, through the full
and free exercise of universal adult suffrage by all the
people in a united and unfragmented South Africa,
could lead to a just and lasting solution of the explosive
situation in South Africa. This is the profound truth
that must inspire and guide the endeavours of the international community to restore the dignity and freedom
that is the birthright of the people of South Africa and to
bring peace and stability to that troubled region of the
world.

35. The South African Government rejects whatever
decisions the Security Council may arrive at, now and
in the future, when it purports to address the domestic
affairs of South Africa. It is the Government of South
Africa and the Government of South Africa alone which
bears the responsibility for the safety and the weIl-being
of all its citizens, and it will not be diverted from its duty
to maintain law and order by any action of this Council
or any other organ of the United Nations.
36. Let me refer briefly at this point to the house-tohouse searches conducted in the township of Sebokeng
by the South African police this morning, which have,
of course, already drawn the predictable hysterical
and malicious comments from the usual sources at the
United Nations. In point of fact, the actions of the
South African police are aimed solely at protecting the
inhabitants of the township of Seboken’g from criminal
and other subversive elements who have perpetrated
acts of intimidation,
murder, arson and pillage against
innocent and law-abiding citizens. Let me add that in
their efforts to restore law and order our police have
had the support and the co-operation of the majority of
the local inhabitants.

28. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries is firmly committed to achieving that objective. So, indeed, is
the United Nations. If the rCgime in Pretoria stands in
the way, it is within the power of the Council to overcome its defiance,
29. The delegations of Burkina Faso, Egypt, India,
Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru and Zimbabwe have
submitted a draft resolution to the Council for its consideration [S/167921. We trust that it will obtain the
support of all members of the Council.
30. We shall soon have the privilege of having with us
in this chamber Bishop Desmond Tutu, on whom the
Nobel Peace Prize was conferred just a few days ago.
Let me conclude by recalling his words, spoken in
Soweto only two days ago, and directed particularly at
the white minority community. He said, as reported by
The New York Times of 22 October: “If you think you
can stop us, you are going to be stampeded, you are
going to be overrun. We don’t want you to be overrun,
We say: ‘Come join us. Join the. winning side.’ ”

37. That the representative of India, with his country’s abysmal record of discrimination
and social inequality, should have had the audacity this afternoon to
lecture South Africa on matters of constitutional justice
is the height of hypocrisy, As for Ethiopia, its representative would have done better to look to the interests
of his own people rather than make the preposterous
allegations against my country which he made this
afternoon.

3 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

38. My Government will continue to promote orderly
and evolutionary change for the benefit of all South
Africa’s peoples. It will not allow the irresponsible
4

activities of those who have called this meeting, and
who, of course, are not required to answer for the
consequences of their actions, to impede our progress
towards peace and stability, both in South Africa and
throughout our subcontinent.

this trend is rapidly reversed, it must lead inevitably
to the final decline of the Council’s authority and
reputation.
45. I have been asked by the South African Minister
for Foreign Affairs to state here today that South
Africa, as a regional Power in southern Africa, gives
notice that it has no intention to capitulate, I must
warn that, if the United Nations continues on its present course, South Africa will be forced to withdraw
its contribution towards peace in southern Africa,
Frankly, we have had enough. It is the States around us
which will ultimately suffer, and it is the Organization
which will have to bear the responsibility and which will
have to accept the consequences.

39. As the records of the Council reflect, I have previously explained carefully what the purposes of
the South African Government’s policies are. I have
pointed to the progress that is being made towards
reaching an accommodation in South Africa which will
ensure a just and equitable dispensation for all South
Africa’s peoples.
40, But it is quite clear to me that there is no desire in
the United Nations to evaluate the socio-economic and
political developments in South Africa fairly and objectively. On the contrary, we have learnt from experience
that when South African affairs are discussedin violation of the Charter, as is the casetoday, we can expect
no just, equitable or honest assessmentof the South
African situation. No one apparently dares, in the face
of the vengeful and malicious hostility directed against
my country, to speak up and to defend the very substantial progress which has been made in improving the lot
of South Africa’s peoples in virtually every sphere of
human endeavour.

46. Is it not time for the more responsible Members of
the United Nations which have the real interests of this
body at heart to put a stop to this sort of action?
47. To sum up, as far as the South African Government is concerned I have made our position very plain
in the Council in the past and it is no different today. We
reject the Council’s claim to concern itself with the
internal affairs of the Republic of South Africa and we
reject its presumption in purporting to prescribe how
South Africa should conduct its domestic affairs.

41. It is nothing less than ludicrous that my country
should be condemned by StatesMembers of the Organization whose own people are indisputably worse off
than South Africans of all colours-worse off in every
aspect of life: in genuine constitutional rights, in judicial
rights, in socio-economic development, ineducation, in
health services and in the basic human needs, such as
food and shelter.

48. The PRESIDENT (inferpretation from French):
The next speaker is the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, Mr. Joseph Garba. I invite
him to take a piace at the Council table and to make his
statement.
49. Mr, GARBA (Special Committee against Apartheid): Mr. President, I should like first of all to thank
you and the other members of the Council for giving
me this opportunity to make a brief statement on behalf
of the Special Committee against Apartheid, and to
express my great pleasure that you are presiding over
this meeting devoted to the very grave situation in
South Africa, in spite of the garbage to which we have
just been treated.

42. But, as I have said, there is no point in my repeating here today what we have achieved and what we
are achieving in South Africa, achievements of which
we are justifiably proud. There is no point in my repeating those achievements, for this meeting is not
interested in positive developments in South Africa. It
has been called for one reason and for one reason only:
to stoke further the fires of the anti-South African vendetta in the face of the South African Government’s
achievements along the path of providing a fair dispensation for the political, economic and social aspirations
of all the peoples of our multifaceted society.

50. As we meet today we know that the racist r6gime
of South Africa sent no fewer than 7,000 men into
the segregated African township of Sebokeng, near
Johannesburg, in the middle of the night to intimidate
the African people and to carry out house-to-house
searches and arrest hundreds of Africans. In spite of
what the South African representative said a few minutes ago, I am sure that those members who watched
CBS News this morning saw exactly what happened.
I did, and I was astounded. The press has also reported
that that township of 120,000 people was transformed
into a military camp, with white racist soldiers in
combat gear, and with assault rifles and Alsatian dogs
combing the township, and with helicopters circling
overhead. Reporters were taken through the streets
in armoured troop carriers and saw soldiers spaced
15 metres apart on all the streets of the township.

43. Those who called this meeting are evidently
alarmed becauseour efforts are bearing fruit. They will
stop at nothing to mislead world opinion as to the true
rnotives of the South African Government and they will
leave no stone unturned to try to undermine the progress already achieved. But they will not succeed.They
will fail. And they will fail because the efforts of the
South African Government will increasingly receive
the international recognition which they deserve. We
will not be deterred.
44. With every meeting of this nature the Security
Council falls into greater and greater disrepute. Unless
5

51, According to the report by Reuters: “It was the
Army’s first major operation against its own citizens
since 1960” -that is, since the state of emergency after
the gruesome Sharpeville massacre of 1960. The report
went on to say that it was “the largest combined South
African defence force-police operation ever”.

57. I must emphasize that condemnations
of the
upurtheid rdgime alone are hardly a meaningful response to the situation. We have had numerous condemnations, and we have had repeated defiance by that
regime of this highest organ of the United Nations.
There can be no excuse for any further delay or equivocation in imposing sanctions against the apartheid
r6gime under the provisions of the Charter. We have
seen following the Sharpeville massacre of 1960 and the
Soweto massacre of 1976to which the representative
of South Africa made no reference in his despicable
statement a few minutes ago-that the United Nations
holds the apartheid rCgime responsible and condemns
it.; but that rkgime proceeds with impunity to take revenge on the black people while the major Western
Powers prevent any meaningful action.

52. It is clear that the racist rBgime, in its desperation
at being unable to curb the growing resistance against
apartheid, has embarked on a war against the unarmed
and defenceless black majority of that unhappy country. That operation, I may add, comes soon after the
very large military manoeuvres staged by the Pretoria
r6gime only last month.
53. The Azanian People’s Organization said that the
military occupation of Sebokeng is a declaration of war.
It also said:

58. The apartheid rBgime is sensitive to the attitudes
of the major Western Powers-particularly
the United
States and the United Kingdom-and
of the transnational corporations. It has understood the present attitudes of those Governments as a licence for repression.
Indeed, it calculates that it should now resort to even
more massive repression in order to suppress resistance so that transnational corporations can continue
their operations and earn the “blood money” from the
suffering of the black people. It hopes that it can create
the calm of the grave so that the major Western Powers
can again equivocate on action to eliminate apartheid.
But history does not repeat itself. The oppressed people
are mobilized more than ever and there is a prospect of
an explosion.

“The occupation shows that the South African
Government has completely failed in its policies of
apartheid. The revolutionary
threat of which the
Government talks has its roots in unrepresentative
minority rule.”
54. A spokesman for the United Democratic Front
(UDF) recalled its repeated warnings that South Africa
was entering a state of civil war. Members of the Council may recall that six leaders of the UDF entered the
British Consulate last month to draw the attention of
the world to the explosive situation.
55, What’is happening in South Africa today is not
merely one more struggle by the people for the redress
of grievances and one more act of inhuman repression
by that rCgime.

59. I would like to appeal to the Council not to rest
after adopting another resolution of condemnation or
demands to the apartheid rCgime but to consider.
measures under the Charter to enforce its resolutions.
I would appeal particularly to the United States and the
United Kingdom to listen for once to the appeals of the
oppressed people of South Africa. To be engaged with
the racists and to spurn the representatives of the great
majority of the people is, to say the least, not a sign of
statesmanship, not an act of friendship with Africa, not
evidence of loyalty to the Charter.

56. Ten years ago, when the Council considered the
situation in South Africa, the racist rCgime solemnly
promised to move away from all discrimination
and the
Western Powers used that declaration as a pretext to
veto the exclusion of that rtgime from the United Nations. Since then, behind propaganda about “changes”
and “reforms”,
in orchestration with some Western
Powers and interests, the racist regime has been trying
to dispossess and denationalize the African majority
through the so-called independence of bantustans and
the forced removals of Africans from their lands and
homes. Last year, behind a barrage of misleading propaganda, it enacted a so-called new constitution designed to divide the black people, denationalize
the
African majority and turn an African country into a
white racist bastion. It went ahead with imposing that
constitution last month despite categorical rejection by
the great majority of the people and despite strong
denunciations by the General Assembly and the Security Council. The black people in South Africa are now
struggling not only for their homes, their livelihood and
their elementary rights, but for their fatherland and,
indeed, for the integrity of the continent of Africa. They
are struggling for all the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

-.

60. Whether the apartheid rCgime will be allowed to
run amok and precipitate a wider conflict, with the
black majority forced to lay down lives for its dignity
and survival, or the international community will resolve the situation depends, above all, on the United
States and the United Kingdom. I hope history will not
need to record that those two great countries have again
failed to fulfil their duty, despite all our appeals, and
have brought on a tragedy.
61. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is Bishop Desmond Tutu, to whom
the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table.
62. On behalf of the Council, I should like to welcome
Bishop Tutu. It is a particular honour for us to hear a

I

6
I
I...__

-

-

Nobel Peace Prize winner address the Council, whose
primary function is to ensure the preservation ofinternational peace and security. At a time in the life of our
civilization when apartheid continues to be the shame
of mankind,
no better choice could have been made
than was made in his case. His profound faith in the
dignity of man and his painful and lengthy experience of
npa!Vheid make him a natural choice for that high distinction. Through him, it is all Africa that is honoured,
because of his deep convictions and his tireless efforts
to make men, regardless of colour, race or political
opinion, brothers living together in peace and harmony
and as good neighbours,
63, I have pleasure in inviting
statement.

the past week. Whilst the black community was in the
seventh heaven of delight because of the decision of
that Committee in Oslo, and whilst the world was congratulating the recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize,
the white Government and most white South Africans,
very sadly, were seeking to devalue that prize. An
event that should have been the occasion ofuninhibited
joy and thanksgiving revealed a sadly divided society.
68. 3efore I came to this country in early September,
to go on sabbatical, I visited one of the trouble-spots
near Johannesburg. I went with members of the Executive Committee of the South African Council of Churches, which had met in emergency session after I had
urged Mr. P. W. Botha to meet with church leaders to
deai with a rapidly deteriorating situation. As a result
of our peace initiative, we did get to meet with two
cabinet ministers, demonstrating thereby our concern
to carry out our call to be ministers of reconciliation and
ambassadors of Christ. In this black township we met
an old lady who told us that she was looking after her
grandchildren and the children of neighbours whilst
they were at work. On the day about which she was
speaking, the police had been chasing black schoolchildren in that street, but the children had eluded
the police, who then drove down the street past the
old lady’s house. Her wards were playing in front of
the house, in the yard. She was sitting in the kitchen at
the back, when her daughter burst in, calling agitatedly
for her. She rushed out into the living room. A grandson
had fallen just inside the door, dead. The police had
shot him in the back. He was six years old. Recently a
baby, a few weeks old, became the first white casualty
of the current uprisings.

Bishop Tutu to make a

64. Bishop TUTU: Mr, President, thank you for your
very kind words. I am very deeply humbled by the
honour that has been bestowed on me, I thank you for
the privilege of addressing this gathering. I thank you
for this opportunity
most warmly, on my own behalf
and on behalf of millions in my land who have been
rendered voiceless, the marginalized ones.
65. It is one of the ironies of our South African situation that I would be denied in my home country the
chance of addressing its highest representative body;
hut about that more a little later. 1 speak out of a full
heart, for I am about to speak about a land that I love
deeply and passionately; a beautiful land of rolling hills
and gurgling streams, of clear starlit skies, of singing
birds and gambolling lambs; a land God has richly endowed with the good things of the earth, a land rich in
mineral deposits of nearly every kind; a land of vast
open spaces, enough to accommodate all its inhabitants
comfortably; a land capable of feeding itself and other
lands on the beleaguered continent of Africa, a veritable bread-basket; a land that could contribute wonderfully to the material and spiritual development and
prosperity of all Africa and indeed of the whole world.
It is endowed with enough to satisfy the material and
spiritual needs of all its peoples.

69. No death can leave us cold. Every death diminishes us. Every death is one too many. Those whom the
black community has identified as collaborators with a
system that oppresses them and denies them the most
elementary human rights have met with cruel death,
which we deplore as much as any others. They have
rejected these people operating within the system,
whom they have seen as lackies ahd stooges despite
their titles of town councillors and so on, under an
apparently new dispensation extending the right of
local government to the blacks.

66. And so we would expect that such a land, veritably flowing with milk and honey, should be aland where
peace and harmony and contentment reigned supreme.
Alas, the opposite is the case. For my beloved country
is wracked by division,
by alienation, by animosity,
by separation, by injustice, by avoidable pain and suffering, It is a deeply fragmented society, hagridden by
fear and anxiety, covered by a pall of despondency and
a sense of desperation,
split up into hostile, warring
factions. It is a highly volatile land, and its inhabitants
sit on a powder-keg with a very short fuse indeed, ready
to blow US all up into kingdom-come.
There is endemic
unrest, like a festering sore that will not heal until not
just the symptoms are treated but the root causes are
removed.

70. Over 100,000 black students are out of school,
boycotting-as
they did in 1976-what they and the
black community perceive as an inferior education designed deliberately for inferiority. An already highly
volatile situation has been ignited several times and, as
a result, over 80 persons have died. There has been
industrial unrest, with the first official strike by black
miners taking place, not without its toll of fatalities
among the blacks.
71. Some may be inclined to ask: But why should all
this unrest be taking place just when the South Africa
Government appears to have embarked on the road of
reform, exemplified externally by the signing of the
Nkomati accord [S/26451, annex4 and internally by the

67. South African
society
is deeply polarized.
Nothing illustrates this more sharply than the events of
7

implementation of a new constitution which appears to
depart radically from the one it replaces, for it makes
room for three chamnbers: one for whites, one for
Coloureds and one for Indians-a constitution described by many as a significant step forward?

foodstuffs and also of rents in black townships
-measures designed to hit hardest those least able to
afford the additional costs. It is not surprising that
all this has exacerbated an already tense and volatile
situation.

72. I wish to state here, as I have stated on other
occasions, that Mr. P. W. Botha must be commended
for his courage in declaring that the future of South
Africa could no longer be determined by whites only.
That was a very brave thing to do. The tragedy of South
Africa is that something with such a considerable
potential for resolving the burgeoning crisis of our land
should have been vitiated by the exclusion of 73 per
cent of the population, the overwhelming majority in
the land. By no stretch of the imagination could that
kind of constitution be considered to be democratic.
The composition of the committees, in the ratio of four
whites to two Coloureds to one Indian, demonstrates
eloquently what most people had suspected all along:
that it was intended to perpetuate the rule of a minority.
The fact that the first qualification for membership of
the chambers is racial says that this constitution was
designed to entrench racism and ethnicity. The most
obnoxious features of apartheid would remain untouched and unchanged. The Group Areas Act, the
Population Registration Act, separate educational systems for the different race groups: all this and more
would remain quite unchanged.

76. So the unrest is continuing, in a kind of war of
attrition, with the casualties not being large enough at
any one time to shock the world sufficiently for it to
want to take action against the system that is the root
cause of all this agony. We have warned consistently
that unrest will be endemic in South Africa until its root
cause is removed. And the root cause is apartheid
-a vicious, immoral and totally evil and unchristian
system.
77. People will refer to the Nkomati accord, and we
will say that we are glad for the cessation of hostilities
anywhere in the world. But we will ask: Why is detente
by the South African Government only for export?
Why is State aggression reserved for the black civilian
population? The news today is that the army has cordoned off Sebokeng, a black township near Sharpeville, and 400 or so persons have been arrested, including the ex-moderator of the Presbyterian Church of
Southern Africa and Father Geoff Moselane, an Anglican priest.
78. As blacks we often and often run the gauntlet of
roadblocks on roads leading into our townships, and
these have been manned by the army in what are actually described as routine police operations. When you
use the army in this fashion, who is the enemy?

73. This constitution was seen by the mainline
English-speaking churches and the official white opposition as disastrously inadequate, and they called
for its rejection in the whites-only referendum last
November. The call was not heeded. The blacks overwhelmingly rejected what they regarded as a sham, an
instrument in the politics of exclusion, Various groups
campaigned for a boycott of the Coloured and Indian
elections-campaigned, I might add, against very great
odds, by and large peacefully. As we know, the authorities responded with their usual iron-fist tactics, detaining most of the leaders of the UDF and other organizations that had organized the boycott-and we have
some of them now holed up in the British Consulate in
Durban, causing a diplomatic contretemps,

79. The authorities have not stopped stripping blacks
of their South African citizenship. Here I am, 53 years
old, a bishop in the church, some would say reasonably
responsible; I travel on a document that says of my
nationality that it is “undeterminable at present”. The
South African Government is turning us into aliens in
the land of our birth. It continues unabated with its
vicious policy of forced population removals. It is
threatening to remove the people of Kwa Ngema. It
treats carelessly the women in the KTC squatter camp
near Cape Town whose flimsy plastic coverings are
destroyed every day by the authorities-and the heinous crime of those women is that they want to be with
their husbands, with the fathers of their children.

74. The current unrest was in very large measure
triggered off by the reaction of the authorities to antielection demonstrations in August. The farcical overall
turn-out of only about 20 per cent saysmore eloquently
than anything else that the Indians and the Coloureds
have refused to be co-opted as the junior partners of
apartheid-the phrase usedby Allan Boesak, the founding father of the UDF and President of the World
Alhance of Reformed Churches.

80. White South Africans are not demons; they are
ordinary human beings, scared human beings, many of
them; who would not be, if they were outnumbered five
to one? Through this lofty body I wish to appeal to my
white fellow South Africans to share in building a new
society, for blacks are not intent on driving whites into
the sea but on claiming only their rightful place in the
sun in the land of their birth.

7.5. But there is little freedom in this land of plenty.
There is little freedom to disagree with the determinations of the authorities. There is large-scale unemployment because of the drought and the recession that has
hit most of the world’s economy. And it is at sucha time
that the authorities have increased the prices of various

81. We deplore all forms of violence, the violence of
an oppressive and unjust society and the violence of
those seeking to overthrow that society, for we believe
that violence is not the answer to the crisis of our land.
8

82. We dream of a new society that will be truly nonracial, truly democratic, in which people count because
they are created in the image of God.

be cowed into slibmission by such threats. Their struggle will continue and’will overcome the system of institutionalized apartheid, which has been declared a
crime against all humanity.

83. We are committed to work for justice, for peace
and for reconciliation. We ask you, pleasehelp us; urge
the South African authorities to go to the conference
table with the authentic representatives of all sections
of our community.

90. The inspiring words we just heard from Bishop
Desmond Tutu will no doubt encourage not only the
people of South Africa but also all the front-line States
and, indeed, all of us. I wish the representative of South
Africa had remained in the chamber to listen’ and heed
that appeal from Bishop Tutu, but i wonder if, even
had he been present here, he would have heeded that
appeal. I have grave doubts, because from the record
that we know of the regime of South Africa, that appeal
would have fallen on deaf ears.

84. I appeal to the Council to act. I appeal in the name
of the ordinary, the little people of South Africa.
I appeal in the name of the squatters in Crossroads and
in the KTC camp. I appeal on behalf of the father who
has to live in a single-sex hostel as a migrant worker,
separated from his family for 11 months of the year.
I appeal on behalf of the students who have rejected
this travesty of education made available only for
blacks. I appeal on behalf of those who are banned
arbitrarily, who are banished, who are detained without
trial, those imprisoned because they have had a vision
of this new South Africa. 1 appeal on behalf of those
who have been exiled from their homes.

91. The PRESIDENT (interpretafion from French):
The representative of Ethiopia has asked to make a
statement, and I now call upon him.
92. Mr. DINKA (Ethiopia): I shall be very brief. The
representative of the Fascist Pretoria regime has done
his best to hoodwink the international community again
with the usual garbage for which the representatives of
Pretoria are well known. I shall not allow myself to
stoop to his level by replying in kind. After all, it is very
difficult for one to insult an entity which is the personification of the worst possible insult one can mention.

85. I say we will be free, and we askyou: Help us, that
this freedom come for all of us in South Africa, black
and white, but that it come with the least possible
violence, that it come peacefully, that it come soon.
86. Mr. KRISHNAN (India): Some entirely uncalledfor remarks and unfounded allegations made by the
representative of the apartheid regime of South Africa
have compelled me to speak.

93. The whole world knows that the apartheid regime
is the most odious system, and the international community has declared it a crime against humanity. We
only hope for the day that this noble chamber will be rid
of such obnoxious representatives of an equally abhorrent regime.

87. The record of my country in preserving and protecting human rights within the framework of democracy is well known, and the last thing I would have
expected to hear in this chamber are unfounded charges
against India from the representative of a rkgime based
on and nourished by institutionalized racial discrimination and deliberate suppression of fundamental human,
political and civil rights.

94. The people of Africa, including those of Ethiopia,
may be poor, but they remain optimistic, not orily as to
their own bright future, but also for the downfall of
apartheid.

95. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it
[S/16791]. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote.

88. Intemperate and unwarranted attacks against my
country, India, and other non-aligned countries, or
against Ethiopia and the African countries on whose
behalf the representative of Ethiopia has spoken, would
be of no avail to the representative of the minority
regime of South Africa in defending what is patently
indefensible andjustifying what the civilized world has
already rejected asa mockery of every value and principle that mankind cherishes and upholds.

96. The PRESIDENT (interpretatidn from Fbnch):
I call on the representative of the Netherlands, who
wishes to make a statement before the vote.

89. The representative of South Africa has again entered the plea of domestic jurisdiction. Long years ago
the United Nations declared and decided that, where
apartheid
was concerned, there could be no shelter
taken behind the Charter of the United Nations. We
have also heard from the representative of South Africa
renewed threats against the sovereign States in the
region of southern Africa. He should know that neither
the people of South Africa nor the front-line States will

97. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): Two months
ago, on the eve of the elections for representatives of
South Africa’s Coloured people and people of Asian
descent, the Council adopted resolution 554 (1984),
thereby rejecting the’ new South African constitution
and affirming that only the total eradication of apartheid can bring about a just and lasting sdlution of the
situation in South Africa. After the elections had been
held and the new constitution had come into effect, the

It was so decided,

9

General Assembly, faced with the outbreak of widespread disturbances accompanying and following the
elections, reacted by condemning South Africa for persisting in its racial policies [res&tion
3912 of 28 September 19841. My country voted in favour of both resolutions.

indicated its readiness to co-operate with other members of the Council in strengthening the existing mandatory arms embargo against South Africa-for
instance,
by complementing
it with a mandatory ban on the import of arms manufactured by South Africa.
102. My Government is deeply distressed by the wave
of violence, deaths and arrests of leading figures involved in the boycott of the elections which has swept
over South Africa in recent months. The Netherlands
strongly supported the Declaration on South Africa by
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the 10 States members of the European Economic Community of 11 September 1984 [S/26741, annex], in which the Ten voiced
their concern at the growing deterioration of the situation in South Africa and announced that they would
seek the immediate release of those detained without
charge. The Ten repeated their concern at these developments in their statement on the occasion of the Day
of Solidarity with South African Political Prisoners.

98. Unfortunately,
things have hardly improved since
then. In several black townships rioting continues to
erupt time and again, causing an ever-increasing number of casualties. Perhaps this upsurge of violence cannot exclusively be attributed to South Africa’s new
constitutional arrangements. Other factors, such as a
rent increase and general dissatisfaction with living
conditions in the black townships, have certainly compounded an already explosive situation. Under these
circumstances one spark is sufficient to provoke the
pent-up frustrations and anger of the oppressed black
majority into outbursts of destruction. Indeed, it must
be feared that as long as the root causes of these events
are not addressed in a decisive manner the flames of
violence will continue to erupt periodically from the
smouldering hatred created by a repressive system.

103. Against this sombre backdrop of mounting confrontation, the news that one of South Africa’s foremost opponents of apartheid and advocates of peaceful
change, Bishop Desmond Tutu, the General Secretary
of the South African Council of Churches, has been
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize is all the more gratifying. We listened with great interest to what he
said today, and we are very pleased at this felicitous
and timely award to a man whose stubborn pursuit of
peaceful change has embodied the hopes of those who,
in spite of the intransigence of the South African Government, hold to their belief that a solution to South
Africa’s problems must be found through dialogue and
reconciliation,

99. As I have explained on previous occasions, the
Netherlands Government is of the opinion that South
Africa’s new constitution, based on proposals which
were endorsed by an exclusively white referendum last
year, utterly fails to meet the grievances and legitimate
aspirations of the majority of the population.
100. Moreover, the new constitutional framework has
clearly been designed to impose severe limits on the
influence which the Coloured and Asian Chambers of
the tricameral Parliament can bring to bear on the
Governmetit’s
decision-making
process, and thus to
ensure continued white dominance. The low voter turnout at the elections for these Chambers demonstrated
that the non-white population of South Africa did not
view the new constitutional set-up as a move away from
the present-day racial policies but, rather, as an attempt
to bolster the system of apartheid by introducing some
cosmetic changes, without touching its hard core. The
international
community, through its rejection of the
new constitution, voiced its concern at these developments, which demonstrate the South African Government’s blindness to the real causes of the growing tensions in that dountry, causes which sooner or later it
will have to address.

104. My delegation agrees with the overall thrust of
the draft resolution before us [S/16791] and accordingly
it will vote in favour of it. The Netherlands strongly
condemns South Africa’s apartheid system, and we
share the view expressed in the draft resolution that its
complete eradication and replacement by a free, nonracial and democratic society, in which all the people of the country, irrespective of race or colour,
will enjoy equal rights, is imperative. We agree with
those who drafted the draft resolution that this should
include the demands enumerated in operative paragraph 6. The bankruptcy of South Africa’s homelands
policy is becoming more visible every day. Not only has
the creation of these entities failed to elicit even the
slightest measure of recognition by the international
community,
but the inability of the bantustans to SUStain their population has demonstrated that the grand
apartheid scheme is an impracticable
illusion. Similarly, the forced removals carried out by the South
African authorities have kept the unfavourable attention of world opinion focused on the inherent brutality
of apartheid.

101. The Netherlands has consistently adopted the
position that the ills of South Africa’s deeply troubled
society can be cured only by a policy of meaningful
steps leading towards fundamental reform. For such
steps to be meaningful they must include a scheme
for eventual power-sharing by all segments of South
Africa’s population and address the all-important
issue
of the disfranchisement of the black majority. With this
objective in mind, the Netherlands has pursued a policy
of increasing the pressure on South Africa, both nationally and through concerted international action, In this
connection I recall that the Netherlands has repeatedly

105. However, the Netherlands cannot agree with
some of the language used in the draft resolution. I wish
to recall that my country, although it condemns the
10

exclusion of South Africa’s black majority from participation in the constitutional process, considers that the
Council is not entitled to pass judgement on the legal
vahdity of a Member State’s constitution or electoral
processes. Furthermore,
we have some reservations
concerning the implicit reference in paragraph 1 to the
International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid [General Assembly
resolution 3068 (XXVIII),
annex].

1IO. What is taking pIace in South Africa is a struggle
not for national liberation but for self-determination.
Apartheid can never be reconciled with the principle of
self-determination.
Within South Africa, courageous
men such as Bishop Desmond Tutu, whose advocacy of
non-violent change has just been repeated and who has
rightly been rewarded with a Nobel Peace Prize, have
long struggled to enjoy equal rights and to have a say in
their own destiny, We believe that it is for the South
African people themselves-all
the people of South
Africa-to
resolve their problems and to be allowed
freely and peacefully to determine their future. Moreover, we believe that all States Members of the Organization have a responsibility to assist and support this
process by working not for armed struggle but for
peaceful change, and by doing all we can to persuade
the Government of South Africa to extend full civil and
political rights to all its people.

106. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/16791.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France,
India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe,
Against:
Abstaining:

111. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): Sir, I should like to begin by offering our congratulations to you in this public session on your
assumption of the presidency for this month and to
express my Government’s satisfaction and pleasure at
your conduct of the affairs of the Council during the
past weeks. We have already had occasion to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of Zimbabwe, on his skilful and adept management of the
Council’s affairs.

None.
United

States of America.

The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none,
1 ubstention [resolution 556 (1984)].

with

107. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
make statements after the vote.

112. In abstaining today the United States interposed
no obstacle to the resolution adopted by the Council,
though some excesses of language prevented us from
joining the Council in voting affirmatively. My Government abhors apartheid. We have expressed this abhorrence on many occasions. We have also repeatedly
expressed our conviction that denial of equal rights to
all South African citizens is wrong in itself and a source
of great unrest and disturbance in South African society. My Government is distressed and concerned by
the violence that has swept South Africa recently. We
fully support the demands expressed in the resolution
for equal rights, majority rule and respect for minority
rights for all South African citizens of all colours and
races.

108. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom):
To
those who would prefer to see apartheid dismantled
without further suffering and self-determination
accorded to ah the people of South Africa without additional bloodshed, the tragic and violent events of the
past few weeks have been profoundly disheartening.
The warnings that were sounded as far back as 25,
35 and more years ago, and have since been repeated
with ever increasing intensity, have not been heeded.
109. The United Kingdom voted in favour of resolution 556 (1984) as a further sign that the international
community
does not believe the problems of South
Africa can or should be resolved by repression, by the
denial of civil and political rights or by violence. Our
vote marks no change in the position we adopted in our
votes on Council resolution 554 (1984) and General
Assembly resolutions 38/11 and 39/2. It does not lie
within the competence of any organ of the United Nations to reject or declare null and void the constitution
of a Member State. The seriousness of the situation in
South Africa speaks for itself: we regret, and regard
as counter-productive,
the exaggerated language used
in several parts of this resolution, including the term
“massacre”,
to describe that situation. In this respect,
‘we regard the expression “crime against humanity” as
one of abhorrence rather than a technical legal description and we do not interpret any part of this resolution
as failing within the terms of Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

113. Indeed, the United States Government strongly
supports the demand for equal rights, freedom, equal
opportunity,
self-government
and self-determination
for all citizens of all countries. We do not believe that
the problems of South Africa will be resolved until all
South African citizens enjoy their full rights as citizens
in a self-governing society, The United States Government’s priorities in southern Africa remain the search
for peace and concrete progress towards our common
goals in South Africa and the region as a whole.
114. May I add that this meeting has given us the
opportunity-and
a very welcome opportunity
indeed-to hear the eloquent views of a great exponent of
human rights, We always listen to Bishop Tutu with
attention. Our respect for him has been expressed many
11

times and on many occasions. At this point it is perhaps
most appropriate for me to quote the words of President
Reagan, who has written to Bishop Tutu saying:

moval to bantustans, which makes many South Africans exiles in their own country, nor the violence
exerted by the forces of order constitute a solution,

“Please accept my congratulations
and those of
the American people on being named the 1984 recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of
your efforts on behalf of peaceful change in South
Africa. All Americans join me in recognizing your
labours in seeking to promote non-violent change
away from apart/z& towards a form of government
based on consent of the governed and towards a
society that offers equal rights and opportunities to
all its citizens,without
regard to race. The United
States has heard the appeal for justice voiced by
South Africans who suffer under apartheid rule. We
continue 10 urge the South African Government to
engage in a meaningful dialogue with all its citizens
aimed at accomplishing a peaceful transition away
from apartheid. We applaud you on being selected
for this honour and assure you that we share these
goals.”

118. Only the establishment of ajust society, based on
equality of rights and respect for the dignity ofeach man
and each woman, can guarantee peace in South Africa,
Such a democratic society must be freely brought about
by all South Africans, without distinction as to race or
colour. This is how my delegation interprets the right
to self-determination
referred to in the resolution and
recognized by Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations as the right of all the peoples of the world,

115.

119. Until that legitimate right is recognized, France
will continue to denounce unequivocally
and unreservedly the apartheid regime and the consequences
and practices that stem from it.
120. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntionfrom
I call on the representative of Ethiopia.

French):

121. Mr. DINKA (Ethiopia): The hour is late, and
I wish only to thank the Council, on behalf of the Group
of African States of the United Nations, for its commendable decision, which we in the African Group
believe to be a positive step towards the elimination of
the abhorrent system of apartheid.

Mr. de La BARRE

de NANTEUIL
(France)
[interpretation
porn French]: We have some reservations regarding certain terms in the first preambular
paragraph and in paragraph 1, particularly concerning
the description of apartheid as a “crime against humanity”. However, we voted in favour of the resolution submitted to us today, as we voted in favour of
Council resolution 554 (1984) last August and, more
recently, on 28 September, of General Assembly resolution 3912.

122. It must be clear, however, that apartheid remains an inhuman system. It remains a threat to international peace and security. The Council, therefore, is
duty-bound to take every measure commensurate with
its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and to remain seized of the situation in South
Africa.

116. I wish to recall what was said by the Minister for
foreign Affairs of France just a few days ago, when he
paid a special visit to New York to address the Special
Committee against Apartheid. He stated that the attitude of South Africa was “morally unacceptable, politically dangerous and intellectually
scandalous”.

123. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

117. Neither constitutional reforms that leave intact
the system of apartheid, nor the policy of forced re-

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

lJnitcd
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
f’rom bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde enticr.
Informez-vous
auprts
des ventes.
New York ou Gcntve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES

NATIONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLKACIONES

Las publicacioncs
de las Naciones
tadas partcs del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estAn en venta en librcrias
a su librcro
a dirijase
a: Naciancs

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

IJNIES

et les agcnces
A : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNlDAS
y was
distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n de Ventas,

90-61313-Feb~wy

1993--2,tio
