S/PV.8581*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8581st meeting

Friday, 19 July 2019, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Popolizio Bardales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (5/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2019/530)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22372 (E)
*1922372*
* Reissued for technical reasons on 4 February 2021.

Colombia

S/PV.8581

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2019/530)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/530, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to present to the Council the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia (S/2019/530). I wish to take this
opportunity to welcome the presence of Mr. Néstor
Popolizio Bardales, Minister for Foreign Relations of
Peru and President of the Security Council; Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia; and Mr. Emilio Archila, Presidential
Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation.
(spoke in English)
During their visit to Colombia last week, Council
members were able to appreciate the achievements of
2/23

19/07/2019

the peace process since their last visit two years ago,
as well as the remaining challenges. The visit was a
timely reaffirmation of the international community’s
strong support for this process. It was well received by
the Government, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC), political parties from across the
spectrum, the heads of the transitional justice system,
civil society organizations, local authorities and
community leaders with whom the Council met in the
department of Cauca.
As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his
report, and as the Council was able to observe on
the ground, the assessment of the peace process
is mixed. While the efforts of the Government to
advance the reintegration of former Fuerza Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) members have begun showing important
concrete results, security in conflict-affected areas
remains of grave concern.
It is also important to highlight that, despite some
recent examples to the contrary, the great majority of
former FARC-EP members, as well as the leadership
of the FARC party, remain strongly committed to the
peace process. This commitment is reflected in their
participation in Congress, their preparations to take
part in the upcoming elections and their efforts to
reintegrate into civilian life and to build a better future
for their families and communities. To cite just a few
examples of what has been accomplished through
the perseverance of former combatants, last week
products of FARC-led cooperatives were on display
at Colombia’s largest agricultural fair in Bogotá,
including coffee, beef products and handicrafts. In
May, five former combatants and three community
members, who have become rafting trainers as part of
an ecotourism project, competed under the Colombian
flag at the World Rafting Championships in Australia.
The support of the Government, local communities and
the international community, among others, has been
instrumental in making this possible.
Over the past six weeks, the Government and the
FARC, joined by the Mission, have undertaken visits
to the ten territorial areas to discuss their future with
former combatants, communities and local authorities.
We commend both the Government and the FARC
for their flexibility and willingness to find mutually
agreeable solutions. This successful joint effort led by
the Government to overcome a hurdle in implementation
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

through dialogue should set an example to advance in
other areas.
The Government has reassured former combatants
of its commitment to formalizing land arrangements for
the territorial areas for training and reintegration and to
maintain the monthly allowance for former combatants.
It is essential to ensure the adequate resources to meet
Government goals for housing, health, education
and childcare.
It is urgent to increase the number of productive
projects for former combatants and to provide the
necessary technical assistance and access to markets in
order to ensure their sustainability. Both parties have a
responsibility to re-energize the process of presentation,
approval and disbursement of funding for the projects.
Communities, ethnic populations and women should be
at the centre of these efforts.
Proper attention must also be paid to the
approximately 8,000 former combatants living outside
the territorial areas, including in new settlements and
urban areas. All actors involved in supporting the
reintegration process must recognize this changing
landscape and adapt strategies accordingly with a view
to providing these former combatants with reintegration
options and security guarantees.
As the Council heard directly from communities in
Cauca, the security situation is extremely concerning
in former conflict areas. Since the Secretary-General’s
report was issued three weeks ago, four more former
combatants have been killed, bringing the number
of former FARC-EP members killed since the peace
agreement was signed to 127. One of those killed
was a former mid-level commander who had been
active in the negotiations in Havana and was leading a
productive project.
The Special Investigation Unit of the Office of
the Attorney General reports advances in half of the
cases of killings of former combatants. This progress is
key, as timely investigations are essential to combating
impunity, including for the intellectual authors of
these crimes. In this context, we welcome the new
measures announced by President Duque Márquez to
improve security and protection for former combatants.
Sufficient resources should also be provided to the
National Protection Unit, which provides protection for
FARC members.

S/PV. 8581

It is important to make every effort so that the
upcoming October elections can be as peaceful as
last year’s presidential and legislative elections. These
elections will be another important step in the political
reintegration of the FARC. To date, the party has
registered more than 120 candidates, approximately
half of whom are former combatants. Additional steps
must be taken to ensure their security, as well as that of
candidates from all other political parties.
We remain gravely concerned about the situation
of social leaders and human rights defenders. As was
mentioned earlier, one leader from Cauca, Francia
Márquez, was not able to attend the meeting with
the Council after being threatened by an illegal
armed group. The plight of hundreds of brave leaders
under threat around the country is unacceptable. The
subcommission of the National Commission on Security
Guarantees recently met to receive inputs from civil
society organizations, but we remain concerned that
the Commission itself has not met for many months.
Its mandate, which is the design and implementation of
a public policy to dismantle criminal organizations, is
essential to putting a stop to these killings.
It is important to note that the Government has
just announced protective measures for leaders of
the National Comprehensive Programme for the
Substitution of Illicit Crops. I welcome those measures,
as well as recent efforts to implement a comprehensive
programme to address the specific situation of women
leaders. These populations are particularly vulnerable
to threats from criminal armed groups and deserve the
special attention they are being given.
The presence of illegal armed groups in former
conflict areas affects all actors present in those areas,
including members of the public security forces, whose
deaths at the hands of these groups we also strongly
deplore. In this context, the importance of establishing
an integrated presence of the State — both security
and civilian institutions — in conflict-affected areas
cannot be overstated. It is not surprising that local
communities and authorities have been unanimous in
their desire for the territorial areas for training and
reintegration to remain, as the resulting increased
presence of State institutions has brought improvements
in security and economic activity. The implementation
of the development programmes with a territorial focus
should also have a positive effect in bringing muchneeded investments to these areas.

19-223723/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

The past few weeks have been marked by the increased
participation of victims in the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. For
instance, on 26 June the Truth Commission held its first
national event on truth, focused on victims of sexual
violence during the conflict. Colombia’s innovative
model of restorative justice is starting to deliver on
its promise to ensure justice and reparations for the
victims. Continued support for the comprehensive
system, including adequate financial resources, is of
the essence.
(spoke in Spanish)
On 15 July, President Duque enacted one of the
Government’s proposed constitutional reforms, which
focuses on provisions of the Final Agreement for the
Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable
and Lasting Peace for dealing with certain crimes, but
clearly establishes that it applies only to future peace
processes. This principle of non-retroactivity is critical
to providing legal security.
We are confident that next week, when
Congress begins a new term, the issues related to
the implementation of the peace agreement will be
discussed in conformity with the spirit and essence
of the agreement and through inclusive dialogue. In
that connection, allow me to reiterate the call of the
Secretary-General for Colombians to focus on what
unites them rather than what divides them.
Finally, I reiterate that truly sustainable peace
requires parallel progress in all components of the final
agreement, including comprehensive rural reform, the
substitution of illicit crops, security guarantees, the
reintegration of former combatants and justice and
reparations for the victims.
(spoke in English)
The peace agreement has resulted in thousands
of lives being saved. It has generated opportunities
for victims and their families to heal and receive
justice, and has enabled economic development for
vast stretches of the country that were ravaged by war
for decades. As was mentioned repeatedly during the
visit, the Council’s steadfast and unified support has
been critical to those achievements, and the Colombian
people and institutions are deeply grateful to the
Security Council. The Colombian peace process is an
outstanding example of how much support the United
Nations can provide when the Council is firmly united.
4/23

19/07/2019

Its continued commitment is needed to help Colombia
secure the peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Massieu for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I welcome you back
to the Council, Mr. President, for your second day
as the presiding officer. May I also welcome Foreign
Minister Trujillo García to the Council, as well as a
number of his colleagues who are now our firm friends
after a very productive visit last week. I once again
thank him and his Government for inviting and hosting
the Security Council.
We just spoke about our visit in the previous meeting
(see S/PV.8580), but I think it was truly invaluable for
all of us to see the situation for ourselves. I believe we
have all returned with a stronger understanding as a
result. Lastly, may I thank Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing to the Council and, through him, his colleagues
on the ground for all their hard work.
We share the assessment of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/530) that now is a critical moment for
the peace process in Colombia, because almost three
years on, the Colombian peace accord continues to
set a positive example to the rest of the world. In that
light, we welcome the commitment of President Duque
Márquez and his Government to the peace process,
which he and members of his Government reaffirmed
repeatedly during the Security Council’s visit last week.
We particularly welcomed President Duque’s request,
in consultation with members of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común, that the Security Council
should extend the United Nations Verification Mission’s
mandate by one year. We look forward to giving that
request due consideration with our Council colleagues
in the coming months.
We are pleased to see that the Truth Commission,
the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing
in the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict and
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace have all started their
work. We also welcome the Government’s efforts to
clearly set out a plan for ending threats and attacks
against community leaders, social leaders and human
rights defenders. We will continue to work with the
Colombian Government as it builds on these successes
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

to ensure lasting peace in the country. We see three key
areas of focus for this work.
First, it is, clearly, crucial that rural reform efforts
be accelerated, as this is one of the interlocking sets
of commitments of the Final Agreement for the
Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a
Stable and Lasting Peace. That goes hand in hand with
rural development. The Government has drawn up
many promising plans for development over the past
year and has approved a number of projects, but the
Government itself says that the time has now come for
concrete action. And while we recognize the significant
political hurdles the Government faces, we fully
support President Duque’s efforts to build consensus.
We hope that progress on the development plans with
a territorial focus, land ownership and registration
processes, and crop substitution initiatives can help
Colombia build confidence in its commitment to peace.
We know it will not happen overnight, but we know,
too, that the Government is committed to achieving
results soon, which we think is essential for the ongoing
peace process implementation.
Secondly, the Colombian Government should give
full political and financial support to the institutions
that work for peace. We welcome the signing of the law
governing the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, as well as
the beginning of work by the Truth Commission and
the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing. I
think it is fair to say that we had an inspiring meeting
with representatives of those three bodies. They face a
huge task, but they are hugely impressive people. But to
inspire confidence among the Colombian people, these
institutions must be well resourced and given public
support by the Government.
Thirdly, the intimidation and killing of social
leaders, community leaders and human rights
defenders continue to damage confidence in the
perceived commitment of the Government to the peace
agreement. After our visit, I think we all now recognize
the difficulties and complexities, particularly after
having seen the situation on the ground, but we believe
the Colombian Government must continue its efforts
to enforce the rule of law in rural areas, to prevent
attacks against community leaders and to bring those
responsible to justice. In many regions of Colombia,
insecurity is increasing the risk that citizens might lose
faith in the State’s ability to provide safety. The risk is
not only to this peace process, but to future ones as well.

S/PV. 8581

Let me take this opportunity again to commend our
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
un Verification Mission in Colombia for their valuable
work, where they have a crucial role in supporting the
Government in its work to build lasting and sustaining
peace. Let me once again welcome the Government’s
plans, activities, commitment and achievements to date.
Many times during our visit, we affirmed how
important it is that the inclusive Colombian peace
process is being supported by all sections of Colombian
society. The Colombian peace process is a bright spot
on the Council’s agenda and a shining example to the
world. I thank all Colombians for their determination to
ensure a sustained peace.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I welcome
you, Mr. President, again to the Council today. I also
thank the Special Representative for his briefing today,
and add my voice of welcome to Foreign Minister
Trujillo García, High Counsellor Archila and your
whole delegation.
The historic 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace offered
a new era of hope to Colombians longing for an end
to decades of violence and insecurity. The innovative
approaches taken by the Colombian Government and
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
(FARC) to establish a peace accord framework has
demonstrated their joint commitment to ushering in
a new era of shared peace and prosperity. The United
States strongly supports that ongoing joint effort to
secure a lasting peace that the Colombian people
deserve. The Special Representative and the staff of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia are
key contributors to that process.
Despite ongoing challenges, progress has been
made in implementing the peace agreement. That
includes a commitment to reintegration by the
Colombian Government and the FARC. It includes
supporting rural populations in substituting illicit crops
and laying the groundwork for transitional justice. It
also includes coordination on security and social
welfare for ex-guerrillas and ensuring the protection of
civil society leaders.
Recent joint visits by the Government and FARC
representatives to 4 of the 24 territorial areas for
training and reintegration demonstrated both parties’
concerns over the future status of those sites and
to maintaining security and strengthening social

19-223725/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

and economic conditions for those communities
in transition. Those positive steps are historic, but
Colombia and its international partners must remain
vigilant in addressing ongoing barriers to lasting
peace. For example, narco-traffickers and illegal armed
groups are seeking to derail the peace process to profit
from the resulting instability and chaos. In Colombia
and elsewhere, the illicit production and trafficking of
cocaine are linked to organized crime, illegal financial
flows and corruption. They pose a threat to public health
and safety in Colombia, throughout Latin America and
around the world.
President Duque Márquez and his Administration
have demonstrated their resolve to expand counternarcotics efforts. Thanks to President Duque’s
aggressive eradication efforts, Colombian coca
cultivation and cocaine production decreased for the
first time since 2012. Colombia destroyed over 60 per
cent more coca in the first four months of 2019 than
during the same period in 2018, and in the first four
months of 2019 alone the Colombian Government
seized nearly 145 metric tons of cocaine.
The United States remains committed to working
with the Duque Administration to pursue a whole-ofGovernment approach to counter-narcotics, rural
development and rural security with the shared goal of
reducing coca cultivation and cocaine production by
half by the end of 2023. Those efforts directly support
peace implementation. We are encouraged by the
Colombian Government’s efforts to extend its presence
into rural conflict-affected areas, which will bring
much needed justice, economic support and security to
vulnerable populations.
The United States is deeply concerned by credible
reports of ongoing violence against human rights
defenders, members of the press and social leaders,
which members of the Council heard about first-hand
during our visit to Colombia last week. We renew our
call on the Government to redouble its efforts to protect
social leaders and members of vulnerable populations
across Colombia, and we reiterate our support for
Colombia’s efforts to ensure that those leaders can
safely accomplish their vital work in support of a just
and lasting peace.
A transitional justice system that promotes peace
and meets victims’ demands for the pursuit of truth
and justice is essential for Colombia’s peace process.
We view the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as vital to
6/23

19/07/2019

addressing war crimes and human rights abuses. It is
imperative that this system, so critical to a just and
durable peace, operate as intended to redress serious
conflict-related crimes, that it not be inappropriately
used by common criminals seeking to elude the regular
criminal justice system, and that its operations take into
account, as appropriate, Colombia’s international legal
obligations. A well-functioning Special Jurisdiction
for Peace will help ensure accountability for crimes
committed by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo and State actors and
provide justice for victims, including by providing
access to reparations.
As Colombia continues to implement its peace
plan, it is also demonstrating regional leadership
by recognizing interim President Juan Guaidó as
Venezuela’s legitimate leader and by supporting
more than 1.5 million Venezuelans fleeing the manmade crisis in Venezuela. Colombia is supporting
that vulnerable population by granting temporary
residency and work permits and by facilitating access
to social services.
The Venezuelan people and regional leaders know
that the illegitimate Maduro regime is singularly
responsible for the chaos that has enveloped the country.
Maduro continues to undermine democratic institutions,
oppress democratic actors, carry out systematic and
violent repression of human rights, and engage in
rampant and widespread corruption. While visiting a
migrant centre in the border town of Cúcuta on 14 April,
Secretary of State Pompeo and President Duque heard
personal stories of hardship from Venezuelans who had
fled their homeland owing to severe shortages of food,
medicine and basic consumer goods. To date, more than
4 million Venezuelans have fled their homeland owing
to Maduro’s senseless cronyism and wanton violence.
The peace in Colombia provides a stark contrast to
the situation in Venezuela. After more than 50 years
of violence, the Colombian people have entered an
auspicious new chapter in which future generations
will no longer have to experience the hardships of
armed conflict. The United States stands firmly with
Colombia to further strengthen its peace gains.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his comprehensive briefing.
I also welcome the presence among us of the Minister
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo García.
This meeting is being held one week after the
Council’s visit to Colombia. I would like to thank the
Colombian authorities, as well as my Peruvian and
British colleagues, for the excellent organization of that
visit. The mission allowed us to witness the commitment
of the Colombian authorities at the highest level to the
peace process. It also demonstrated the importance
of involving all parties, including civil society and
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común, to
ensure the sustainability of the process over time.
I would like to emphasize three points.
First, the increasing polarization of Colombian
society and the security situation continue to be
sources of concern. The outcome of the peace process
is extremely positive, but the uptick in violence and the
lack of confidence on the part of the population and civil
society are worrisome. France condemns the killings
of former combatants, social leaders, human rights
defenders, journalists and individuals involved in crop
substitution. Those are not isolated acts but recurring
phenomena. It is important that this movement of
political violence be combated in and of itself and that
impunity be ended.
In that regard, we welcome the Colombian
Government’s initiatives, including those aimed at
protecting former combatants who choose the path of
reintegration. The implementation of the Action Plan
for the Protection of Social and Community Leaders,
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists, which was
established last year, and the recently announced pilot
projects are steps in the right direction. Those efforts
should be continued and strengthened, particularly in
the run-up to the local elections in October, in order
to ensure that Colombian democracy can flourish in a
climate of trust, calm and security.
Secondly, I would like to stress the importance of
the full implementation of the Final Agreement for the
Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable
and Lasting Peace in all its aspects. The progress made
in recent months must be continued and expanded. In
particular, the entry into force of the statutory law of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace is an important milestone
in the transitional justice process. Its implementation
presents many challenges, including with regard to
the retroactive application of certain provisions, but
respect for the commitments made by all parties must

S/PV. 8581

prevail. It is important that Colombia continue to build
its capacity to strengthen the legitimacy, independence
and sustainability of the transitional justice system.
It is also important that women, who have too often
been victims of violence, be able to find justice. We
will remain vigilant on those subjects, because justice
cannot be separated from the objective of lasting peace
and national reconciliation.
The economic and social reintegration of former
combatants is the main key to the success of the peace
process. Long-term solutions must be found for former
combatants living in the territorial areas for training
and reintegration.
Another key element is the implementation of
measures on rural reform. The issue of access to land
cannot be separated from a sustainable economic
and social development policy. The continuation of
programmes illicit crop substitution programmes
is also important. Finally, the deployment of State
services to the areas that are most vulnerable to illegal
armed groups is essential for successful socioeconomic
reintegration throughout the country.
Thirdly, the support of the Council and, more
generally, the international community is indispensable.
Through the political courage and painful choices
that it has required on the part of all stakeholders, the
Colombian peace process is in many ways a source of
inspiration for all, and the Council in particular. In
that regard, we have a responsibility to support and
sustain the historic choice made in 2016 for forwardlooking national reconciliation. That collective
support, which is reflected in particular in the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and the
United Nations country team, whose work I commend,
deserves to be continued, including in the light of the
forthcoming renewal of the Mission’s mandate.
In my national capacity, I would also like to assure
the Colombian people of France’s friendly support and
readiness to continue to stand by them, together with
our partners in the European Union, on the demanding
path of peace.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome your
presence, Mr. Minister, among us today to preside over
this meeting, which, given its importance, Peru decided
to include in the programme of its presidency. We also
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign Affairs of

19-223727/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

Colombia. We wish both Ministers an enjoyable stay in
New York.
We join the other members of the Security Council
in thanking the team represented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, for the very detailed briefing that
he just delivered.
As we have just heard, very recently the members
of the Council had the opportunity to visit Colombia.
That was a propitious occasion to get to know the
diverse actors of the political scene and the civil society
of the country, both in Bogotá and the department of
Cauca, with whom we shared exchanges on the main
challenges that stand in the way of the reconciliation
process and the attainment and consolidation of peace
in Colombia.
We trust, as we noted during our visit, in the
political will of the Government and the entire political
elite of the country, which, under the leadership of His
Excellency Mr. Iván Duque Márquez, will be inspired by
the smooth coordination of efforts, promoting policies
that take into account the true needs of the citizens and
the positive contributions of all the officially recognized
actors in the process, and that it will open the door wide
to all the other actors that have not joined that peace
process yet, whom we invite to heed President Duque’s
call to release the hostages, lay down their arms and
agree on and support full and inclusive peace in the
great Latin American country of Colombia.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that
the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict
and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace in
Colombia continues to be the foundation on which the
future stability and tranquillity of the Colombian people
is based. As Special Representative Massieu noted, the
agreement is an example to countries around the world
that negotiated solutions are possible. In that regard, we
note with regret the climate of polarization that persists
around certain elements of the agreement, despite
the Government’s commitment to establishing all the
mechanisms necessary to ensure its implementation,
such as its “peace with legality” policy.
We therefore urge the parties, especially the
political forces, to work together to facilitate the process
through inclusive dialogue based on mutual respect. In
that context, we strongly support President Duque’s
request to the Security Council during its recent visit
8/23

19/07/2019

to Colombia for the one-year renewal of the United
Nations Verification Mission. It is imperative that the
Mission continue the excellent work that it is carrying
out, which is widely recognized by all the Colombian
people, until the obstacles that continue to impede the
full and comprehensive implementation of the peace
agreement are completely eliminated.
We are pleased to note the positive progress made
by the Government in ensuring the social and economic
reintegration of former members of the Fuerza Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP), engaged in carrying out various agropastoral projects. We also hope that the objectives of the
reintegration process will be met within the established
deadlines and that the process will be accelerated by
providing security guarantees to former members
of the FARC-EP, fully aware of the many challenges
facing the implementation of the peace agreement.
We welcome the approval by Congress of the
national development plan, which will facilitate the
stabilization road map undertaken by the Government
on peace-related activities. We also note the spirit of
cooperation between the Government and indigenous
peoples, which is equally important for the peace
process in Colombia.
The existence of a legal framework that works
independently and autonomously is paramount for
transitional justice. In that regard, we welcome
the enactment of the statutory law of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. As we approach the local and
regional elections in October, the cooperation and
commitment of institutions, essential sectors of the
State and the people in general are indispensable to
preventing violence from hindering the elections.
Before concluding, I must express our concern over
the violent acts to which the social leaders, activists
and parties to the peace agreement are being subjected.
We call on the competent parties to take the measures
necessary to guarantee the complete safety and security
of those people and the affected areas through the
effective and active presence of Government officials.
Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates
its full support for the authorities and the people of
Colombia in the implementation of the peace agreement
and places its full trust in the team of the United
Nations Verification Mission to achieve the objectives
of that process. We also commend and thank Peru and
the United Kingdom for their successful leadership of
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

the visit to Colombia, the Verification Mission for the
excellent and professional manner in which it prepared
that visit and President Duque, his Government and all
the political and civil society actors for their hospitality
and full availability during the Security Council’s visit.
The success of the peace process in Colombia will be a
major victory for all Colombians.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes your presence, Mr. Minister, and
His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, which raises
the profile of this briefing on the peace process in his
country. We also commend Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, for his informative briefing.
The Security Council’s recent visit to Colombia
has enabled Member States to better understand the
challenges and opportunities associated with the peace
process and to reaffirm their support for the authorities,
as well as other relevant stakeholders. My delegation
takes this opportunity to express its deep gratitude to
the Colombian authorities for the warm welcome and
courtesies extended to the Council during its visit.
In signing the Final Agreement for the Termination
of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and
Lasting Peace on 24 November 2016, the Colombian
parties expressed their shared aspiration to peace and
stability, and their commitment to ending 50 years
of conflict, working to restore the territorial unity
of Colombia, strengthening security and promoting
investments for the development of rural areas. More
than two years after its signing, my country notes the
slow but clearly promising progress that has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore expresses its support for President Iván Duque
Márquez’s call for unity and urges all stakeholders to
work harder to implement their commitments.
In that regard, my country welcomes the involvement
of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
(FARC) in the political process, the activities of the
Congress and transitional justice issues. Côte d’Ivoire
also welcomes the Government’s measures to promote
economic recovery and socioeconomic reintegration,
including the approval of the national development plan,
the launch of 500 projects and the public investment
plan geared towards the compensation of victims and
the reintegration of ex-combatants, and the creation of

S/PV. 8581

viable alternative livelihoods for workers cultivating
illicit crops.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the efforts of
the Colombian Government that enabled the
operationalization of the mechanisms responsible for
the implementation of the peace agreement, namely,
the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement and the Commission on Truth, Coexistence
and Non-Repetition. My delegation is of the opinion
that, in addition to the authorities’ proposals to improve
the multipurpose land cadastre, the June promulgation
of the statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
was a significant step in guiding the peace process. It
is therefore important that meaningful resources be
allocated to ensure its effectiveness and independence.
In view of the forthcoming regional and municipal
elections, it is imperative that the Colombian parties
overcome their differences in order to maintain the gains
achieved so far and pursue the shared task of restoring
peace and stability in the country. Such efforts should
also focus on improving collective security, including
the protection of human rights defenders and former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo. Moreover, the fight
against the informal economy must remain a priority
for the Government, which must also strengthen its
presence and step up the provision of social services in
rural areas in order to redress imbalances in that area.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call on
bilateral and multilateral partners to support the peace
process by supporting the initiatives of the Government
and other stakeholders to foster restoring lasting
peace and development in Colombia. My country also
expresses its support for the Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and encourages him
to pursue his efforts in the fulfilment of his mandate.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We once again welcome you,
Minister Popolizio Bardales, to the Security Council.
I take this opportunity to commend Ambassadors
Meza-Cuadra and Allen for Council’s successful visit
to Colombia. We welcome the presence of Minister
Holmes Trujillo García. It is always an honour to have
him among us. We also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing.
Since the signing of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting

19-223729/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

Peace in 2016, Colombia has taken important steps
and become a source of inspiration and an important
reference for world peace. I say to Minister Holmes
Trujillo García that, as Latin Americans, we feel deeply
proud. We reiterate our support for the implementation
of the agreement and welcome Colombia’s commitment
to implementing it. We also recognize the efforts and
progress made by the Government in the process of
reintegrating former combatants into civilian life and
in providing guarantees for their safety.
However, the peace agreement continues to present
significant challenges. In particular, we should like
to mention two specific situations: first, the political
management of the agreement and, secondly, the latter’s
security ramifications.
With regard to political management, we have no
doubt that the Government is continuing to work to
achieve national consensus on polarizing issues. We
stress the importance of strengthening inclusive and
coordinated dialogue. Furthermore, with regard to the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, we urge the parties to
continue to use the constitutionally established channels
to ensure its effective functioning. We emphasize the
need to preserve the independence and autonomy of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and other transitional
justice mechanisms.
With regard to the security situation, despite
improvements we are concerned about the killings of
former combatants, community leaders and women.
We are also saddened by the acts of violence and
intimidation putatively carried out by organized
criminal groups.
In the Dominican Republic’s view, if no one is held
responsible, then everyone should be held responsible.
We therefore stress that diluting responsibility for
atrocity crimes by having them shouldered by one
generic, non-specific group jeopardizes social cohesion
and non-repetition. In name of the victims, those who
mourn them and Colombian men and women, we urge
the authorities to spare no effort in identifying those
responsible and punishing them as soon as possible so
as to eliminate impunity once and for all, discourage
violence and guarantee improved protection.
We commend the pact for life signed between the
Government of Colombia and civil society organizations.
It is also time to call for greater focus on the more than
7,000 ex-combatants outside the territorial areas for
10/23

19/07/2019

training and reintegration, to ensure the holding of
peaceful regional elections scheduled for October.
We underscore the commitment of the Government
to developing an action plan on youth, peace and
security to catalyse the potential of young people and
their contributions to the implementation of the peace
agreement. In that regard, we congratulate Mr. Ruiz
Massieu and his team for their excellent work and
recognition by all Council members and those who
participated in this week’s briefing on youth, peace and
security (see S/PV.8577), highlighting as a best practice
the strategy of the Colombian Verification Mission to
implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
Lastly, we call on international organizations to
support Colombia’s peacebuilding efforts with a view
to the future. We urge Colombians to work for their
future and to leave their past behind.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are delighted to see you, Mr. Minister,
preside over the Security Council. We are also pleased
to see Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Counsellor Archila and
the entire Colombian delegation among us today. We
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for his presentation
of the report of the Secretary General (S/2019/530) and
for his detailed briefing on the Mission’s work and
developments in the country over the past three months.
Everyone with whom we spoke during the visit
underscored the important role played by the Verification
Mission and the need for its presence in the country as
an important factor in ensuring the implementation of
the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict
and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The report of the Secretary-General prepared us
very well for a successful mission to the country, which
took place from 11 to 14 July. We thank the Government
of Colombia and the Verification Mission for the
excellent organization of the visit. At today’s meeting,
we will base our statement on our impressions we took
back from the visit, because it is better to see things
once than hear about them 100 times. We were able to
see the situation with our own eyes and to understand
at first-hand the country’s delicate social fabric and
the difficulties and successes in implementing the
peace agreement.
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

A notable part of our visit was learning about
an incredible fruit called the “tree tomato”, which
has great consumer appeal. The representative of the
United Kingdom cannot even imagine how well he
hit the nail on the head, because when he mentioned
Russia as a prospective export market for that fruit I
was searching the Internet for places to buy it in New
York. I do not believe that Russia is the only potential
export market for it. Perhaps even the European Union
might want to be involved, in particular Germany, as
I seem to recall that my friend Mr. Heusgen also quite
enjoyed the product.
Turning now to serious matters, I would like to
begin by confirming that Colombia is a fine example of
effective international assistance for stabilization in any
country. That support was possible because Colombians
themselves brokered the life-changing final peace
agreement. Over the past two and a half years since it
was signed, a great deal has been done in the country.
In 2017, the process of the handover of weapons by
former combatants was concluded and, very recently,
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace fully began its work.
Those positive steps ensure that the Colombian peace
process enjoys the support of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council. We welcome the commitment
of the Government to its obligations under the peace
agreement. We again received assurances of that during
our visit to Colombia. That commitment needs to be
continued and put into practice, although we understand
that that is not always easy.
The most striking example of such commitment in
the past three months was the signing by President Iván
Duque Márquez on 6 June of the statutory law of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. It is no secret to anyone
that disagreements surrounding that document had
polarized the society for quite some time, in spite of the
fact that it is stipulated in the final peace agreement.
Many such difficult but necessary decisions will have to
be taken in the future. That is why we fully agree with
the Secretary-General that the impending constitutional
reforms in Colombia require broad internal dialogue.
At this critical stage, the Government’s most important
task should be that of unifying society.
However, apart from that much remains to be done
along the long road to genuine stabilization. During
our visit, we heard criticisms about the stalled agrarian
reform and the insufficient funding of Government
programmes. We heard concerns about the future fate
of the territorial areas for reintegration, which are key

S/PV. 8581

for people returning to a normal peaceful life. Former
combatants who laid down their arms must become fullfledged members of Colombian society, with the same
political and socioeconomic rights and opportunities.
One important aspect of which many have spoken
is ensuring security in areas that have been liberated
from the internal armed conflict. As we see in the
report of the Secretary-General, the absence of the
State in vast areas is leading to an increased risk of
insecurity for the civilian population, including for
disarmed former combatants. Their lives are threatened
by illegal armed formations attempting to gain control
over territory. We heard a great deal of testimony to
that effect during the mission. We very well understand
that people do not have many options when it comes
to ensuring their security. They can either rely on the
protection of the Government or they can take up arms
themselves. The dangers inherent in the second option
need no explanation.
The same goes for agrarian reform. People do
not just need to protect themselves; they also need to
feed themselves. If the Government does not keep its
promises, people will start growing the crops that are
best able to feed them. Simply put, a failure to resolve
issues of security and employment will inevitably lead
to an increase in the number of dissidents. We have long
followed with concern media reports that some former
combatants are leaving Government programmes
and rearming.
During the mission, we often asked our
interlocutors what, in their view, would be the key
to a successful stabilization process in the country
and they told us something interesting. In addition to
reintegrating former combatants and ensuring security
and programmes for socioeconomic development, many
civil society representatives told us that genuine peace
in the country will not be possible without inclusive
work with absolutely all players within Colombia,
including the National Liberation Army. It is hard not
to agree with that. We believe that the Government
should also listen to its people’s opinion on the issue.
In that context, we were pleased to see the letter sent
to the Secretary-General on 26 May, underscoring
readiness to find a political solution to disagreements
with the Government.
In conclusion, I reiterate that here in the Council,
we have repeatedly said that Colombia is a showcase
of effective international support, and today it should

19-2237211/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

become a showcase for national ownership over the fate
of the country. As a permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia stands ready to continue to provide
support to the Colombian peace process so long as the
Government remains committed to fully implementing
the final peace agreement.
Today, a reference was made to the situation
concerning migrants from Venezuela, a large number
of whom are in Colombia. I would like to say that the
resolution to Colombia’s domestic issues depends not
on the situation in Venezuela, but first and foremost
on Colombians themselves. We trust that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, in which
Russian representatives also work, will continue to play
a significant role in supporting the reintegration of the
former members of armed groups into peaceful civilian
life and political activity.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by welcoming you, Mr. President, and
thanking you for presiding over today’s meeting.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, to the Council. I would like to
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his
comprehensive and valuable briefing on the most
significant achievements and challenges to peace
in Colombia.
I would like to commend the measures taken by
the Government of President Iván Duque Márquez and
its commitment to continuing to implement the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace. I must also thank the delegations of
Peru and the United Kingdom for organizing the visit to
Colombia. I thank the Government for facilitating the
mission and everyone who participated in its success.
Colombians have proven to the world that
Colombia can overcome the past, after signing the
peace agreement to end the conflict and build peace,
along with continued efforts to implement the historic
agreement. The agreement has ended a conflict that
lasted for more than half a century, claimed many lives,
injured a great number and left many missing. It is an
example for the whole world on how to end conflicts
through diplomacy and negotiation. One of the most
important challenges facing the implementation of the
agreement is the socioeconomic reintegration of former
12/23

19/07/2019

members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP).
Given what we saw during our mission, we agree
with the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/530)
that the most important challenge is the lack of
adequate, timely funding to implement all aspects of
the transition and the dearth of opportunities to gain
access to land through legal means. However, we
highly appreciate the Government’s efforts to facilitate
the socioeconomic reintegration of former FARC-EP
members through various initiatives, plans and projects
that have been adopted by the National Council on
Economic and Social Policy.
We look forward to achieving the objectives of
the reintegration process through the efforts of the
Government and local communities and authorities and
gradual transition processes involving the provision of
food and basic services until long-term measures for
regional training and reintegration efforts are formulated
after August 15. We underscore the importance of the
illicit crop substitution programme, providing legal and
security guarantees to former members of the FARCEP, and overcoming all challenges to implementing all
aspects of the peace agreement.
Unfortunately, the killings of and threats against
community leaders, including women and indigenous
leaders, and human rights defenders are continuing.
It has been confirmed that nearly 230 killings have
taken place since the signing of the peace agreement,
as Mr. Ruiz Massieu mentioned.
In addition to a number of prevention and
protection initiatives, we commend the measures taken
by the Government to revitalize the Comprehensive
Programme on Guarantees for Women Human Rights
Defenders and Leaders. We also applaud all the
Government’s efforts to re-establish its authority over
all territories and to hold all criminals accountable. We
hope that the statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, which was adopted on 6 June, will serve as
the main pillar to help build the confidence necessary to
create a conducive security and political environment.
We look forward to peaceful elections with a large
turnout in October, as well as to the completed
implementation of all aspects of the peace agreement.
Finally, we commend ongoing efforts to promote
the peace process through the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, under the leadership
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

and in cooperation with national and local authorities,
civil society, international organizations and the private
sector. We also commend the Mission’s efforts to
involve young people and youth organizations. I must
also emphasize the important role played by women
in implementing the peace agreement, as well as in
development, peacebuilding and reconciliation.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me thank the
presidency of Peru for having put the issue of Colombia
on the agenda. Your presence here today, Mr. President,
is a sign of the importance that you attach to this agenda
item. The visit to Colombia was, for me personally,
an eye-opener. I think it was a very important trip; it
showed the unity of the Security Council.
I can only echo what my friend Ambassador
Nebenzia said about friendly competition with regard
to the tree tomatoes. Ambassador Nebenzia actually
gave the tree tomatoes to the wonderful pilots of the
helicopter. I took them home and gave them to my
children, who loved them. He is indeed right that
it is very difficult to buy them in New York, but if
Ambassador Nebenzia is ready to support Colombian
products, I am happy to show him where he can buy
Colombian avocados in New York. I could tell him
now, but we are probably not allowed to do any product
placement here in the Security Council.

S/PV. 8581

Secondly, I would also commend the Colombian
Government. Of course, we know that in the election
campaign for the presidential elections, then-candidate
Duque Márquez was perhaps not the most enthusiastic
about the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. But having
met with him, I must commend him for his political
leadership, because he has clearly demonstrated
that now, as a President, he is fully committed to the
agreement. The fact that, during our trip, he gave the
presidency a letter asking for the continuation of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is a
clear indication of his political commitment. Moreover,
the fact that the Colombian Government has decided to
prolong financial support for the reintegration of former
combatants is another indicator of their commitment to
the peace agreement.
I would also like to reiterate our strong support
for the Verification Mission. While we were there,
we saw how popular Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu is in the country. I do not know who is more
popular — Mr. Ruiz Massieu or footballer Mr. James
Rodríguez — but in any case he does a very important
job and we wish to thank him and his team, as well as
the United Nations country team.

I would also like to thank Colombia and the
Colombian Government for their wonderful hospitality.
Foreign Minister Trujillo García spent two days with
us there. I do not know how much how much work or
pleasure there was for him in this visit, but for us it was
a pleasure and I would like to thank him, as well as the
Counsellor and the Ambassador. When we were there,
it was very clear how important this peace process is
for the country, the Government and the people. When
he mentioned that this struggle endured for 50 years, it
made me think of how it has gone on for longer than the
division of Germany. We saw how deep this conflict
runs and how difficult it is to overcome, with its many
wounds, the many victims and the distrust. Therefore, I
would like to highlight two things.

I do not want to speak for a long time, but I would
like to echo a point that Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu made. The implementation of the agreement
is very important. The former combatants that are
not in the territorial areas now need to be included.
We saw how committed the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) fighters in the territorial areas are and
how engaged they are in their work. The way in which
this community has been established among former
FARC-EP fighters and indigenous populations is
truly exemplary. However, many of them remain on
the outside. Therefore, including them and including
women — both former women FARC-EP fighters and
women and children in general — is really important.
Here I would like to commend the Mission for its youth,
peace and security strategy.

First, the current situation in Colombia really
serves as a source of inspiration to all of those around
the world who are still coping with conflict, proving
that even long-lasting conflicts can be overcome. I
believe that this is what Ambassador Ndong Mba said
earlier; he also gave a very impressive speech when we
were at the territorial area in Cauca.

Everyone around the table has spoken about the
killing of former FARC-EP fighters, social leaders
and human rights defenders. This something that we
are all concerned about, including the Government. We
can only encourage the Government to do its utmost to
fight impunity and fight for accountability. I know how
difficult that is. Colombia is a huge country, but I think

19-2237213/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

that no effort can be spared to enlarge the presence
of the State in in all regions. Ensuring the presence
of the Administration, security and also some very
basic infrastructure, such as schooling for children, is
extremely important.
I would also like to highlight one part of our very
full, rich programme — our Peruvian friends did not
allow us one minute of free time. We had a meeting
with the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and
Non-Repetition, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and
the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing in
the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict. I was
really impressed by their commitment, professionalism
and willingness to really contribute to the reconciliation
of the Colombian people. I would urge the Government
to continue adequate financial support for these
institutions. Given regional activity in the wake of the
new provisions, one should not raise uncertainty about
the legal status of former FARC-EP fighters.
I would like to echo what my American colleague
said with regard to coca production and counternarcotics. The figures are indeed alarming. Germany
fully supports the eradication programme and call for
them to be conducted on a voluntary basis. I know it is
very cumbersome, but the voluntary programmes linked
with the new cadastres that are being established for the
distribution of land are, I think, the only way. Germany
is opposed to the forced eradication and forced aerial
spraying of coca crops. I know it is an easy solution
and some are in favour of it, but we believe that it is not
good for the environment, it is bad for people’s health
and it does not serve its purpose. There are statistics
according to which voluntary eradication sees 1 per
cent of people going back to grow coca again, while
with forced eradication that rises to 40 per cent. We
therefore call for the continuation of the voluntary
programmes only.
Germany will continue to support Colombia
bilaterally. We have had wonderful, long-term relations
with the country since the era of Alexander von
Humboldt. We know the burden it is bearing due to the
refugees from Venezuela and we support it bilaterally
as well as through the post-conflict multi-partner trust
fund for Colombia. We also support the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, which we discussed yesterday
in our meetings on transitions (see S/PV.8579), as we
know how important it is for Colombia, too.
14/23

19/07/2019

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and Foreign Minister Trujillo
García for his presence today in the Security Council.
I would also like to thank the delegations of Peru
and the United Kingdom, as well as the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and the Colombian
authorities for organizing our trip last week. As all
my colleagues who preceded me have said, it was
a valuable opportunity for the Council to express its
support for the peace process and to better understand
the challenges facing Colombia in the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
Belgium welcomes the strong commitment
expressed by all parties during the visit. From
President Duque Márquez, leaders of the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC), heads
of peace-agreement institutions, representatives of
civil society organizations and former combatants
from Santa Rosa to Cauca and the communities with
which the latter live, the main message we heard was
the need and desire to make the peace agreement work.
I personally left Colombia convinced that, despite the
considerable challenges, the country continues to set a
shining example to the regions of the world in conflict
that need inspiration.
The request to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is a clear sign
of this commitment. We also recognize the progress
made in the reintegration of ex-combatants, the pursuit
of a pragmatic solution for the 24 concentration areas,
the approval of national and regional development
plans and the proposal to strengthen the land registry.
It is now important to bolster these reintegration and
rural-reform efforts.
The October elections will be an important stage
in the political reintegration of the FARC. We urge
the authorities to protect social leaders, human rights
defenders, candidates and FARC politicians in the runup to the elections. Women leaders, in particular, are
vulnerable. It is deeply worrying to note that, since the
signing of the peace agreement, the murders of 123
former combatants and several hundred social leaders
have been confirmed. Too often, the perpetrators have
not been held to account. Security guarantees are
therefore needed, especially in the context of a broader
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

extension of the full presence of the State into former
conflict areas.
Belgium welcomes the adoption of the statutory
law of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which is
consolidating its autonomy and independence and
is the cornerstone of the restorative-justice model
in Colombia. I also commend the work of the Truth
Commission and the Unit for the Search for Persons
deemed Missing in the Context of and Due to the Armed
Conflict. These transitional-justice institutions must be
given adequate resources to carry out their mandate.
While recognizing that the vast majority of former
FARC combatants are honouring their commitments
under the peace agreement, I stress that it is crucial
that all FARC leaders set an example and actively
contribute to telling the truth in all the cases being
considered by the Special Jurisdiction. The actions of
a small minority of detractors of the agreement must
not be instrumentalized by others to undermine the
implementation of the agreement, which requires the
continuous courage of all political actors.
Belgium is monitoring, in particular, the situation
of children in armed conflict. We encourage the
Government to prioritize the protection of children,
and I commend the Colombian Family Welfare Institute
for its work. We remain very concerned about the
sharp increase in the recruitment and use of children,
primarily by non-State armed groups.
We regret the persistent polarized atmosphere
around elements of the peace agreement, which
demonstrates the need for inclusive dialogue among all
political actors. Everyone must overcome mistrust and
unite behind peace.
There is no doubt that the historic decision to
end the armed conflict was the right one, despite the
current challenges. This morning, we spoke at length
about the now-famous tomatoes (see S/PV.8580), and
it is true that to see these ex-combatants, who for years
lived with weapons in their hands, today devoting their
energy to growing tomatoes is a powerful image.
I assure all parties of Belgium’s unwavering support
for the peace process.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his informative
briefing. I also thank Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García
for his presence in the Council today. Let me also

S/PV. 8581

extend my gratitude to the Government of Colombia,
the personnel of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, the Secretariat and the leads of
the Security Council visiting mission, in particular
Peru and the United Kingdom, for all the efforts they
undertook to prepare a very successful and important
visit to Colombia. Briefings by Government officials
and sincere dialogue with former members of guerrilla
groups, social leaders and inhabitants of territorial
areas for training and reintegration, vastly improved our
knowledge about the struggles with the reconciliation
process and obstacles to a full implementation of the
peace agreement.
Despite the numerous challenges, the signing of the
peace agreement between Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the implementation process
that followed is rightly being considered a success
story and a great example for others to follow. That puts
additional pressure on the signatories of the agreement
and the Security Council so as to ensure that the
progress achieved does not vanish. We have to recall
the message of President Duque Márquez — to focus on
what unites rather than divides Colombians.
We are pleased to see that the statutory law of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the last missing piece of
the legal framework for Colombia’s restorative model
of transitional justice, is finally in place. It gives the
tribunal a solid legal framework to work autonomously
and independently. We hope that all components of this
comprehensive legal system will have the necessary
resources to carry out its critical functions.
Despite the efforts of the Government, there is still
need for greater guarantees of protection for human
rights defenders and social leaders. The National
Commission on Security Guarantees has a clear role
to play to safeguard the focus of its action plans. This
is particularly important in the run-up to October’s
local and regional elections, where acts of aggression
and intimidation of the candidates could occur even
more frequently.
It is deeply concerning that during the reporting
period, 14 additional former members of FARCEP were killed. Taking into consideration that this
correlates with the growing presence of criminal armed
groups in areas vacated by the FARC-EP, the State
must urgently act to establish an effective presence and
control in those areas.

19-2237215/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

Full political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration
of former FARC-EP members is necessary to create
trust and confidence in the peace process. In this
context, I would also like to emphasize the role of
women, whose participation is crucial. We are satisfied
to recall the mission’s observation that the Government
and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
are strongly committed to this issue. Their respective
leaders are now responsible for providing sustainable
economic opportunities for their people.
We welcome the approval of the Government’s
national development plan with its road map for
stabilization aimed at expanding public investments in
conflict-affected regions of the country. Furthermore,
we note that the 16 development programmes with a
territorial focus have finally begun. These plans can
give much needed hope to people in the neglected areas.
We understand the complicated situation of the
legal status of the 24 territorial areas for training and
reintegration that are authorized until 15 August and
hope that the necessary arrangements agreed with
the FARC will soon be in place. The views of local
communities should also be taken into account, as they
express fear that the departure of the territorial areas
for training and reintegration will negatively impact
their security, social and economic conditions.
According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/530), roughly 1 in 10 former combatants
have disabilities stemming from the armed conflict.
This is an area in which we have not done enough.
Ground-breaking resolution 2475 (2019), which was
adopted unanimously in June, is a significant first
step towards mainstreaming the rights of persons with
disabilities across the United Nations, including in the
peace and security context.
In conclusion, let me underline Poland’s support for
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
and the United Nations country team.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. We warmly recall
our visit to Colombia and appreciate his help and that
of his team in facilitating that very important trip.
Let me also welcome Foreign Minister Carlos Trujillo
García to the Security Council and thank him for the
warm hospitality that was accorded to us in Colombia. I
would also like to thank Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra and
his able team for their excellent arrangements. I need to
16/23

19/07/2019

mention that in the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru, who is presiding over this meeting. I
thank them once again.
From the briefing and the Council’s visit to
Colombia, I would like to address several key
issues. First, Indonesia welcomes the many positive
developments that have occurred in fulfilling the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace, especially the strong commitment
to the reintegration process by the Government and the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC).
We also welcome the statutory law of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, which was enacted in June,
which was the last missing piece in the legal framework
for Colombia’s restorative model of transitional justice.
It will provide the tribunal with a solid legal framework
to work independently and autonomously.
We strongly commend the people of Colombia for
their courage and resolve to achieve peace and stability
in their own country. Their commitment to the peace
process is exemplary. I certainly concur with my
colleague, the representative of the Russian Federation,
who mentioned the importance of a nationally led
Colombian peace process.
Secondly, we acknowledge the very timely mission
of the Security Council to Colombia last week. It
gave us the unique opportunity to witness first-hand
the accomplishments achieved thus far, as well as the
challenges in implementing the peace agreement. We
were able to demonstrate the unified solidarity of the
international community with the Government and
the people of Colombia in their effort to restore peace,
stability and security. Our presence was a positive
affirmation and sign of support for the determination of
the Government and the FARC in a peace process that
benefits all Colombians. Many at this table and in other
contexts during our visit to Colombia have mentioned
requests for continued assistance from the Council and
the United Nations, including the continuation of the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, a request that I believe the Council will
certainly grant.
Thirdly, like others, we are concerned about the
ongoing attacks on and killings of former combatants,
community leaders and human rights defenders. But,
as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/530) also
noted, we are very much encouraged by the intention,
expressed by President Duque Márquez, to respond
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

swiftly to ensure that all responsible individuals are
brought to justice. We had a very open discussion on
the intention to provide protection, which is a very
positive sign when it comes from the President himself.
We believe that the Colombian Government has
the capacity and capability to resolve all issues on the
ground. However, it cannot undertake that enormous
task alone. Indonesia calls upon the international
community to mobilize adequate resources in that regard
and also to assist in bringing peace to Colombia. We
have always stood ready to assist, including by sharing
our experiences and best practices on reintegration and
reconciliation and with illicit-drug crops, with which
we have also had experience in the past. We share
the plight of the Colombian Government, as well as a
programme on crops for peace, including palm oil.
We concur with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu on the need to
redouble efforts to reintegrate former combatants and
to implement development programmes and additional
projects to substitute for the cultivation of illicit drugs.
My colleagues have mentioned only tomatoes — I do not
know why tomatoes are so important — but especially
since we have also seen other projects, involving,
namely, local handicrafts. I believe we improved the
economy of the wives of former combatants by buying
all of their nice bags and caps. I bought one myself and
I know the representative of the United States did so as
well. I think many other projects of this type have to be
carried out.
During our trip, we heard a great deal about
challenges, difficulties and obstacles, but in our open
discussion with the former combatants on coca, there
was a plea by the wife of a former combatant and a
member of a women’s non-governmental organization
on the need to also prioritize the inclusion of women
in the peace process. And I certainly concur with the
representative of Poland on the need to focus on the
plight of women combatants, which is an important
point that I would like to underline once again.
Lastly, we must not lose the existing positive
momentum as we encourage the parties to redouble
their efforts to implement the peace agreement. The
Security Council should also continue to effectively
assist the Government with its peacemaking efforts.
Let Colombia continue to be a success story for the
Council — a nationally led story of peace.

S/PV. 8581

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, let me
start by thanking and congratulating the delegations
of Peru and the United Kingdom, as President of the
Council and penholder on Colombia, respectively, for
leading a very successful mission to the country last
week. The visit by the Council was aimed at improving
its understanding of the status of the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and the challenges
faced by the country. South Africa agrees that the
mission was successful.
I would also like to welcome the Foreign Minister
of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, to
today’s meeting. We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, for his informative briefing and the good
work he and his team are doing in the country.
The consolidation of peace after decades of conflict
and mistrust is not an easy task. We wish to commend
the Government of Colombia for its efforts aimed at
implementing the peace agreement. South Africa’s
position is informed by its principled stance that the
only viable sustainable solution for the conflict lies in a
negotiated and inclusive political settlement that is in the
interests of and nationally led by the people of Colombia.
South Africa therefore fully supports the final peace
agreement that was signed between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in 2016 and
believes that it must be implemented in its entirety and
in a comprehensive manner, ensuring the inclusion of
youth, women and civil society and the protection of
their interests.
South Africa has also noted the progress made
on the demobilization and reintegration process of
members of the FARC-EP, which should be commended.
In this regard, we call on all political parties to fully
respect and remain committed to the agreement and
continue to desist from any actions that may undermine
its comprehensive implementation. In this context,
South Africa also welcomes the recent positive steps
taken by the Government in enacting the statutory law
of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and approving
the national development plan. This plan lays the
foundation for the Government to continue its initiative
to integrate the former members of the FARC-EP and
ensure that they have decent lives.

19-2237217/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

South Africa also agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s observation that the integration of Colombian
society means that even historically excluded areas in
Colombia need to be brought into the fold in order to
ensure a smooth transition into the new era. The new
plan can be used as a basis for identifying peace-related
activities within a broader set of public investments in
all the regions affected by the conflict. In this regard,
South Africa agrees with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that such efforts, especially the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, are the last missing pieces of
the legal framework for Colombia’s transitional-justice
model. Although there is a lot of work to be done going
forward, the country is on a positive trajectory towards
lasting peace and reconciliation.
It is important to deepen efforts to de-escalate
tensions and advance the reintegration process. We
remain concerned about the security of all stakeholders.
It should be noted that integration cannot be achieved if
all parties to the peace process are not guaranteed their
personal security. South Africa is concerned about the
increased killing of FARC-EP members and social and
community leaders. We urge all parties to refrain from
any actions that could undermine the building of the
much-needed trust among all communities and to make
positive efforts in this regard, which can be achieved only
with the cooperation of all communities — particularly
the youth and women in these communities,
who are most disproportionately affected by the
conflict — the Government, former combatants and
institutional mechanisms and frameworks designed to
prevent future violence and tensions.
It is our responsibility as the international
community and, in particular, the United Nations
through the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, to support full compliance with the
agreements reached between the parties concerning the
monitoring and verification of the bilateral and definitive
ceasefire, as well as the cessation of hostilities and the
laying down of arms. It became increasingly visible
during the visit of the Security Council that the work of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is
important and invaluable for the peace process and the
implementation of the peace agreement.
It is encouraging that the Government has taken
a flexible approach in relation to the FARC-EP with
respect to the arrangements on the future of the 24
territorial areas for training and reintegration when
the reintegration status ends on 15 August. It is
18/23

19/07/2019

encouraging that the Government has extended the
date to clarify the status of these territorial areas
for training and reintegration because it is a positive
step towards addressing the security concerns of
these communities. However, to ensure that the
former combatants have adequate access to economic
opportunities, the Government must swiftly approve
plans for the disbursement of funding for economic
activities and initiatives.
South Africa’s own experience with its Truth and
Reconciliation Commission confirmed that its process
was crucial for achieving national unity. Hearing the
different views and versions of events of all communities
in Colombia will ensure that the road to peace is based on
an inclusive political process. A lasting comprehensive
peace can be achieved only with the involvement of all
stakeholders. It is also important for the Government to
speak with one voice in an effort to consolidate national
unity and reconciliation. South Africa therefore calls
on all parties to respect the constitutionally mandated
mechanisms and frameworks established to assist the
political and judicial transition.
Let me conclude by stating that South Africa urges
States Members of the United Nations and international
partners to support and encourage the people of
Colombia to preserve and fully implement the final
peace agreement in a comprehensive manner, address
the concerns and rights of victims to truth, justice,
reparations and non-repetition, as well as inclusive
dialogue and a peaceful settlement. We also support
and look forward to the extension of the Verification
Mission for a period of one year.
For Foreign Minister Trujillo García and his
delegation, I would like to note that a Nelson Mandela
peace bench was unveiled yesterday by the South
African, Norway and the Nobel Peace communities to
mark the one-hundred-first anniversary of the birth of
Nelson Mandela. This bench, which is located at the
visitor’s entrance of the building in which we sit today,
has a simple quotation from Nelson Mandela inscribed
on it: “The best weapon is to sit down and talk”. We
hope that the people of Colombia will continue to sit
down, talk and negotiate, because we believe that by
doing so lasting peace will return to their country.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Foreign Minister Popolizio Bardales as
he presides over today’s meeting and thanks Foreign
Minister Trujillo García for his participation. I also
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
We just heard the briefing on the Security Council’s
visit to Colombia (see S/PV.8580). China welcomes
the positive results of the visit and also wishes to
thank the Government of Colombia for its cooperation
and hospitality.
The Colombian peace process is essential for
achieving comprehensive peace and stability in
Colombia. It is also of great value for regional peace
and security and development. In the recent period, the
Colombian Government has continued to advance the
peace process and make progress, particularly in such
aspects as strengthening national institution-building,
promoting economic and rural development,
developing crop substitutions and facilitating the
reintegration of former combatants. China commends
these achievements.
At the same time, Colombia is still facing
challenges in fully implementing the peace agreement.
In some regions, the security situation remains
fragile. All parties should continue making efforts to
enhance mutual trust, provide assistance for the social
and economic reintegration of former combatants,
take practical measures to guarantee the security of
former combatants and their communities, promote
development in former-conflict areas and strengthen
support for remote areas.
Recent differences in views among the relevant
parties in Colombia on such issues as the statutory law
of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace have been resolved
through legal channels, with the joint efforts of all
parties. China welcomes this achievement and hopes
that the parties in Colombia will advance the peace
process as a top priority, persevere in the comprehensive
implementation of the peace agreement, strengthen
inclusive political dialogue and accelerate economic
and social reconstruction. We hope that the Colombian
Government will continue to hold peace talks with the
parties concerned and create favourable conditions for
the realization of comprehensive peace, stability and
development in Colombia as soon as possible.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu and the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia have made important contributions
to promoting the Colombian peace process and
enhancing the country’s security, stability and economic
and social development. China commends them for their

S/PV. 8581

efforts. We hope that the Mission will continue on the
basis of respect for the the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Colombia, to strengthen
communication with the Colombian parties, increase
trust and resolve suspicions, and advance the national
peace process with a view towards making further
achievements.
China stands ready to work with other members of
the Security Council to help advance the Colombian
peace process and achieve comprehensive peace,
stability and development in Colombia as soon
as possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru.
We would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, for his informative briefing. I also wish to
specially commend the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo García, in today’s meeting and, through him,
convey to President Iván Duque Márquez and his
Government our profound gratitude for having invited
and received members of the Security Council in his
country. We consider that our visit allowed us to gain a
more precise understanding of the situation in Colombia,
in particular with regard to the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace and the challenges it
entails, as well as the efforts, progress and unwavering
commitment of the Government and the people of
Colombia to achieve peace.
That there is no turning back in bringing about
peace in Colombia is the message that has resonated
loud and clear, and we trust that the Security Council
will echo this message and stand united, together with
the international community, in supporting this process,
which is an example for the world. We highlight the efforts
of the “peace with legality” plan to comprehensively
address the implementation of the relevant agreements,
such as those related to comprehensive rural reform,
crop-substitution programmes, the strengthening of
State presence so as to improve access to services and
security, and the social and economic reintegration
of former combatants. In particular, we commend the
notable progress made in the area of the reintegration
process, for example, through the territorial areas for

19-2237219/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

training and reintegration that we saw first-hand and
which play a fundamental role in constructive collective
and individual projects, access to land and the effective
integration within local communities.
We acknowledge the outstanding work and the
enormous resources that are being dedicated to
the creation and development of job opportunities,
disbursing monthly incomes, setting up a health-care
and pension system and reinforcing security measures
both inside and outside the territorial areas. These
efforts reaffirm the Government’s commitment to and
the former combatants’ confidence in reaffirming their
decision that violence cannot be the way forward. In
this regard, we underline the measures adopted by the
Government, such as the Action Plan for the Protection
of Social and Community Leaders, Human Rights
Defenders and Journalists, to improve the security of
communities, social leaders, human rights defenders
and former combatants confronted by the threat of
criminal groups exploiting the vulnerability of rural
areas. Together with the Government, the Security
Council and the Colombian people as a whole, Peru
is concerned about the killings of social leaders and
ex-combatants whose only crime is their commitment
to peace, and we express our full support for the
Government’s efforts to address that situation, in
particular through stepped-up cooperation between the
security forces and local authorities on the ground.
We are well aware of the need to redouble our efforts
in combating illicit drug trafficking and illegal mining,
which threaten the peace and sustainable development of
our countries. In this regard, in the light of our positive
experiences in Peru, we stress the importance of cropsubstitution programmes as an alternative source for
providing economic and commercial opportunities to
rural areas with the participation of local communities.
In this regard, the peace agreement contains an
important human component that takes into account
the specific needs of rural communities, indigenous
and ethnic groups and women and young people,
who are called upon to play a fundamental role in the
implementation of the agreement and to promote and
strengthen the reconciliation of the Colombian people.
As part of the reconciliation process, we must pay
tribute to the victims whose commitment also made it
possible to achieve peace. There is a moral duty owed
to the victims beyond civil reparations, and we believe
that the components of the Comprehensive System
20/23

19/07/2019

of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition are
helping achieve this purpose.
Finally, I acknowledge and welcome the role played
by the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
and thank its outstanding team for the dedication,
professionalism and excellence with which they are
carrying out their mandate. We fully support the efforts
of the Mission in Colombia and welcome the request
of President Iván Duque Márquez on behalf of the
Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común to extend its mandate for another year.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming in the
Security Council the commitment of Peru to the peace
process in Colombia, which — we will never tire of
saying it — serves as an example and model not only
for Latin America, but for the whole world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
Mr. Trujillo García (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/530), which covers the period from 27 March
to 26 June. I also thank the members of the Security
Council for their valuable and constructive visit to
Colombia last week.
For Colombia, the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia plays a major role in the process
of implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
through forward-looking reforms for its implementation
based on consensus and institutional mechanisms,
which is part of the mandate that the Colombian
people conferred upon President Iván Duque Márquez
to provide all Colombians peace with legality and
legality with security. For this reason, the President
has requested the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral to extend the mandate of the Mission for
another year.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General
acknowledges in his report the commitment of the
national Government to the implementation of the
Final Agreement through actions and the adoption of
concrete measures, some of which go beyond the initial
19-22372

19/07/2019

Colombia

obligations in the strictest sense and have enabled us to
achieve the significant progress described in the report
in all areas of the Mission’s mandate. We also appreciate
the acknowledgement that these efforts have gone
beyond the implementation of the Final Agreement and
are now part of a broader Government agenda aimed
at the positive transformation of territories and the
living conditions and opportunities of their inhabitants
as embodied by the national development plan, entitled
“Pact for Colombia, pact for equity”.
Legality, the strengthening of institutions and the
full application of the rule of law in Colombia are one
of the pillars on which the national development plan
has been drafted. These same principles guide the
Government’s position on the institutions established in
the Final Agreement, including, of course, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, the importance of which has
been acknowledged and reiterated at every turn.
The objections raised by the President of the
Republic to the draft statutory law on the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, motivated by a legitimate
concern shared by a large number of citizens, were
dealt with through the procedure provided for in the
Constitution, with the involvement of the Congress
of the Republic and the Constitutional Court, in the
full exercise of their powers. Once this procedure
was completed, this law was enacted on 6 June and is
already in force, which shows that the institutional path
was a safe and properly planned path, as the Council
was informed on several occasions.
We will continue to support the Comprehensive
System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
in order to fulfil the lofty purposes for which it
was established and to meet the expectations of all
Colombians, in particular the victims. For the same
reasons and through institutional channels, we will also
continue to promote the changes and reforms we consider
appropriate so as to ensure peace without impunity,
such as the initiative that establishes that, in future,
sexual crimes against children will be adjudicated
within the ordinary justice system. In this regard, the
constitutional reform set forth in Legislative Act 02
of 2019, approved by a large majority of Colombia’s
Congress and promulgated on 15 July, should be
understood to provide that neither kidnapping nor drug
trafficking can be considered political or related crimes
and therefore cannot be amnestied or pardoned. These
are some of the reforms that have been planned and will
be planned in future.

S/PV. 8581

Let me turn now to a key aspect of the Mission’s
mandate: the reintegration of members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP). As the Secretary-General’s report
highlights, my country’s Government will continue
with complete determination to honour its commitment
to ensuring the successful reintegration of more than
10,500 ex-combatants who continue to participate in the
process and genuinely remain on the right side of the
law. We are pleased to see that, like the Government,
the vast majority of ex-combatants comply with what
has been agreed, and we remain optimistic about their
future civilian life.
However, I must mention an event that occurred
subsequent to the publication of the report before us
today, which is causing enormous consternation to the
Government and in broad sectors of Colombian society,
namely, the decision by one of the leaders of the FARCEP, Seuxis Paucias Hernández Solarte, also known as
Jesús Santrich, to abandon his protection scheme on
30 June, when he was in a territorial area for training
and reintegration close to the border with Venezuela. By
taking such a decision, Santrich sought to evade justice,
as he was due to appear before the Supreme Court of
Justice on 9 June in a preliminary investigation into his
alleged involvement in drug-trafficking crimes after
the signing of the Final Agreement, not to mention the
breach of his obligations under the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. We deplore the fact that a person in a
leadership position within his organization — to such
an extent that on 11 June he took office as a Member
of Congress, as the report points out — evades
justice, shirks his obligations to the victims and takes
advantage of the good faith of all Colombians. We are
also concerned about the fact that various FARC-EP
leaders do not honour their commitments, which is
why non-compliance cases should be opened. Several
names should be mentioned here but, for the purposes
of today’s meeting, I will simply say that 16 per cent
of the leadership of the former guerrilla group have
not disclosed the truth or attended hearings, show
very little interest in reparations to victims and have
not made a genuine commitment to the guarantees
for non-repetition, as their current whereabouts
are unknown.
We welcome the fact that the political party Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) has
rejected Santrich’s behaviour and distanced itself from
statements and actions that imply non-compliance

19-2237221/23

S/PV.8581

Colombia

with the responsibilities under the Final Agreement.
The conduct of Mr. Hernández Solarte and some of his
associates, such as Luciano Marín Arango, also known
as Ivan Márquez, Hernán Velásquez Saldarriaga, also
known as El Paisa, and Henry Castellanos Garzón,
also known as Romaña, deserves the repudiation of
all of society, but in particular, of the FARC political
party, as a sign of its commitment to complying with
the obligations that the Final Agreement imposes
on each of the parties. One of these obligations,
which the Government continues to make progress
in fulfilling, is to strengthen security conditions
for FARC political party candidates ahead of the
regional and local elections to be held in October, as
a further step towards the political reintegration of
former combatants. On 8 July, President Iván Duque
Márquez presented a transparency and security plan for
territorial elections, which includes specific measures
for the FARC political party, in terms of institutional
support, security and protection, in addition to the
general measures adopted for all candidates in the
national electoral-guarantees plan.
Progress has also been made in the socioeconomic
reintegration of ex-combatants. The report gives an
account of 24 approved productive collective projects.
Another five are being evaluated. Some 216 individual
productive projects have also been approved. In total,
2,181 ex-combatants have benefited directly through
the projects, which also has a positive impact on their
families and, naturally, on their surroundings. Work is
also being done in this area to regulate access to land
for reintegration purposes, and progress has been made
in employing ex-combatants, in the public and private
sectors alike, thereby enabling 1,380 ex-combatants to
gain access to formal employment in various sectors of
the economy.
The national Government’s commitment to the
socioeconomic reintegration of ex-combatants has
been translated into concrete actions, to ensure the
efficiency and sustainability of the economy. The
institutional offer to guarantee attention in this area
is maintained and strengthened both for the more than
3,000 ex-combatants in the territorial areas for training
and reintegration and for the more than 8,000 who
preferred to reintegrate into civil life outside those
areas. I would like to reiterate that, although the term
for the territorial areas for training and reintegration
will expire in August, the national Government will
not abandon to their fate those who are in them. As the
22/23

19/07/2019

report acknowledges, the Government is committed to
the orderly management of the transition of those areas,
which from the beginning, were meant to be temporary.
I would now like to address the second main
component of the Mission’s mandate: security
guarantees. In his report, the Secretary-General
expresses concern about the assassinations of former
FARC-EP members since the signing of the Final
Agreement — a concern shared by the national
Government. The Colombian State and society
have emphatically expressed their rejection of such
developments, and the President of Colombia himself
has ordered the adoption of measures to improve the
safety of ex-combatants by ensuring their protection
in a comprehensive manner. Similarly, the competent
authorities work with the utmost diligence to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for the crimes, while
focusing their efforts on the regions with the highest
incidence of threats to the lives of ex-combatants, so as
to ensure that perpetrators do not go unpunished.
As a result of all of the foregoing actions, according
to reports from the elite corps of the police, the
number of murders of ex-combatants decreased from
32 in the first half of 2018 to 17 in the same period
of 2019. In addition, the effectiveness of the measures
adopted by the State is reflected in the fact that no
murders of ex-combatants who are being reintegrated
in the territorial areas for training and reintegration
or who have requested protection from the State have
been recorded. The greatest challenge in this area is
the security situation of the former combatants who
are proceeding with the reintegration process outside
the territorial areas. They are dispersed throughout the
national territory, and many of them are in areas where
the presence of various criminal economies stimulates
the activity of organized illegal armed groups.
For that reason, in addition to the specific measures
adopted to protect former combatants, military and
police operations are being deployed to contain the
threats posed by organized illegal armed groups,
and efforts are being stepped up to impede criminal
economies. Currently, those two elements jointly
constitute the main challenge of implementing the Final
Agreement and the efforts to stabilize and consolidate a
peaceful coexistence in Colombia — as expressly stated
in the report on the Verification Mission. They are also
the main source of threats to the security of former
combatants, human rights defenders and social leaders.
19-22372

19/07/2019

S/PV. 8581

Colombia

The measures that have been adopted to protect the
latter have led to a reduction in the number of killings
since May 2019. These results, while positive, are
far from satisfactory. The national Government will
not be satisfied until better security conditions are in
place for social leaders, communicators and human
rights defenders to carry out their work and continue
to positively contribute to the institutional, economic
and social life of their communities. In this regard, I
must mention that the Special Investigation Unit of the
country’s Attorney General has stated that it has solved
the crimes in more than half the reported cases and in
60 per cent of the killings of social leaders, which is
testament to the progress the corresponding authorities
have been making on that front.
On the other hand, it is important to note — since
it was mentioned — the mechanisms to fight the
world drug problem, especially in relation to areas
where illicit crops are cultivated. President of Duque
Márquez’s Government’s policy is to avail itself of the
whole gamut of potential mechanisms to respond to this
challenge. President Duque Márquez’s Government
received some 206,000 hectares of illicit crops. With
great effort, these numbers are beginning to decrease,
which is why President Duque Márquez’s Government’s
actions are aimed at making as many tools as possible
available, including forced eradication, voluntary
eradication, agreements with communities, and lowaltitude spraying with all required safety and security
measures, which is an opportunity that has arisen from
a decision taken by the constitutional court yesterday.
This court decision will make it possible to eliminate
all the potential risks and make progress in that area
as one of the necessary mechanisms to respond to the
world drug problem in Colombia. It is very important
that the Council be crystal clear in understanding that

the task of peacebuilding in the country will be much
more difficult with coca, which is why fighting it
constitutes effective action for guaranteeing peace and
security in Colombia.
I would like to thank the Verification Mission for
its support for the Government’s efforts to implement
the Final Agreement with forward-looking reforms
through consensus and institutional mechanisms. Its
work is also essential in the promotion and verification
of compliance with the obligations of the FARC-EP,
under the Agreement, in areas to which its contribution
is key in the achievement of tangible progress, such
as demining, the delivery of goods as reparations for
victims, and the effective reintegration of formerly
recruited children and adolescents.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating the gratitude
of my Government and my compatriots to all the
members of the Council for its recent visit to Colombia,
during which its members were able to experience firsthand the results of President Iván Duque Márquez’s
Government’s commitment to this process, as well as
the magnitude of the challenges that we face. Rather
than trying to evade those challenges, we are taking
them on in a committed and responsible manner. We are
encouraged by our conviction that peace with legality
is not only desirable but possible and necessary. We
espouse the concerns of all Colombians: those of former
combatants who are committed to legality, victims
who are concerned about truth and just reparation, a
society that calls for non-repetition, individuals that
have legitimate expectations for the implementation
process, and people who call for greater consensus so
that the process has more legitimacy and better serves
the purpose that inspires it.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

19-2237223/23
