26

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

ters of the secretariat of the Conference on a permanent
basis at Geneva and a liaison office at United Nations
Headquarters in New York;
4. Expresses its satisfaction that by setting in motion
the Trade and Development Board which, in turn,
established its subsidiary bodies and formulated their
terms of reference, the Conference has provided itself
with the appropriate framework needed for an effective
contribution to the solution of major problems of trade
and development;
5. N ates with appreciation the method of work
adopted by the Board at its first session, which resulted
in the drawing up of a programme of work and the
identification of recommendations to which the highest
priority should be given ;
6. Expresses serious concern at the lack of progress
in solving the substantive problems with which the Conference was faced and reaffirms the continuing and
urgent need for Member States, in the light of the
Final Act of the Conference, to take full account, in
their trade and development policies, of the needs of
the developing countries and the need for prompt,
decisive and concrete measures devised to solve these
problems;
7. Invites the Board, in the execution of its work
programme, to accord particular attention to the problems of trade in primary commodities which require
most urgent action;
8. Calls upon the Governments of the States members of the Conference to continue to examine their
policies and to take action, jointly or separately as
may be feasible, in the light of the Final Act of the
Conference, with a view to implementing the recommendations of the Conference in the various fields of
their national and international programmes;
9. Further calls upon the Governments of the States
members of the Conference to exert maximum efforts
through the Conference, which attached great importance to principles governing international trade relations and trade policies conducive to development,19
with a view to reaching, at the earliest possible moment,
the broadest measure of agreement on principles and
policies;
10. Endorses the decision of the Board to review
annually the progress achieved in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference and the
fulfilment of its programme of work;
11. Calls upon the States members of the Conference t~ take the necessary steps to provide, in a form
they will find appropriate, information concerning action
taken relevant to the functions of the Board and on the
basis of the Final Act of the Conference, which will
enable the Board to review efficiently and expeditiously
the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference, so as to concentrate on substantive issues in
the field of trade and development ;
12. N_ ates with satisfaction that arrangements are
al~eady m progress to ensure a close working relationship between the Conference, the regional economic
commissions and the United Nations Economic and
Social Office in Beirut, the specialized agencies and the
Internatiom..l Atomic Energy Agency;
111 See Proceedings of thr United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, vol. 1, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.ll), annexes A.I.1,
A.1.2 and A.1.3, pp. 18, 25 and 26.

13. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Governing Council of the
United Kations Development Programme, the regional
economic commissions and the United Nations Economic and Social Office in Beirut to continue to take
into account the recommendations of the Conference
falling within their competence in the elaboration and
implementation of their respective programmes and to
contribute, as appropriate, to the work of the Conference
and the Board ;
14. Invites the other international bodies concerned,
including the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to take into account the
recommendations of the Conference and to co-operate,
as appropriate, in the work of the Conference and the
Board;
15. Decides to convene the second session of the
Conference in the first part of 1967, a:; recommended
by the Board in its resolution 20 (II) of 15 September
1965, and expresses confidence that, in the meantime,
the States members of the Conference will endeavour,
through the Board and its subsidiary bodies, to concentrate on substantive questions of trade and development and to achieve adequate progress towards resolving them;
16. Requests the Board to propose, in accordance
with paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 1995
( XIX), the date and place of the second session of
the Conference, preferably in a developing country, for
decision by the Assembly at its twenty-first session.
1404th plenary meetin_q.
20 December 1965.
2086 (XX). Transit trade of land-locked countries
The General Assembly,
Considering that, in order to promote economic and
social development through international trade, the landlocked States need adequate facilities to enable then 1
to overcome the effects of their land-locked position on
their trade,
Recalling its resolution 1028 (XI) of 20 February
1957, in which it recognized the problems of landlocked countries and invited the Governments of Member States to give full recognition to the needs of landlocked Member States in the matter of transit trade and,
therefore, to accord them adequate facilities in terms
of international law and practice in this regard, bearing
in mind the future requirements resulting from the
economic development of the land-locked countries,
Taking into account the recommendation col1[ained
in annex A.VI.1 of the Final Act of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development,2° which paved
the way for the establishment of the Convention on
Transit Trade of Land-locked States,
Noting iuith satisfaction that, upon that recommendation, the Convention on Transit Trade of Land-locked
States was successfully concluded at the United Nations
Conference on Transit Trade of Land-locked Countries
as a step towards the normalization of transit trade
of all land-locked countries,
l. Reaffirms the eight principles relating to transit
trade of land-locked countries, adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
20 Ibid.,

p. 62.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

first session, in 1964, and contained in annex A.T.2 of
the Final Act of the Conference ;21
2. Requests that the Convention on Transit Trade
of Land-locked States be signed by 31 December 1965
and ratified or acceded to as soon as possible in order
to promote the economic and social development of
the land-locked countries through international trade;
3. Requests the Secretary--General of the United
Nations and the Secretarv-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to be
guided by the terms of the present resolution and the
nbove-mentioned Convention in assisting the landlocked countries to overcome their difficulties regarding
transit trade.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2087 (XX). Financing of economic development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1318 (XIII) of 12 December
l 958 entitled "Promotion of the international flow of
private capital" and 1710 (XVI) of 19 December 1961
fntitled "United N ::itions Development Decade: a programme for international economic co-operation",
Taking into account the recommendations contained
in anneX: A.IV.2 of the Final Act of the United Nations
Conference on Trade nn<l Development, 22
Having considered the recommendations on the promotion of private foreign investment in developing
countries, contained in annex A.JV.12 of the Final Act
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 23
Noting with interest the fourth and fifth reports of
the Secretary-General on the promotion of the international flow of private capital,2 i
Rea.ffirming that private foreign investment may contribute to the economic diversification and development
of private-capital-importing developing countries and to
the accelerated transfer of technical and managerial
know-how to these countries, where such investments
are made in terms that are satisfactory both to thr
capital-exporting countries ;md the capital-importing
countries,
1. Asks Governments to give serious consideration
to the recommendations contained in annex A.IV.12
of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development;
2. Calls upon Governments to give due consideration
to the measures and actions for the promotion of private
foreign investment in developing countries recommended by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, always taking into account the relevant laws and regulations of each country, and the
need of respect for the sovereignty of the host countries ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep in view
the above-mentioned measures and actions in the preparation of his further studies on the promotion of the
international flow of private capital, as. called for under
the annex mentioned in paragraph 1 above, as well as
under General Assembly resolution 1318 (XIII) and
21 Ibid., p. 25.
22 Jbid., p. 43.

49.
Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 10, documents
E/3905 and Add.1; ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda
item 8, documents E/4038 and Add.I.
23 Ibid., p.

24 Official

27

Economic and Social Council resolution 922 (XXXIV)
of 3 August 1962;
4. Looks forward to the early publication of the
~eerrt:1ry~General's findings in this field.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2088 (XX). Accelerated flow of capital and technical assistance to the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recallin_r; its resolution 1938 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, which requested the Secretary-General to
review the conceptual and methodological problems in
the measurement of capit.11 flow and aid and to submit
proposals for making the presentation of the relevant
data as meaningful and purposeful as possible,
Tahng into account the recommendation contained
in annex A.IV.2, section ITT, of the Final Act of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development2" that each economically advanced country should
endeavour to supply financial rrsources to the developing countries of a minimum net amount approaching as
nearly as possible 1 per cent of its national income,
having regard, however, to the special position of
certain countries which are net importers of capital,
Taking also into accri11nt the recommendations contained in annex A.TV.4 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development26 setting forth the objectives to be met in removing the diffirnltie~ experienced by the developing countries under
aid programmes of government-to-government transfer
of capital through lwns and in the availability of supplier,;' credits to developing countries, owing, inter alia,
to short periods of repayment, high rates of interest,
limitations on the tying of credits to specific projects
and to purchases from countries providing the capital,
N otinq the recommendations contained in annex
A. T\'.S °of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 27 relating to the
prohlc>m of debt service in developing countries and the
fact that the servicing of external debt constitutes an
increasing burden on their resources,
Takinq note of Economic and Social Council resolution 10~8 A (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, which recommended that the Governments of developed Member
States give early and sympathetic consideration to
making their lending terms substantially more favourable to the developing countries by such methods as
extending the period of repayment, reducing interest
rates and providing a period of grace for both interest
and repayment of principal,
Taking note also of Economic nnd Social Council
resolution 1088 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 regarding
the financing of economic development and, in particular. the problem of concepts and methodology in
the measurement of the flow of capital and nid to
developing countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1089 (XXXIX) of 31 July 1965, which, in paragraph 1, urged the States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and particularly thP developed countries:
~ See Proccedi11_q:; /1( the United Nations Conferenre on
Trad£' and Development, vol. I, Pinal Act and Report (United
'-rations publication. ~a!Ps No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 43.
26 Ibid., p. 44.
27 Ibid., p. 46.
