IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

287

draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in Interna­
tional Relations, 18 as well as other proposals made during
the consideration of this item,
Recalling also its resolution 32/150 of 19 December
l 977, by which it established the Special Committee on
Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of
Force in International Relations,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 33/96 of 16
December 1978, 34/13 of 9 November 1979, 35/50 of 4
December 1980, 36/31 of 13 November 1981, 37/105 of
16 December 1982 and 38/133 of 19 December 1983, in
which it decided that the Special Committee should con­
tinue its work,
Taking note of the statements made by the Chairmen of
the Special Committee at its sessions in 1983 19 and 1984, 20
based on the informal working paper presented by the
Chairman of the Special Committee at its session in
1982,21
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
on the work of the session it held in 1984, 22
Taking into account that the Special Committee has not
completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for effectiveness in the universal
application of the principle of non-use of force in interna­
tional relations and for assistance by the United Nations in
this endeavour,
Expressing the hope that the Special Committee will, on
the basis of the proposals before it, complete the mandate
entrusted to it as soon as possible,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non­
Use of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, a world treaty on the non-use of force in interna­
tional relations as well as the peaceful settlement of dis­
putes or such other recommendations as the Committee
deems appropriate;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in order to ensure
progress in its work, to speed up at its session in 1985 the
elaboration of the formulas of the working paper contain­
ing the main elements of the principle of non-use of force
in international relations, taking duly into account the pro­
posals submitted to it and the efforts undertaken at its ses­
sions in l 982, l 983 and 1984;
4. Invites Governments to communicate their com­
ments or suggestions or to bring them up to date, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 31/9;
5. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of the
importance of reaching general agreement whenever it has
significance for the outcome of its work;
6. Decides that the Special Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its working group;
7. Requests the Special Committee to concentrate its
work in the framework of its working group;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Spe­
cial Committee with the necessary facilities and services;
9. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on
its work to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Report of the Special

Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle
of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".

18 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session, Supple­
ment No. 41 (A/34/41 and Corr. I), annex.
19 Ibid., Thirty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 4 I (A/38/41 ). para. 59.
20 Ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 4 I (A/39/41). para. 51

21 Ih,d.. Thmy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/37/41 and Corr. I).
para. 172.
12 /hid.. Thm.v-mnrh Se,1 .rnm. Supplement No. 4 I (A/39141 ).
,'l /h1d., Supplement No. !7 (A 19117).

99th plenary meeting
I 3 December I 984

39/82. Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its seventeenth session.23
Recalling that the object of the Commission is the pro­
motion of the progressive harmonization and unification
of international trade law,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17
December l 966, as well as all its other resolutions relating
to the work of the Commission,
Recalling also its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S­
VI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive
harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of inter­
national trade, especially those affecting the developing
countries, would significantly contribute to universal eco­
nomic co-operation among all States on a basis of equality,
equity and common interest and to the elimination of dis­
crimination in international trade and, thereby, to the
well-being of all peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the dif­
ferent social and legal systems in harmonizing and unify­
ing the rules of international trade law,
Stressing the value of participation by States at all levels
of economic development, including developing countries,
in the process of harmonizing and unifying rules of inter­
national trade law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on the work of its seventeenth session;
2. Commends the Commission for the progress made
in its work, in particular towards the preparation of a draft
convention on international bills of exchange and interna­
tional promissory notes, a model law on international
commercial arbitration, a legal guide on drawing up inter­
national contracts for the construction of industrial works
and a legal guide on electronic funds transfers, and for
having reached decisions by consensus;
3. Calls upon the Commission, in particular its Work­
ing Group on the New International Economic Order, to
continue to take account of the relevant provisions of the
resolutions concerning the new international economic
order, as adopted by the General Assembly at its sixth and
seventh special sessions;
4. Notes that the Commission has assigned to its
Working Group on International Contract Practices the
task of preparing uniform legal rules on the liability of
operators of transport terminals, and that the Commission
has placed in its programme of work as a priority item the
topic of legal implications of automatic data processing to
the flow of international trade;

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

288

5. Reaffirms the mandate of the Commission, as the
core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of international trade law, to co-ordinate legal activ­
ities in this field in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
unification and harmonization of international trade law,
and, in this connection, recommends that the Commission
should continue to maintain close co-operation with the
other international organs and organizations, including
regional organizations, active in the field of international
trade law;
6. Reaffirms also the importance, in particular for the
developing countries, of the work of the Commission con­
cerned with training and assistance in the field of interna­
tional trade law and the desirability for it to sponsor sym­
posia and seminars, in particular those organized on a
regional basis, to promote such training and assistance,
and, in this connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to those Governments,
regional organizations and institutions that have collabo­
rated with the secretariat of the Commission in organizing
regional seminars and symposia in the field of interna­
tional trade law;
(b) Welcomes the additional initiatives being under­
taken by the Commission and its secretariat to collaborate
with other organizations and institutions in the organiza­
tion of regional seminars;
(c) Invites Governments, international organizations
and institutions to assist the secretariat of the Commission
in financing and organizing regional seminars and sympo­
sia, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Invites Governments, relevant United Nations
organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions to allow the resumption of the
programme of the Commission for the award of fellow­
ships on a regular basis to candidates from developing
countries to enable them to participate in such symposia
and seminars;
7. Recommends that the Commission should continue
its work on the topics included in its programme of work;
8. Reaffirms the important role of the International
Trade Law Branch of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Sec­
retariat, as the substantive secretariat of the Commission,
in assisting in the implementation of the work programme
of the Commission and expresses the hope that the same
high quality of the work of the Secretariat will be main­
tained for the future.
99th plenary meeting
13 December l 984
39/83.

Consideration of effective measures to
enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 24
Emphasizing the important role of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, as well as of missions
and representatives to international intergovernmental
organizations and officials of such organizations, in the
maintenance of international peace and the promotion of
friendly relations among States and also the need for
enhancing global understanding thereof,
24 A/39/456 and Add.1-4.

Emphasizing also the duty of States to take all appropri­
ate steps, as required by international law:
(a) To protect the premises of diplomatic and consular
missions, as well as of missions to international intergov­
ernmental organizations,
(b) To prevent any attacks on diplomatic and consular
representatives, as well as on representatives to interna­
tional intergovernmental organizations and officials of
such organizations,
(c) To apprehend the offenders and to bring them to
justice,
Deeply concerned about the continued large number of
failures to respect the inviolability of diplomatic and con­
sular missions and representatives, and about the serious
threat presented by such violations to the maintenance of
normal and peaceful international relations, which are
necessary for co-operation among States,
Expressing its sympathy for the victims of illegal acts
against diplomatic and consular representatives and mis­
sions, as well as against representatives and missions to
international intergovernmental organizations and officials
of such organizations,
Convinced that respect for the principles and rules of
international law governing diplomatic and consular rela­
tions, in particular those aimed at ensuring the inviolabili­
ty of diplomatic and consular missions and representa­
tives, is a basic prerequisite for the normal conduct of rela­
tions among States and for the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that only a small number of States have so far, in
response to the call by the General Assembly at its thirty­
fifth, thirty-sixth, thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth sessions,
become parties to the relevant conventions concerning the
inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives,
Convinced that the reporting procedures established
under General Assembly resolution 35/168 of 15 Decem­
ber 1980 and further elaborated in Assembly resolutions
36/33 of 13 November 1981, 37/108 of 16 December
1982 and 38/136 of 19 December 1983 are important
steps in the efforts to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives,
Desiring to maintain and further strengthen those
reporting procedures,
l . Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Strongly condemns acts of violence against diplo­
matic and consular missions and representatives, as well
as against missions and representatives to international
intergovernmental organizations and officials of such
organizations;
3. Emphasizes the importance of enhanced awareness
throughout the world of the necessity of ensuring the pro­
tection, security and safety of such missions, representa­
tives and officials, as well as of the role of the United
Nations in this regard;
4. Urges States to observe and to implement the
principles and rules of international law governing diplo­
matic and consular relations and, in particular, to take all
necessary measures in conformity with their international
obligations to ensure effectively the protection, security
and safety of all diplomatic and consular missions and rep­
resentatives officially present in territory under their juris­
diction, including practicable measures to prohibit in their
territories illegal activities of persons, groups and organi-
