UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/460
14 June 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 14 JUNE 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey to you the attached letter, dated 13 June 1997,
which I have received from the Permanent Representative of Italy to the United
Nations (see annex). Attached to the letter is the sixth bi-weekly report on
the multinational protection force for Albania, as requested by the Security
Council in resolution 1101 (1997) of 28 March 1997.
I should appreciate your bringing the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-16223 (E)

160697

*9716223E*

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/460
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 13 June 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Italy to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to submit the sixth report on the multinational
protection force for Albania (see appendix). The report is submitted pursuant
to the requirement set out in paragraph 9 of Security Council resolution
1101 (1997) of 28 March 1997, in which the Council requested the Member States
participating in the multinational protection force to provide periodic reports,
at least every two weeks, through the Secretary-General, to the Council. The
fifth such report was conveyed to you on 6 June 1997 (see S/1997/440).
I should be grateful if you could have the text of the present letter and
the sixth report circulated as a document of the Security Council.

(Signed)

F. Paolo FULCI
Ambassador

/...

S/1997/460
English
Page 3

Appendix
Sixth report to the Security Council on the operation of the
multinational protection force in Albania

1.
On 28 March 1997, the Security Council adopted resolution 1101 (1997), in
paragraph 2 of which it welcomed the offer made by certain Member States to
establish a temporary and limited multinational protection force to facilitate
the safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance and to help create a
secure environment for the missions of international organizations in Albania,
including those providing humanitarian assistance.
2.
In paragraph 9 of the resolution, the Security Council requested the Member
States participating in the multinational protection force to provide periodic
reports, at least every two weeks, to the Council through the Secretary-General.
The first five reports were provided on 9 and 25 April, 9 and 23 May and
6 June 1997 (see S/1997/440). The sixth report is a special report referring to
the modalities of the presence of the force after 28 June 1997 and in the light
of the assessment of the situation by the Council three months after its
adoption of resolution 1101 (1997), as foreseen by it in paragraph 6 of the
resolution.
3.
The Steering Committee, consisting of the political directors of the troopcontributing countries and the Commander of the operation, had a special meeting
on 10 June under the chairmanship of Ambassador Amedeo de Franchis, the Italian
political director, to approve the present special report.
4.
The Steering Committee considered several requests by the Albanian
authorities that the force remain in Albania during the electoral process to
help ensure a safe and secure environment for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) monitoring teams, in the framework of the Security
Council’s mandate, and expressed its readiness to accede to those requests.
5.
The Steering Committee examined the results of the International Meeting on
Albania held at Rome on 26 May 1997. The participants at that Meeting had
expressed appreciation for the neutral and impartial way in which the Security
Council mandate had been carried out by the force in close contact with the
Albanian authorities. They also recognized that the presence of the
multinational protection force was effectively contributing to the stability of
both the country and the region and stated that the force, within the framework
of its mandate, would contribute to ensuring a safe environment in Albania
during the electoral process, taking into account in all possible ways the OSCE
electoral concept.
6.
The Steering Committee took note of the requests presented in that
connection by the Director-General of the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIHR) of OSCE, Ambassador Stoudmann, during the Committee’s
meeting of 4 June.

/...

S/1997/460
English
Page 4

7.
The Steering Committee noted the indications provided by the Albanian
authorities and OSCE that the electoral process would exceed the present timelimit of the mandate.
8.
The Steering Committee also noted the results of a planning meeting of
military representatives of the troop-contributing countries, which took place
at Rome on 6 June and which examined the operational modalities for the force to
ensure a secure environment for OSCE/ODIHR personnel during the electoral
process and in the framework of its mandate as defined in Security Council
resolution 1101 (1997).
9.
The Steering Committee noted that a withdrawal of the multinational
protection force by 28 June, the day before the planned elections in Albania, as
foreseen in paragraph 6 of resolution 1101 (1997), would not allow the force to
provide the above-mentioned secure environment and would therefore undermine one
of the main efforts of international assistance to Albania, with an added
negative impact on the improvements so far achieved through the efforts of the
international community in close cooperation with the Albanian authorities and
in addition to their own action in that field.
10. The Steering Committee took note of the readiness of the contributing
countries to maintain, for a limited time, their military contingents in Albania
as part of the multinational protection force and in the framework of the
mandate given by the Security Council.
11. The Steering Committee took note that, for a limited period of time,
coinciding with the electoral process and for the specific purpose of protecting
the OSCE electoral missions, a limited increase in the strength of the force
from that originally planned would be necessary.
12. In view of the above, the Steering Committee recommends that the mandate
given to the force by the Security Council in resolution 1101 (1997) be extended
for the period necessary for the completion of the electoral process in Albania
and in any event not longer than 45 days after the termination of the present
mandate.

-----
