A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/158
8 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.1 and Corr.1)]
54/158. International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming once more the permanent validity of the principles and norms set forth in the basic
instruments regarding the international protection of human rights, in particular the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights,1 the International Covenants on Human Rights,2 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,3 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,4 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,5
Bearing in mind the principles and norms established within the framework of the International Labour
Organization and the importance of the work done in connection with migrant workers and members of their
families in other specialized agencies and in various organs of the United Nations,
Reiterating that, despite the existence of an already established body of principles and norms, there is
a need to make further efforts to improve the situation and to guarantee respect for the human rights and
dignity of all migrant workers and members of their families,
1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

3
4

Resolution 34/180, annex.

5

Resolution 44/25, annex.

00 26514

/...

A/RES/54/158
Page 2

Aware of the situation of migrant workers and members of their families and the marked increase in
migratory movements that has occurred, especially in certain parts of the world,
Considering that, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference
on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,6 all States are urged to guarantee the protection of the human rights of
all migrant workers and members of their families,
Underlining the importance of the creation and promotion of conditions to foster greater harmony and
tolerance between migrant workers and the rest of the society of the State in which they reside, with the aim
of eliminating the growing manifestations of racism and xenophobia perpetrated in segments of many
societies by individuals or groups against migrant workers,
Recalling its resolution 45/158 of 18 December 1990, by which it adopted and opened for signature,
ratification and accession the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families,
Bearing in mind that, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, States are invited to consider
the possibility of signing and ratifying the Convention at the earliest possible time,
Recalling that, in its resolution 53/137 of 9 December 1998, it requested the Secretary-General to submit
to it at its fifty-fourth session a report on the status of the Convention,
1. Expresses its deep concern at the growing manifestations of racism, xenophobia and other forms
of discrimination and inhuman or degrading treatment directed against migrant workers in different parts of
the world;
2. Welcomes the signature or ratification of or accession to the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families by some Member States;
3. Calls upon all Member States to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Convention as
a matter of priority, expresses the hope that it will enter into force at an early date, and notes that, pursuant
to article 87 of the Convention, only eight ratifications or accessions are still needed for it to enter into force;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the facilities and assistance necessary for the
promotion of the Convention through the World Public Information Campaign on Human Rights and the
programme of advisory services in the field of human rights;
5. Welcomes the global campaign for the entry into force of the Convention, and invites the
organizations and agencies of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to intensify further their efforts with a view to disseminating information on and promoting
understanding of the importance of the Convention;

6

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/54/158
Page 3

6. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1999/44 of 27 April
1999,7 to appoint a Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants to examine ways and means to
overcome the obstacles existing to the full and effective protection of the human rights of this vulnerable
group;
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,8 and requests him to submit an updated report
on the status of the Convention to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session;
8. Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General at its fifty-fifth session under the sub-item
entitled “Implementation of human rights instruments”.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999

7

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

8

A/54/346.
