General Assembly-Tbirty-fourtb Session

144
---------------

adopted by the General Assembly and its related organs
in favour of developing island countries,

1. Welcomes resolution I 11 (V) of 3 June 1979 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development208 on specific action related to the particular needs
and problems of island developing countries;

2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the action programme in favour of developing island
countries ;204
3. Calls upon the international community to implement urgently the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of developing island countries envisaged in resolutions 98 (IV) and 111 (V) of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
4. Further calls upon the international community
to ensure that the criteria, terms and conditions governing the flow of bilateral and multilateral financial and
technical assistance to the developing island countries
shall be geared to the special needs and problems of the
countries concerned;
5. Invites the competent organs of the United Nations system to consider taking effective steps to enhance
their capacity to respond positively to the specific needs
of developing island countries at the national, regional
and interregional levels, for c;xample by strengthening
their technical and advisory services on behalf of those
countries;
6. Further invites the Preparatory Committee for
the New International Development Strategy to take
fully into account, in the formulation of the strategy for
the third United Nations development decade, the
particular needs and problems of developing island
countries;
7.

Requests the United Nations Development Pro-

gramme and invites international development institu

tions and bilateral institutions to consider increasing
their assistance to developing island countries;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme and other competent institutions to co-operate
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the programme ot activities envisaged in
paragraphs 4 and 5 of resoh1 1 ion 11 J (V) of the
Conference; 203
,
9. Recommends that developed countries, international development institutions and those developing
countries which are elaborating programmes of assistance in favour of other developiug countries should give
particular attention to request.•, for assistance from developing island countries;
. 10: Calls up'?n the r:egio_nal commissions urgently to
identify appropnate act10n m favour of the developing
island countries in their respective regions;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to include an
assessment of the situation in the developing island
countries in his analytical report to the General Assembly at its special session in 1980 on the establish-ment of the new international economic order called for
in Assembly resolution 13/ I 98 of 29 January' 1979.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979
203 Ibid., Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No, E,7'JJLD.14), part one, sect. A
2o 4 A/34/ 544 and Add I and 2

34/206.

Implementation of section IV of the annu to
General Assembly resolution 32/ 197 on the
restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 197 4, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, by which it, inter aUa, established the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic
and Social Sectors of the United Nations System for the
purpose of preparing detailed action proposals with a
view to initiating the process of restructuring the United
Nations system so as to make it more fully capable of
dealing with problems of international economic cooperation and development in a comprehensive and
effective manner, and to make it more responsive to the
requirements of the provisions of the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order as well as those of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 32/ 197 of 20 December
1977, by which it, inter alia, endorsed the conclusions
and recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee,
Recalling further its resolution 33/202 of 29 January 1979, in which it, inter alia, requested certain
actions and measures within the framework of the implementation of the conclusions and recommendations
of the Ad Hoe Committee,
Reaffirming that the process of restructuring the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system is
an integral part of the efforts required to ensure the
equitable, full and effective participation of the developing countries in the formulation and application of all
decisions within the United Nations system in the field of
development and international economic co-operation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the decentralization of economic and social activities to,
and the strengthening of, the regional commissions205
and the progress report of the Secretary-General for
1979 on the restructuring of the economic and social
sectors of the United Nations system, 206
1. Takes note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/ 64 of 3 August 1979, entitled "Regional
co-operation and development";
2. Emphasizes the need for more vigorous action to
enable the regional commissions to play their role fully
as the main general economic and social development
centres within the United Nations system for their respective regions, through full and effective implementation
of the provisions of paragraphs 19, 23 and 26 of section
IV of the annex to General Assembly resolution 32/197;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance
with section V, paragraph 4, of General Assembly resolution 33/202, to intensify, through inter alia the
redeployment of existing posts from United Nations
Headquarters to the regional commissions, the development and application of the decentralization measures
contemplated in his reports on the restructuring of the
economic and social sectors of the United Nations system, submitted to the Economic and Social Council at
205
206

A/34/649.
E/1979/81.

V.

Resoludom adopted on tbe reports of tbe Second Committee

its second regular session of 1979 206 and to the Assembly
at its thirty-third session 207 and thirty-fourth session, 206
as well as in Council resolution 1979/64;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the executive secretaries of the regional commissions, to provide all the necessary support to the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in its review,
envisaged in paragraph 6 of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1979 / 64, of policy and programme issues
relating to the distribution of tasks and responsibilities
between the regional commissions and other United Nations units, programmes and organs concerned;
5. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to prepare, in co-operation with the executive secretaries of the regional
commissions, proposals for enhancing the collective involvement of the countries of each region in the identification and initiation of regional projects and activities as
well as in the determination of priorities for intercountry
programmes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the above-mentioned measures.

109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/207.

Preparations for the special session of the
General Assembly in 1980208

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 32/174 of 19 December 1977,
in which it decided, inter alia, to convene a special session of the General Assembly in 1980, and its resolution
33/198 of 29 January 1979 on the preparations for that
special session,
Recalling also its resolution 33/193 of 29 January
1979 on the preparations for an international development strategy for the third United Nations development decade,
Recognizing the need for the special session to produce results commensurate with both the gravity of the
current international economic situation and the magnitude of the current economic problems,
Noting the Economic Declaration adopted by the
Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9
September 1979, 209
Recalling further its resolutions 34/138 of 14 December 1979 on the global negotiations relating to international economic co-operation for development and
34/ 139 of the same date on the proposals for global
negotiations relating to international economic co-operation for development,
~mphas_izing ~at the General Assembly is requested,
at its special session, to assess the progress made in the
20 7 A/33/410/Rev.1, r,ara. 93.

20a See also sect. X.B. , decision 34/ 448.

201 A/34/542,

annex, sect. IV.

145

establishment of the new international economic order
and to consider obstacles as indicated by the various
forums of the United Nations system that impede its
establishment and, in this context, to take appropriate
action for the promotion of the development of developing countries and international economic co-operation,
including the adoption of the new international development strategy for the 1980s,
Urging all countries to commit themselves effectively
to achieving, through international negotiations and
other concerted action, the restructuring of international
economic relations on the basis of the principles of
justice and equality in order to provide for steady economic development, with due regard to the development potential of developing countries,
Stressing the need for thorough preparation for the
special session in order to achieve positive and concrete
results,
1. Reaffirms its decision that the special session in
1980 will, on the basis of an assessment of the progress
made in the establishment of the new international economic order, take appropriate action for the promotion
of the development of developing countries and international economic co-operation, including inter alia for the
adoption of the international development strategy for
the third United Nations development decade and for
the launching of global negotiations relating to international economic co-operation for development;
2. Decides to hold the special session at a high political level for two weeks at a suitable time between midAugust and mid-September 1980;
3. Urges the Preparatory Committee for the New
International Development Strategy to accelerate its
work so as to be able to submit to the General Assembly,
through the Economic and Social Council, a draft of the
international development strategy for the third United
Nations development decade for adoption and proclamation at the special session;
4. Invites the Committee of the Whole Established
under General Assembly Resolution 32/ 174, in its
capacity as the preparatory committee for the global
negotiations relating to international economic co-operation for development, 210 to organize its work in such a
manner as to be able to submit its final report to the Assembly at the special session;
5. Decides that the Committee of the Whole, in addition to making preparations for the global negotiations,
should consider matters relating to the adequate preparation of the special session;
6. Invites the Governments of Member States to reexamine, bearing in mind the need to establish the new
international economic order, their position on the important international economic problems, so as to enable the General Assembly to achieve positive results at
the special session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to accord the
necessary high priority to and to provide the necessary
facilities and resources for all preparatory arrangements
for the special session;
8. Takes note of the preliminary version of the analytical report 211 called for in General Assembly resolution
33/198 and requests the Secretary-General to submit
and make available to Governments six weeks before the
special session the final report in accordance with the
outline, taking into account the relevant resolutions and
decisions adopted by the Assembly during its thirty210 See sect. II, resolution 34/138.
211

A/34/596.
