RECORDS

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2504’”

MEETING:

16 DECEMBER

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2504). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to_the President of the Security Council
(S/16216). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WT.2504

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2504th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President:

16 December

Mr. Max VAN DER STOEL
(Netherlands).

places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today in
response to the request contained in a letter addressed
to the President of the Security Council on 14 December 1983 by the representative of Angola.
3. I should also like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to document S/16219, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 December from the representative of South Africa to the Secretary-General.

agenda (S/Agenda/2504)

of the agenda

.
4. The first speaker is the representative
upon whom I now call.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent Representative
of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16216)
The meeting

of Angola,

5. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President,
I thank you and the other Council members for agreeing
to meet so promptly. My Government made an urgent
request for this meeting of the Council for a number of
reasons.

was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption

1983, at 4 p.m.

of the agenda

6. There has been a full-scale war by the racist armed
forces of South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola since 1981. Prior to that, since 1975, the racist
troops had carried out regular acts of aggression against
the territory and people of Angola, starting within the
hour of the proclamation of Angolan independence on
11 November 1975.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16216)

7. This full-scale war is being supported in various
overt and covert ways by certain States Members of the
United Nations, without whose backing the racist
troops would not be able to carry out destabilizing
attempts against the sovereign and legitimate Govemment of Angola.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Botswana, Brazil, India,
Mauritania,
Mozambique,.
Portugal, Somalia, South
Africa, Yugoslavia and Zambia in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

8. My Government issued a White Paper on acts of
aggression by the racist South African regime against
Angola, which my Government requested be circulated
as a document of the Security Council on 5 December;
for unfortunate reasons, it has not yet been distributed.* This document, which the Angola Mission has
distributed in the Council, gives a summary of the racist
acts in the period 1975 to mid-1982. These acts of
aggression not only have continued, but have intensified from mid-1982 to the present.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Krishnan
(India), Mr. Ould Hamody (Mauritania),
Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. Medina (Portugal), Mr. Adan
(Somalia), Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the

9. My Government has brought our case to the Council on a number of occasions.
* Subsequently circulated as document S/16198.

1

.

10. In March 1976, the Council adopted resolution 387
(1976), demanding that “South Africa scrupuiously respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity”
of my country and calling upon the racist
regime to pay full compensation.

South Africa and for full and adequate compensation
, -&;
South Africa to Angola.
,I. ,. ,

by

17. This draft resolution wastvetoed by a superPower, a permanent member of the Council, 13 other
members having voted in favour and one having
abstained [2300th meeting, para. 451. As a result of that
veto, the racist South African troops are still in occupation of southern Angola.

11. In May 1978, the CounciI adopted resolution 428
(1978), repeating that demand and demanding also the
“immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of all South
African forces from Angola”.

18. The Council is the supreme peace-keeping organ
of the United Nations. I quote Article 24, paragraph 1,
of the Charter of the United Nations, as follows:

12. In March 1979, the Council adopted resolution 447
(1979), demanding that “South Africa cease immediately its provocative armed invasions against the People’s Republic of Angola and that it respect forthwith
the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integ;
rity” of my country.

“In order to ensure prompt and effective action by
,. the United Nations, its Members confer on the Security Council primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and
agree that in carrying out its duties under this responsibility the Security Council acts on their behalf.”

13. In November 1979, the Council adopted resolution 454 (1979), strongly condemning South Africa’s
aggression and called upon the racist Government “to
cease immediately
all acts of aggression and provocation against the People’s Republic of Angola and forthwith to withdraw all its armed forces from Angola”.

In the face of the Council’s impotence and inability to
help Angola, the victim of racist aggression, in the face
of its paralysis because of the veto exercised by a superPower, to what court of justice should the people of
Angola turn? In which international forum should we
seek redress? Which international organization will deliver Angola-and,
indeed, all of southern Africafrom the criminal madness of this monster in our midst?

14. In June 1980, the Council adopted resolution 475
(1980), in which it demanded that the racist regime
“withdraw forthwith all its military forces from the
territory of the People’s Republic of Angola, cease all
violations of Angola’s air space and, henceforth, scrupulously respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola”, called upon all
States “to implement fully the arms embargo imposed
against South Africa in Security Council resolution 418
(1977)“, and decided “to meet again in the event of
further acts of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola
by the South African racist regime, in order to consider
the adoption of more effective measures in accordance
with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof ‘.

19. In a gesture of calculated cynicism, the racist
regime, upon hearing of my Government’s request that
a Council meeting be convened, made a tactical move
aimed at diffusing expressions of support for the
Angolan position and the Angolan cause, and at giving
its allies the dubious distinction of being able to point
with pride to the fact that, at last, their policy of constructive engagement is paying off.
20. It is such racist tactics and strategies that we in
southern Africa have learned, through bitter experience with Pretoria and through trust in its allies, to be
extremely wary of. The price we have paid in learning
this lesson is thousands dead and injured beyond rehabilitation, occupation of our sovereign territory, sneak
attacks on our vital installations,
economic sabotage,
recruitment and use of mercenaries against life and
property in sovereign States and efforts to destabilize
the legitimate Governments of southern Africa-in
particular, that of Angola.-

15. In August 1981, the Government and the people of
Angola made an anguished appeal to the- Council
[S/I4654] after a massive invasion of mycountry
and
the military occupation of parts of southern Angola
-an occupation which continues to this date.
16. The draft resolution then before the Council
[S/14664/Rev.2] strongly condemned the racist regime
for its premeditated, unprovoked and persistent acts of
aggression of Angola; declared that the armed invasion
was a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola and constituted a breach of
international peace and security; demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all South African
troops from Angola; strongly condemned the use by
South Africa of mercenaries against the Government
and people of Angola; condemned the aggressive campaign and other hostile activities aimed at destabilizing
the People’s Republic of Angola; and called for implementation of the arms embargo imposed in 1977 against

21. The records of the various organs of the United
Nations are replete with instances of racist South
Africa’s duplicity and basic intransigence, though these
may sometimes be disguised by gestures which are
made to appear conciliatory.
22. In fact, despite the letter from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of racist South Africa to the SecretaryGeneral of 27 August 1981 [S/146.52] and the publicity
given the South African “offer”, I was informed by my
Government in the early hours of this morning that in
2

fact four columns of racist troops made up of armoured
corps are mounting-an offensive into the province of
Huila; a clash already took place, on 14 December, near
Mulongo, betweenthe racist aggressors and the valiant
People’s Forces for the Liberation of Angola (FAPLA)
soldiers defending our country.

we have met friends and foes to seek some way out of
this impasse. But there are some revolutionary principles on which we will not compromise-our
national
sovereignty and territorial integrity among them.
28. Angola is an African State, a southern African
State, a front-line State. We are aware of our duties and
responsibilities,
and will continue to discharge them.
But, as a Member of the United Nations, we have the
right to expect supportive action, especially from
the Security Council, whose permanent members have
the duty not to make a mockery of international law and
of the Charter of the United Nations by using the veto to
block the course of justice.

23. I ask the Council this:‘is this latest offensive commensurate with the sentiments expressed in the abovementioned letter? WilI the Council once more allow
itself to be duped by South Africa’s wiles? Even a
cursory reading of that letter reveals that in fact the
racist regime has really made no offer at all; all that the
letter contains is a vague statement that it is prepared to
begin a disengagement,
but it does not talk of withdrawal. Furthermore,
it again brings up the issue of
linkage, which the Government of Angola, supported in
this by most nations of the world, rejects absolutely and
categorically.

29. The gains claimed by the forces of imperialism all
over the world, and by their apartheid ally in South
Africa in particular, are temporary and pyrrhic. Their
cost will ultimately be incalculable in human, political,
military and economic terms. History is on our side,
and revolutions never go backwards, although they
may suffer an occasional setback.

24. The withdrawal of the racist soldiers and mercenaries from the territory of sovereign Angola is nonnegotiable; it is Angola’s inherent right under international law on statehood and national sovereignty.
After this unconditional withdrawal, which is one of the
four points enunciated by Comrade Jose Eduardo DOS
Santos, President of the Movimento Popular de Libertacao de Angola (MPLA-PT)
Workers’ Party and President of the People’s Republic of Angola, as a sine qua
non for a solution to the problems in southern Africa,
we can discuss other issues, on which the Angolan
people’s commitment
remains as strong as ever. But
first the racist regime must withdraw its five battalions
which are situated in Chitado, Xangongo, Ionde, Evale
and Mulemba.

30. While our final victory approaches, the apartheid
regime, if1 may paraphrase Huxley, distracts attention
from the real point at issue by eloquent digressions and
skilled appeals.
3 1. If the international community does not condemn
the guilty it exonerates them, and if the Security Council does not condemn racist South Africa for its military
occupation of Angolan territory, and force its withdrawal, then we are forced to the conclusion that this
peace-keeping organ by its impotence and inaction legitimizes war.

25. Some of the details of the militarv occunation bv
the racist armed forces and their m&try
operation;
inside our territory are set out in the White Paper
I spoke of [S/16198, annex]. In addition, the racist
armed forces carry out at least three reconnaissance
flights per week from military ,air strips in Ondangua,
Ruacana, Runto and Grootfontein
in the illegally
occupied Territory of Namibia, utilizing Mirage III,
F-7, Canberra, Impala and Buccaneer aircraft and
Puma SA-330, Super Frelon and Alouette II and III
helicopters.

32. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker on the list is
the representative of South Africa, whom I invite to
take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
33. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, I with to convey to
you our congratulations
and best wishes on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council.
34. Once again the Council has been called together
to consider the situation in southern Angola. However,
the factors which have brought about this situation
have not changed since the Council last considered this
question, in August 1981 [2296th to 2300th meetings].

26. It is stated categorically in Article 25 of the Charter that Members of the United Nations agree to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with the present Charter. And yet we have
here a racist Member of the Organization which has
since 1976 refused to do so, with absolute impunity,
while Angola, a Member State of the Organization,
which has never violated any decision of the United
Nations or of any of its organs, is punished time and
again by the unwillingness of the Council to enforce
measures that could rectify the situation.
.
27. The Angolan Government .has never refused or
been afraid to meet, talk or negotiate. Time and again

35. First. South Africa’s securitv onerations in southern Angola have one objective and one objective only:
the protection of South West Africa (Namibia) against
SWAP0 [South West Africa People’s Orgunizution]
terrorist attacks.
36. SWAP0 has murdered more than 1,300 South
West Africans (Namibians)
since it began its terrorist campaign against the people of the Territory. It
has conducted a systematic campaign of intimidation
3

..
_

against its political opponents and has been responsible
for the assassination of more than 25 important political leaders, including Chief Clemens Kapuuo, Toivo
Shyagaya, Filemon Nika, Chief Elifas, Paulus Hamalua
Heita, Thomas Hikongo and Oswald Andawa.

of SWAP0 and Cuban forces above certain latitudes in
Angola. It was hoped that this process would lead to
the establishment of peace in the.border area and that
it would make an important contribution
to the settlement of the broader problems of the region. A second
meeting between ministerial
delegations from South
Africa and the MPLA regime was accordingly arranged
to take place in the Cape Verde Islands on 23 February
1983, to make further progress towards what was believed to be a common objective, namely, the establishment of peace in the border area.

37. In addition, more than 1,000 South West Africans
(Namibians) have been maimed or seriously injured as a
result of SWAPO’s violent activities. Eleven hundred
people, mostly schoolchildren,
have been abducted
from the Territory. SWAP0 now relies on such abductions and recruitment of Angolan citizens to replenish
its terrorist bands.

41. However, SWAPO, actively supported by the
MPLA regime, chose the eve of the second round of
talks to launch its largest-ever offensive against the
people of South ,West Africa (Namibia).
Although
South Africa would have been justified in doing so, it
did not cancel the talks but sent a senior delegation to
the Cape Verde Islands to make it clear that the talks
could not continue unless the FAPLA and SWAP0
manifested the same military restraint that South Africa
had for a number of months maintained. South Africa
also made it clear that an overall solution to the problems of the region would require the withdrawal of the
Cubans from the whole of Angola.

38. These actions, and not its United Nations rhetoric, are SWAPO’s response to the prospect of free and
fair elections in South West Africa (Namibia). Since all
parties to this dispute have agreed that South West
Africa (Namibia) should become independent on the
basis of free and fair elections, SWAP0 ought to state
why it continues with this senseless campaign of violence, for as long as it continues to do so, South Africa
will take whatever action is necessary to defend the
people of the Territory. In particular, South Africa will
not allow SWAP0 bands to establish sanctuaries north
of the border in Angola, from where they can carry out
their raids against the inhabitants of the Territory.

42. South Africa informed the MPLA r&ime on a
number of occasions that it would be prepared to continue its.bilateral discussions on this basis. However,
the MPLA regime had clearly decided to abandon the
process of peaceful negotiation and to seek to achieve
its objectives by other means.

39. In keeping with the Charter of the United Nations,
‘South Africa would have much preferred to resolve this
problem by peaceful means. Indeed, South Africa has
explored all the possibilities for a negotiated solution.
In no less than 54 letters to the former Secretary-General, South Africa brought to the attention of the United
Nations details of the hundreds of murders that had
been perpetrated by SWAPO. South Africa repeatedly
urged the former Secretary-General
to use his good
offices to bring about a cessation of armed attacks
against South West Africa (Namibia)
from Angola.
However, its letters were ignored. On several occasions South Africa sought to put its case to the General
Assembly, but its right to do so was simply brushed
aside, obviously because the majority in the United
Nations finds the truth unpalatable. When the representatives of the Territory,
who were suffering from
SWAP0 attacks, sought to express their grievances,
the Council was not even prepared to give them a
hearing. Far from playing the role envisaged in the
Charter for the peaceful resolution of disputes, the
United Nations has been one of the main instigators and
supporters of SWAPO’s terrorist violence against the
people of the Territory.

43. Despite this attitude, South Africa’s offer still
stands. South Africa has no desire to control a single
centimetre of Angolan territory-not
a single centimetre-and,
although it differs radically with the policies -and approach of the MPLA regime, it is prepared
to examine the possibility of peaceful coexistence with
all the States of the region. South Africa has repeatedly
stated that the moment SWAP0 undertakes to cease its
campaign of violence, and in fact carries out such
a commitment,
action against ,SWAPO by the South
African forces will cease. In such circumstances, there
would of course be no necessity for South African
military action across the border against’SWAP0
elements in Angola.
44. The solution to the present problem is very simple. The MPLA, in accordance with international law,
should ensure that its territory is not used for the
launching of terrorist attacks against its neighbours.
The MPLA regime is aware of this, and yet it persists in
supporting SWAPO’s policy of aggression. It has requested this meeting of the Council to hide its own
aggressive designs against the people of South West
Africa (Namibia) and to distract attention from its own
serious. internal problems. These problems have arisen
from the imposition on Angola of an ideology which is
utterly alien to the peoples of Africa. The fact of the
matter is that the authority of the MPLA regime does
not derive from the freely expressed wishes of the

~40. Having exhausted the possibilities of preventing
aggression through the United Nations, South Africa
attempted to resolve the problem directly with the
MPLA regime. On 7 and 8 December 1982, a South
African delegation, led by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Information,
held promising talks with an
MPLA delegation in the Cape Verde Islands. A formula
was proposed which could have led to the cessation of
armed activities in the border area and the withdrawal
4

with your wide experience and known diplomatic skills,
you will guide our work to a satisfactory conclusion.

Angolan people, but from the military force of foreign
troops. The MPLA.will
not solve its problems by pretending that they are all caused by South Africa. If there
are members of this. Council who believe the MPLA’s
propaganda that South. Africa is responsible for the
present situation in Angola; then we challenge the
MPLA to invite members of the Council to go to Angola
and to assess the situation freely for themselves.

51. Allow me also to extend to your predecessor,
Mr. Gauci of Malta, our heartfelt gratitude for the able
manner in which he presided over the meetings of the
Council during the month of November.
52. I wish to thank you, Sir, and the other members of
the Council for giving me the opportunity to take part in
this debate as Chairman of the Group of African States
for December and also as the representative of my own
country.

45. By requesting this meeting, the MPLA also hopes
to justify the presence in Angola of the Cuban and other
surrogates which it has invited to suppress the Angolan
people. The Cubans are not there to fight South Africa;
they are there to tight the people of Angola. They are
.not there to defend the independence of a sovereign
Government; they are there to prop up an unrepresentative, unelected and unpopular clique. They are not
the allies of Africa in the struggle for liberation; they are
the vanguard of the new imperialists and colonialists,
and their eyes are as much on Lusaka, Kinshasa,
Gaborone, Brazzaville and Libreville as they are on
Windhoek and Pretoria. If the Council seeks evidence
in this regard, it might consult the peoples of Poland and
Afghanistan, and many others.

53. My delegation was anxious to speak because the
question before the Council is one of direct concern to
every Member of the United Nations. All States are
affected when the rule of international
law is allowed
to break down in any area of the world, and there can
be no doubt that South Africa’s military aggressions
directed against Angola over the past eight years and its
current occupation of Angolan territory constitute a
violation of the Charter principles and the norms of
international law.
54. The facts about the situation are not in doubt.
Numerous fact-finding missions, including those of the
United Nations, have attested to the brutality of the
South African aggressions and the extent of the damage
inflicted.

46. One day Africa will realize that the South Africa
forces in the Angolan-South
West Africa border area,
which it now so vehemently condemns, are in fact
fighting in defence of the whole of Africa against
a powerful and sinister threat to all African States.
Nothing that the Council decides now or in the future
can alter this basic fact. Indeed, many African leaders
fear the same threat by the same super-Power and its
surrogates, and the majority of the members of the
Council know what the truth is, but would not admit it
for reasons of their own.

55. Clearly, Angola is the victim of aggression as that
term has been defined by the General Assembly in its
resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974: its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity have
been grossIy violated; many of its towns and villages
-have been severely damaged or destroyed; the toll of
the dead and wounded, who include civilians, refugees
from racist oppression and women and children, runs
into the thousands; hundreds of thousands have been
made homeless, and the damage to property and to
Angola’s industrial and agricultural sectors must be
assessed in terms of hundreds of millions of dollars.

47. Yesterday I conveyed the, following message to
the Secretary-General from the South African Minister
of Foreign Affairs and Information:
[The speaker read out the letter contained in annex I
to the document published under the symbol S/16219.]
48. It will be realized that the South African Govemment’s attitude towards further efforts to bring about a
peaceful resolution of the South West Africa (Namibia)
issue will be influenced by the response to this latest
initiative for peace, the Angolan representative’s cynical and regrettable remarks this afternoon notwithstanding.

56. This is an intolerable situation, and it is made even
more untenable by South Africa’s arrogant attempts to
justify its actions with patently false arguments. Every
possible judgement of international
law has declared
South Africa to be in illegal occupation of Namibia.
A regime which has so grossly violated its international
responsibilities
cannot claim the right to use military
force against those who oppose its illegal, racist and
‘oppressive rule.

49. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Somalia, who wishes to make a statement
in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of African
States for the month of December. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to,make his statement.

57. The liberation struggle of the people of Namibia,
led by SWAPO, and Angola’s support for that struggle
have been declared legitimate by the General Assembly
and by the Security Council. In our view, the Council
must firmly reject South Africa’s claim to be engaged in
hot pursuit of so-called terrorists. The real terrorists
are those who are engaged in the genocidal oppression
of the majority in South Africa, spreading instability,

50. Mr. ADAN (Somalia): Mr. President, permit me
first of all to express the satisfaction of my delegation at
seeing you presiding over the deliberations of the Council for this month of December., We are confident that
5

death and destruction throughout the southern African
region. These policies are aimed at entrenching apartheid and obstructing the efforts of the United Nations to
lead Namibia to independence.
.
58. Unfortunately,
the experience of the past indicates that South Africa will continue on its lawless and
belligerent path as long as it believes that it can do so
with no more severe penalty than verbal condemnation,
and as long as it continues to enjoy the support of its
powerful friends.

64. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Mr. President, I am
grateful to you and to the other members of the Council
for affording my delegation this opportunity
to participate in the Council’s deliberations on a matter of
great importance to the international community.
Permit me to begin by extending to you our most sincere
felicitations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the current month. .The Netherlands and
India enjoy warm ties of friendship and co-operation,
and we are particularly happy to see you in the Chair.
You bring to your duties a wealth of wisdom as well as
experience in statecraft and diplomacy acquired over
many years. We hope that under your able stewardship
the Council will close its deliberations for this year on a
positive and purposeful note.

59. The African States, and indeed ah States which
look to the United Nations as the source of collective
security, find it incomprehensible
that South Africa has
been allowed to carry out with impunity its murderous
attacks on Angola and other neighbouring countries
and to occupy Angolan territory in clear violation
of international law. The Council has recognized time
and again that South Africa’s actions have seriously
damaged peace and security in southern Africa and
pose a grave threat to international peace and security.
However, the Council’s repeated condemnations have
been ineffective, and its call for adequate compensation
for the damage to life and property in Angola has been
contemptuously
ignored.

65. The Government .of Angola has come once again
before the Council, after a lapse of over two years, to
remind the international
community of the continued
aggression being perpetrated against its territory and
people by the racist and belligerent regime of South
Africa. The issue before the Council today is one that
sometimes tends to get obfuscated in the larger context
of the situation in southern Africa and the question of
Namibia. Indeed, it is one of the many ironies of the
situation that those who make much of the presence of
foreign forces on the territory of countries in the area
should choose to gloss over or deliberately ignore the
massive and prolonged presence of South African forces on a large part of Angolan soil, infringing the sovereignty and territorial .integrity of that country and
casting an ominous shadow on the ever-fragile fabric of
peace and stability in the region.

60. Angola is a country whose people desire above all
to go forward with the task of nation-building
in peace
and stability. Ifit cannot turn to the United Nations for
protection and redress against the repeated and vicious
attacks of its militarist neighbour, then it would seem
that the world community has returned to the law of the
jungle, and that instead of having “peace with progress” for our slogan we might as welI proclaim that
“might is right”.

66. The representative
of Angola has apprised the
Council in vivid terms and with his customary eloquence of the seriousness of the situation which confronts his country. South African aggression against
Angolais not a new phenomenon, having been almost a
continuous factor since the achievement of independence by Angola in 1975. Several times in the past the
Council has been seized of the problem. On most of
those .occasions, the Council has adopted resolutions
condemning South Africa for its aggression and asking
it to withdraw its forces immediately
and unconditionally from Angolan territory. Yet, true to its character,
the Pretoria regime continues to turn a deaf ear to the
expressed will of the international community.
It is a
sad reflection upon the efficacy of the Council that its
resolutions and decisions should be so defiantly cast
to the winds by an intransigent Member State of the
United Nations.

61. In June 1980, the Council agreed to consider the
adoption of more effective measures in accordance
with provisions of the Charter, including those of Chapter VII, in the event of further violations of Angola’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Since that time, as
we are all aware, South Africa’s murderous attacks on
the civilian population and its illegal occupation of
Angolan territory and the repeated violations of its
airspace have continued unabated.
62. The Council is therefore called upon to carry out
its primary responsibility
for restoring international
peace and security when it has been determined that
acts of aggression and breaches of the peace have taken
place. It is the profound hope of my delegation that the
Council will fulfil the promise to Angola, indeed to
the international
community,
contained in its resolution 475 (1980).

67. The statement we have just heard from the representative of the Pretoria regime only provides further
proof, if proof were indeed needed, that South Africa
attempts to hoodwink world opinion by seeking to divert attention to issues that are either fabrications or
have no direct bearing upon the question under consideration. We have also learnt this morning of South
Africa’s proposal-if
indeed it merits such a description-involving
a so-called disengagement of forces

63. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of India, who wishes to make a statement in
his capacity of Chairman of the Group of Non-Aligned
States. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
6

in Angola, contained in Security Council document
S/16219 of 15 December. The timing of this communication is no coincidencelIt
is abundantly clear that this is
yet another diversionary tactic which is part of the
overall strategy of South Africa. The offer of disengagement is patently disingenuous because it mentions
nothing about a South African withdrawal and -is an
attempt by an aggressor to set conditions for observance by the victim of its aggression. It also implies that
South Africa claims the right to continue its military
strikes and operations against and inside Angola and its
intent to pursue its policy-postulates
which could not
possibly be accepted. The communication
has also
brought in considerations
not relevant to the issue,
which only goes to confirm that the object of this epistolary exercise is merely to make false propaganda.

“strongly condemned the continued military occupation of part of Angolan’territory
by the South African
racist troops in violation of the national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola. The Conference considered the
occupation of Angolan territory as an act of aggression against the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, demanded the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of South African troops from Angolan
territory and decided to increase support for and
solidarity with the people and Government of Angola
in order to consolidate Angola’s national independence, and safeguard its sovereignty and territorial
integrity.” [S/15675 and Cow.1 and2, annex, sect. I.,
para. 62.
70. The Meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs and
Heads of Delegations of the Non-Aligned Countries to
the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, held
in New York from 4 to 7 October,

68. South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of a
large part of Angolan territory, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, is of a
piece with its larger strategy of destabilization
in the
entire region, whereby it carries out constant acts of
aggression, subversion and every other kind of.provocation directed against independent African States
in the area, not to mention its continued illegitimate
occupation of Namibia. Indeed, Namibia has been used
time and again by Pretoria as a springboard to launch
a campaign of terrorism, intimidation
and aggression
against neighbouring
States, particularly
Angola.
Today, South African forces, together with the mercenaries and brigands that Pretoria commands, are sited
well over 100 miles deep in Angolan territory;fortified
with sophisticated and heavy armaments, spreading
terror among the local population and Namibian refugees. Angolan airspace is violated at will by South
African aircraft. Ground operations are also frequent.
Only two days ago, on 14 December, as we have heard
from reports, four columns of South African infantry
based in the Angolan province of Cunene mounted an
assault on Huila province and were engaged for lglong
hours in a fierce battle by units of the Angolan defence forces. In the post-independence
period, acts
of South African aggression have been responsible for
total damage costing the economy of Angola about
US$ 10 billion. Valuable infrastructure and property
have been destroyed. Thousands of people have been
killed and many more mercilessly uprooted from their
hearths and homes to eke out a miserable existence.
The forces of the racist regime have perpetrated untold
brutalities: pillage, rape, torture, aerial bombardment
of civilian areas, and large-scale killing of innocent
men, women and children. The horrible massacre of
Namibian refugees and Angolans at Kassinga in May
1978 was just one of the many crimes which bring
disgrace to Pretoria.

“condemned the recent massive aggression carried
out by South African forces against the village of
Cangamba in the Province of Mexico, 500 kilometres
from the Namibian border” [S/16035, para. 221.
I can do no better than to reiterate here today these
pronouncements
of the non-aligned countries.
71. Although I am speaking on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, it might not be out of
order for me to refer also to the Final Communique
issued by the recently concluded Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeting held at New Delhi from
23 to 29 November. Forty-two leaders of States, representing a wide cross-section of the world community,
expressed their indignation at repeated violations by
South Africa of the territorial integritv of neighbour-inn
States. They declared:
“These acts of aggression, intended to intimidate
and destabilize
South Africa’s neighbours,
had
involved for example ground and air strikes, attacks
on refugee concentrations in Lesotho and Mozambique, the occupation of parts of Southern Angola,
as well as economic sabotage and blackmail. Heads
of Government condemned these acts which endangered international peace and security and showed a
total disregard for the norms of civilized conduct
between sovereign States. They believed that the
international community as a whole had an obligation
to take effective measures to impose restraint on
South Africa, and to ensure that the stability of the
region was not jeopardized by further acts of aggression. In that context they called for the immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of South African
troops from Angola and an end to all forms of assistance to the subversive forces.” [S/16206, annex,
Final Communique’, para. 131.

69. The Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries has
always stood steadfastly by the side of the Government
and people of Angola. The Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March this year, in
the Declaration it adopted,
‘~.

72. May I add that the Government and people of
India wish to reaffirm their own full solidarity with
7

Angola and their support for its sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity. We commend the Angolan people
for their courageous and determined resistance in the
face of Pretoria’s belligerence.

proclaimed-most
unusually-to
the general public in a
fit of pique by a colonial Governor who was in a terrible hurry to sail away, literally, into the sunset. No
instruments of power were transferred from the colonial Power to an independent Government, as was done
in the other colonies. The Governor sailed away and left
Angola to its own devices; and indeed, Angola is still
left to its own devices today.

73. When my delegation last addressed the Council on
this item, on 29 August 1981, we cautioned this body
against vacillation, equivocation or prevaridation and
urged its members to be alive to their responsibility
under the Charter, calling upon them to take appropriate and resolute action, including the application
of provisions under Chapter VII [2997th meeting,
para. 841. Regrettably, the draft resolution then before
the Council (S/Z466#/JZev.2] could not see the light of
day owing to the negative vote of a permanent member.
Today, more than two years later, with the continued
illegal occupation of territory unabated, acts of aggression, subversion and destabilization
having grown in
frequency and intensity and the unending brutalities
and indignities heaped upon the people of the occupied
territory, the Council can &ord even less to vacillate.
It must act decisively. The Council should condemn in
unequivocal terms the aggression by South Africa and
its continuing military occupation of parts of southern
Angola and demand the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal by South Africa of all its occupation forces,
as well as a commitment
by it scrupulously to respect
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Angola. The Council should also ask for full compensation from South Africa for all the damages that have
been inflicted on Angola over the last several years by
South African aggression and occupation.

78. Angola is a country whose achievement of independence was almost thwarted by South Africa in
1975, a country which shares no border with South
Africa, and yet which has been compelled to bring
a complaint-a
very serious complaint-before
the
Council about the occupation of its territory by South
African troops. I must repeat that Angola shares no
border with South Africa. The complaint Angola has
brought before the Council has very little to do with the
invasion of that country by South Africa in 1975 on the
eve of its birth as a new nation. It has a great deal to
do with the continued commission of various acts of
aggression by South Africa against Angola, starting in
1975, and with the continued occupation of that country
today, an occupation which began in 1981.
79. Since August 1981, thousands of South African
troops have been occupying the southern part of Angola, in violation of the independence and territorial
integrity of that country. The Angolan province of Cunene, in particular, has since become a permanent military base, for South African troops. It is from that
province that South African troops direct the murderous activities of the bandits of UNITA [Unia’o Nucional para a Zndependencia- Total de Angola], in addition to carrying out their own-ongoing campaign of th’e
wanton destruction of Angola’s economic infrastructure. Whole towns, villages, hospitals, schools, bridges
and oil refineries have been destroyed, not to mention
human lives. A White Paper published recently by the
Government of Angola* tells the story more fully; it is a
story so heart-rending, so tragic that none of us in this
chamber can fail to be moved by it.

74. We believe at the same time that mere condemnation of South African aggression and a call upon South
Africa to withdraw are not enough, for Pretoria has
shown scant regard for such pronouncements.
We continue to believe that if South Africa’s intransigence
persists, the Council must be prepared to adopt appropriate measures under Chapter VII of the Charter. That
in turn would call for a display of the requisite political
will on the part of all the members of the Council. We
hope and trust that they can live up to,our expectations
in this regard.

80. I am talking here about a country whose people,
since their attainment of independence,
have never
ceased to seek-nay, to strive-to live in peace with all
their neighbours in southern Africa, including South
Africa, with which they share no frontier. The people of
Angola have never ceased to proclaim that they are a
peaceful people, who have never attacked or wished to
attack anyone, and that all they want is to live in peace,
working to build a future of well-being, progress and
happiness in the just society they have freely chosen.

75. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
76. Mr. LEGWAILA
(Botswana): Let me begin, Sir,
by congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency for this month. I must also congratulate your
predecessor on the manner in which he guided the
deliberations of the Council last month.

81. Angola could not wage a war of aggression against
South Africa even if it had the inclination to do so. In
the first place, the venture would be inescapably suicidal. In the second place, Angola would have to invade
Namibia in order to reach South Africa across the

77. The leaders of Angola are deadly serious when
they end their political statements with the clarion call,
“The struggle continues; victory is certain”. Theirs is a
never-ending struggle for liberation, for Angola, unlike
any other African country, has not, even after eight
years of independence, tasted even one day of peace. It
is indeed a country, a people, whose independence was

* Subsequently circulated as document S/16198.

8

Orange River, and it has no resources to embark on
such a futile and costly venture.

a negative, deleterious impact on prospects for peace in
the region as a whole.

82. That is the light in which South Africa’s repeated
acts of invasion and continued occupation of Angola
should be seen. The invasion and occupation of Angola
have not been provoked by Angola. They have been
provoked by South Africa itself in an attempt to intimidate Angola and to deny the people of that country the
right to be left alone to choose freely the political system under which they want to live.

88. The region is already in the throes of escalating
conflict brought about by the prevalence of racial injustice in South Africa and Namibia and by the recent
emergence of the phenomenon of destabilization
by
which South Africa seeks to surround itself with thoroughly submissive neighbours.

83. It is not our intention to demand from the Council
more than what we believe Angola deserves in terms of
justice and equity. The Council should not-must
notby oversight or inaction, be seen or construed to be
willing to countenance the persistent commission of
acts of aggression against a small, weak, defenceless
country.
84. What we seek from the Council is a firm and
decisive call for the unconditional withdrawal of South
African troops from Angola, the cessation of the acts of
aggression committed by South Africa against Angola,
payment of reparations by South Africa for the massive
havoc it has wrought in Angola, and scrupulous respect
by all for Angola’s independence, territorial integrity
and sovereignty.
85. South Africa must be compelled to respect Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which enjoins all Member States to refrain in their
relations with one another from the threat or use of
force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or
political independence of any State.
86. South Africa must be compelled also to cease
supporting the UNITA bandits, whose acts of banditry
have caused so much destruction, death and suffering
in Angola.
87. Peace for Angola is peace for southern Africa as a
region, for Angola is not an isolated island insulated
from the cares and concerns of our troubled subcontinent. South Africa’s continued occupation of that sister
front-line State and the consequences thereof have had

89. However, as we have pointed out in the past, no
country in southern Africa will allow itself to be rendered submissive to racial tyranny and injustice. None
of us in the area harbours any warlike intentions towards South Africa. It would be foolish of us to harbour
such intentions. But we are by the conviction of our
moral principles committed to exposing the evils of
apartheid and racial tyranny in South Africa.
90. Neither Angola, nor Botswana, nor Lesotho, nor
Swaziland, nor Mozambique,
nor Zambia, nor Zimbabwe, has anything to do with the bombs of war that
explode in South Africa and Namibia today. Apartheid
and racism and the occupation of Namibia by South
Africa are solely responsible.
91. Neither the occupation of Angolan territory nor
the unleashing of murderous dissidents on the countries
-of southern Africa will save apartheid from perdition.
Nor can they save South Africa-not
only the rest of us
in southern Africa, but also South Africa-from
the
unspeakable tragedy that is bound to befall our region if
South Africa cannot bring itself to the realization that
the use of force to resist change is not the answer. The
answers to the problems of our region are not hard to
find. To the problem at issue, the problem we are discussing here, it is the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of South African troops from Angola. That
is the answer. To the problems of Namibia, the speedy
implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978) is the
answer. To the problem of South Africa itself, the total
abolition of apartheid and the democratization
of South
African society are the answer. Then, and only then,
can all of us in southern Africa be redeemed, be rescued
from the edge of the precipice on which we stand poised
in this most frightening period in our history.
The meeting

rose at 5.25 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUilLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DE!3 NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libtairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-60205-March

1992~2,650
