A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/133
16 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 41
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.19/Rev.1 and Rev.1/Add.1)]
50/133.

Support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the indissoluble links between the principles enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1/ and the foundations of any
democratic society,
Recalling the Manila Declaration 2/ adopted in June 1988 by the First
International Conference of New or Restored Democracies, 3/
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene
and the aspirations of all the peoples for an international order based on the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, including the
promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all and other important principles, such as respect for the equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality,
the rule of law, pluralism, development, better standards of living and
solidarity,
Recalling also its resolution 49/30 of 7 December 1994, in which it
recognized the importance of the Managua Declaration 4/ and the Plan of

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

A/43/538.

3/
Then called the International Conference of Newly Restored
Democracies.
4/
96-76705

A/49/713, annex I.
/...

A/RES/50/133
Page 2

Action 5/ adopted by the Second International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies in July 1994,
Recalling further the view expressed in the Managua Declaration that the
international community must pay closer attention to the obstacles facing the
new or restored democracies,
Taking note of the views of Member States expressed in the debate on
this item at its forty-ninth and fiftieth sessions,
Bearing in mind that such activities of the United Nations carried out
in support of the efforts of Governments are undertaken in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and only at the specific request of the Member
States concerned,
Bearing in mind also that democracy, development and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing
and that democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to
determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and on
their full participation in all aspects of their lives,
Noting that a considerable number of societies have recently undertaken
considerable efforts to achieve their social, political and economic goals
through democratization and the reform of their economies, pursuits that are
deserving of the support and recognition of the international community,
Noting with satisfaction that a Third International Conference on New or
Restored Democracies will take place at Bucharest,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 7 August
1995 6/ on assistance provided in the past by the United Nations, at the
request of Member States, as well as important concepts and considerations
that are pertinent to this question,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;

2.
Commends the Secretary-General and through him the United Nations
system for the activities undertaken at the request of Governments to support
the efforts to consolidate democracy, as reflected in his report;
3.
Recognizes that the Organization has an important role to play in
providing timely, appropriate and coherent support to the efforts of
Governments to achieve democratization within the context of their development
efforts;
4.
Stresses that activities undertaken by the Organization must be in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
5.
Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to improve the
capacity of the Organization to respond effectively to the requests of Member

5/

Ibid., annex II.

6/

A/50/332 and Corr.1.

96-76705

/...

A/RES/50/133
Page 3

States through coherent, adequate support of their efforts to achieve the goal
of democratization;
6.
Encourages Member States to promote democratization and to make
additional efforts to identify possible steps to support the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution, including innovative ways and means, as well as new reflections,
to enable the Organization to respond effectively and in an integrated manner
to requests of Member States for assistance in this field;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the item entitled "Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies".
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995

/...
