S/PV.8704

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8704th meeting

Thursday, 16 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Bencosme Castaños
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. King
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Baati
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-01174 (E)
*2001174*

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

His Majesty Sultan Haitham bin Tariq Al Said success
in leading Oman in the coming years. That will be of
great importance to all of us who are focused on the
issue that we will be discussing today.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director,
Coordination Division, United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Mr. Rajasingham is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Since I last spoke to the Council
(see S/PV.8672), our region has been going through a
crisis, the consequences of which have threatened the
gains we have been observing in Yemen. Fortunately,
the immediate crisis seems to be over and I venture to
say that through the actions of many people, Yemen
has been kept safe from such crisis for now. This
achievement — and it is a real achievement — is based
on a consensus that Yemen must not be affected by
regional tensions.
Most importantly, at this time of crisis we have seen
no major acts of military provocation in Yemen. This
is remarkable. Indeed, it has been one of the quietest
weeks in Yemen since the war began, with only one air
strike, very limited military movement on the ground
and no drone or missile attacks on neighbouring States.
I therefore hope that it is not premature to say that
Yemen has emerged at this moment unscathed. This
achievement has not come by chance. Yemeni leaders
and leaders in the region have deliberately exercised
restraint and withheld from acts of provocation.
I would like to add my condolences upon the death
of His Majesty Sultan Qaboos bin Said on 10 January.
There is no doubt that Sultan Qaboos was an inspiring
leader in the field of peace and reconciliation. I wish
2/19

16/01/2020

The regional crisis has tested the resilience of the
various efforts being undertaken by the parties. These
endeavours must make progress if we are to realize
the ambition that 2020 will bring peace to Yemen.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to these
efforts: the de-escalation of military hostilities and the
implementation of the agreements made in Stockholm
and Riyadh. I would also like to refer to the efforts
on the ancillary measures being undertaken by the
parties, which have value in themselves, while also
building confidence between the parties in their other
endeavours. Where do we stand on each of these tracks?
First, with regard to the de-escalation of military
operations, I said to the Council in November that the
air war in Yemen had been reduced by 80 per cent. This
was a remarkable achievement at that time, and I think
that it is even more remarkable now that it has been
sustained and even improved upon. Since the beginning
of January, there have been nine days with no air strikes
at all. It is certainly and tragically true that some fronts
remain active and that there are still far too many
civilian deaths. Nevertheless, the movement of forces
and military on the ground has been reduced. I hope
that it is true and will remain so that we are witnessing
one of the quietest periods of the conflict. That is no
small thing, and the fact that, as I mentioned, it has
been sustained even during a period of crisis is notable.
These efforts should be judged not by whether they
achieve a perfect ceasefire, but by whether the parties’
energies are directed thereto and away from war.
Experience, however, tells us that military de-escalation
cannot be sustained without political progress among
the parties, and that has become the next challenge.
Secondly, I would like to comment on progress in
implementing the Riyadh agreement. I want to praise
the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council, which made that agreement, supported by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, for their diligence and their
commitment to implementing those commitments. The
relative improvement in security in Aden also bodes
well for their efforts. The parties‘ recommitment to
time-bound measures to support the implementation of
the Riyadh agreement is a very positive sign.
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

I know first-hand that there are daily detailed
negotiations, as we sit here, and I hope that we will
see key appointments in Aden in the coming days. I
am fairly confident that the implementation of that
agreement is moving in a positive direction. Overall,
that is good news, not least because it is also a starting
point for opening a new page to be dominated,
highlighted and shaped by sincere consultations among
the Yemeni parties to reach a political solution to end
the Yemeni crisis.
With regard to the Stockholm Agreement, in
particular as it refers to Al-Hudaydah, none of us should
be satisfied with the record of its implementation, but
we can take comfort in the fact that the United Nations
and the parties remain committed and as active as ever
in implementing the commitments they made more than
a year ago in Stockholm. The parties work together
on a daily basis aboard the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) vessel,
moored in the port of Al-Hudaydah, as well as at the
joint observation posts, and continue with efforts to
further the implementation of the Agreement.
Although violence unfortunately continues in the
southern districts of the governorate, the relative calm
at the front lines in the city of Al-Hudaydah shows that
the measures to enhance the de-escalation and ceasefire
mechanism are working, and that is something we can
and should build on.
The Redeployment Coordination Committee that
was established by the Agreement has engaged in
discussions on a road map for opening humanitarian
corridors that will improve access for humanitarian
agencies — Mr. Rajasingham will focus on that
later — and civilian movement in the governorate.
I hope that they can reach an agreement on those
corridors in the coming weeks to pave the way for
further discussions on the implementation of the
redeployment of forces.
I should note that, despite the achievements
in Al-Hudaydah, the persistent restrictions on the
freedom of movement of UNMHA personnel remain a
concern. I raised that in Sana’a before Christmas 2019.
The restrictions of UNMHA’s patrols to the city and
the ports, together with their logistical and support
activities, contradicts the spirit of the Stockholm
Agreement, and I reiterate my call, together with those
of others, for their immediate resumption.

S/PV. 8704

I mentioned before to the Council (see S/PV.8672)
that we have seen considerable progress related to the
entry of fuel ships into Al-Hudaydah and the collection of
revenues, as agreed in the Stockholm Agreement. From
the establishment of that mechanism in November 2019
until the end of the year, more fuel has been delivered
to Al-Hudaydah than in any other equivalent period in
2019 and the taxes have been collected and deposited
in an account in the Central Bank in Al-Hudaydah. We
are working with the parties to reach an agreement on
how those revenues can be used urgently to contribute
to paying the salaries of civil servants, as set out in the
Stockholm Agreement.
Turning briefly to further confidence-building
measures, the proposal for so-called mercy flights
refers to a World Health Organization (WHO) project
negotiated by WHO with the Government of Yemen
and Ansar Allah over many months. Those flights
will transport patients who need medical attention
unavailable in Yemen to agreed locations abroad.
In recent weeks, WHO has benefited from an
extraordinary array of diplomatic support to make
those flights happen. Indeed, the coalition has provided
its own support for the project in a statement of
26 November 2019 and a number of Member States
have intervened at the highest levels to clear away
any obstacles to that project. We thank them for their
diligence. We are very close to seeing the first flight
move 30 patients, who are waiting in Sana’a, for their
treatment. I truly hope that, by the time we meet next
month, we will have seen the first flight completed.
Certainly, the release of six Saudi detainees by
Ansar Allah on 1 January is further evidence of good
will between the parties. I thank Ansar Allah for that
important humanitarian gesture and the International
Committee of the Red Cross for its support in moving
the detainees from Yemen to Saudi Arabia. However,
it falls short of the aspirations of the parties under the
Stockholm Agreement and discussions on the release
of many thousands of prisoners and detainees. We
continue to hope that the parties can make that happen
soon, and, for our part, I intend to convene the prisonerexchange committee created under the Stockholm
Agreement in the coming days with the intention of
achieving substantive numbers of prisoner releases.
All of these initiatives and the measures associated
with them support the urgent search for a political
solution and the end of the conflict in Yemen. That

20-011743/19

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

pursuit is not dependent on the success of any one
of them but reinforced by the success of all of them.
With each positive step, we are brought closer to
formally launching political consultations between the
Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah. I have spoken
about that in the Council on a number of occasions,
with the hope that we see that happen soon.
Indeed, the significance and meaning of the
initiatives to which I have alluded will become real
only in the context of such a political solution to end
the conflict. We have discussed in this Chamber and at
consultations the need for impatience in that respect.
Yemen has recently been brushed by potential tragedy
from regional tensions and, so far, appears to have
emerged unscathed. That is evidence of the leaders’
desire to keep Yemen safe from such tensions, but it
is a fragile safety and one that needs our diligent and
continuing attention if we are to deliver on our promise
to the people of Yemen so that, this year, they may see
the peace they so evidently deserve.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: Every month, we brief the
Security Council on five priority issues in Yemen:
first, respect for international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians; secondly, humanitarian
access; thirdly, funding for the United Nations aid
operation; fourthly, the Yemeni economy; and, lastly,
progress towards achieving peace. Last year, we saw
improvements on many of those issues. The Special
Envoy also outlined earlier important steps forward on
the political track, but events over the past two months
remind us how volatile the situation remains.
First, with regard to the protection of civilians,
Yemen is on the whole less dangerous for civilians
than it was before the Stockholm Agreement a year
ago. Civilian casualties in 2019 were approximately
35 per cent lower than the previous year, and civilian
fatalities are down by almost half. However, it is still
a very dangerous place. In recent weeks, we have seen
hostilities flare up once again along several front lines,
particularly in Al-Dhale’e, Al-Hudaydah and Shabwah.
Although clashes have been mostly contained, we
continue to see mass-casualty incidents across
the country.
On 25 December, a market in Sa’ada was attacked
for the third time in a month, killing at least 8 civilians,
4/19

16/01/2020

while 89 civilians have been killed or wounded in
attacks at the same market since November 2019. Every
day, we receive reports of civilians killed or injured
when shells land on their homes; snipers fire on their
communities; or landmines or other munitions explode.
Such smaller-scale incidents occur in a constant
stream and receive less attention than they should.
Critical civilian infrastructure is not spared either. On
26 December 2019, mortars once again struck the Red
Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, forcing the World Food
Programme to temporarily suspend milling.
It is unacceptable that civilians should so
disproportionately bear the brunt of this conflict. At
all times, the parties must uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian law to avoid harm to
civilians and civilian infrastructure. The best way to
end such harm is to build on the de-escalation measures
the Special Envoy has described and to move as quickly
as possible to a nationwide ceasefire.
The second issue is also an obligation under
international
humanitarian
law:
unhindered
humanitarian access. Our most recent data show that
access constraints are affecting 6.7 million people who
need assistance across the country. This figure has never
been so high. In recent briefings, Council members have
heard about the bureaucratic impediments, harassment
and violence that humanitarian agencies are facing in
northern Yemen. Serious problems persist. Too many
staff are harassed and threatened. Others are arbitrarily
detained or unable to move freely, sometimes for
extended periods. Humanitarian premises have been
forcibly entered. Missions continue to be delayed or
cancelled, which means people do not receive the help
they need on time. We are engaging continuously with
the Ansar Allah authorities on these concerns and hope
to find practical solutions to ensure we can deliver
assistance in accordance with humanitarian principles.
Our donors have made it clear that they are watching
this issue very closely as they make funding decisions
for this year.
On a separate note, we were encouraged that
senior Ansar Allah officials recently agreed, without
conditions, to the assessment of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, which is decaying off the coast of Al-Hudaydah
and at risk of rupturing. We were therefore disappointed
when other Ansar Allah officials later reversed this
position. We are following up with the authorities now
to confirm how we might proceed.
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

In the south, humanitarian agencies also face
constraints, and we are concerned that these recently
seem to be intensifying. Ongoing volatility remains
an issue. Periodic clashes in Shabwah have prevented
aid convoys from travelling along the southern coast
several times, including just two weeks ago. The recent
opening of Mukalla airport to humanitarian flights will
go a long way towards addressing this challenge.
Humanitarians have also been directly targeted.
Over several days in late December, the premises of four
international humanitarian organizations in Al Dhale’e
were attacked with rocket-propelled grenades. These
unprecedented attacks wounded one person and
damaged property. As a result, 14 organizations
suspended programmes benefiting 217,000 people in
the area, although some of the most critical activities
continued without interruption.
We are grateful to the Government of Yemen, local
authorities and other stakeholders for working closely
with us to improve security. Humanitarian organizations
in the area are now working to resume their activities
safely. We are also seeking the Government’s support
on several proposed regulations that would, we believe,
hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance. In
parallel, we continue to advocate faster procedures for
project approvals and importation of key assets. We
look forward to continuing this dialogue.
Despite all the challenges I have just described,
we are still able to deliver the world’s largest aid
programme in Yemen. The results speak for themselves.
We pay tribute again to United Nations staff, as well
as the staff of the non-governmental organizations and
the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, for their
incredible work.
The World Food Programme and its partners are
providing food assistance to more than 12 million
people every month across the country. With support
from humanitarian agencies, 7 million people are able
to access drinking water. Some 1.2 million medical
consultations take place every month, and more than
2,000 health facilities are receiving support. There are
many other examples.
The foregoing is only possible thanks to our
generous donors, which brings me to my third point:
funding for the aid operation. With nearly $3.5 billion
received — or 83 per cent of our requirements and
about a billion dollars more than in 2018 — last year’s
response plan was relatively well resourced. This year,

S/PV. 8704

Yemen will remain the world’s largest humanitarian
crisis. We are doing everything we can to mitigate
the impact of this crisis, including adding new
programmes to boost the incomes of families facing
famine conditions. However, key assessments are being
delayed in the north. We are hoping these assessments
can move forward in the weeks ahead. Because of our
strong financial footing coming into the new year, we
expect that we will be appealing for less than 2019.
Altogether, we aim to assist 15.6 million people this
year, which represents about half the population. To do
so, we need all our donors to maintain their support. As
always, flexible funding early in the year will make an
enormous difference.
The fourth issue is the economy. Because Yemen
imports nearly everything, maintaining adequate
commercial import flows is crucial to ensuring
people can access the goods they need to survive.
Commercial food imports have remained stable, and
fuel imports have recovered since severe shortages in
the north last September and October. In December,
nearly 260,000 metric tons of commercial fuel entered
Al-Hudaydah — about a third more than usual and
the second highest figure all year. Fuel imports have
been able to recover thanks to the parties’ willingness
to work with the Special Envoy to establish a new
mechanism to manage these imports. We commend the
parties for this work.
We hope similar progress can be made regarding
the Yemeni rial, which is again losing value. Recent
depreciation is at least partially due to a dispute over
bank notes printed after 2016. In mid-December, Ansar
Allah authorities issued a decree banning use of these
notes in the north. This decision is causing newer bank
notes to pool in the south, and exchange rates are now
diverging. In Aden, rates have been reported as high
as 640 rial to the United States dollar versus about 580
rial in the north. Both these figures are far higher than
the 215 rate that prevailed before conflict escalated five
years ago, which means that essential goods remain
unaffordable for millions of people across the country.
Following the Ansar Allah decree, the Government
announced that payments to civil servants and retirees
in the north could not be made. We estimate that about
a quarter of the population rely on these payments to
make ends meet. With a rapidly depreciating rial and
disrupted salary payments, therefore, we are again
seeing some of the key conditions that brought Yemen

20-011745/19

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

to the brink of famine a year ago. We must not let that
happen again.
With foreign currency reserves running very low,
a first step is to establish a regular programme of
foreign-exchange injections, which would, as it did in
the past, help bring the exchange rate down and, by
extension, make it easier for people to afford what they
need to survive. It would also buy more time to resolve
the currency dispute without unravelling the entire
economy. We hope Yemen’s partners will consider this
approach as a matter of urgency.
My last point is about the progress towards peace.
The Special Envoy has briefed the Council on several
encouraging, if still fragile, developments. Certainly,
we are closer now to peace than we were before the
Stockholm Agreement last year. That does not mean
peace is a foregone conclusion — far from it. But after
five years of conflict, millions of Yemenis are hoping
that this time, with the support of the Security Council,
peace may finally come.
The President: I thank Mr. Rajasingham for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to welcome
once again the Special Envoy to the Security Council.
I also welcome the Director. I thank both of them for
their briefings and for their tireless efforts and those of
their teams on this very acute problem.
I think it is clear from what we have heard today
that the political settlement is the only way to bring
long-term stability to Yemen and also to address the
humanitarian crisis. The Security Council has a vital
role to play in supporting the peace process. I would
therefore like to begin by welcoming the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2505 (2020) on Monday renewing
the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement (see S/PV.8701).
There are a number of things I would like to say,
so I will break them down into different headings.
Starting with the Riyadh agreement, we strongly
support this Saudi-brokered agreement, which is vital
to stabilizing the south and key for an overall peace
process. Therefore, the announcement on 9 January of
a military agreement to make progress on the Riyadh
agreement, together with the reports of prisoner
exchanges, is very welcome. I was interested in what
6/19

16/01/2020

Special Envoy Griffiths had to say about reconvening
the prisoner-exchange committee. Let us therefore hope
that it goes well. Announcements do need to be followed
by implementation on the ground, and the formation of
a new Yemeni Government is critical to progress.
On de-escalation, it is very welcome that there has
been a tangible decrease in inflammatory rhetoric and an
apparent decrease in violence around the Saudi border,
which are good demonstrations of political will. The
announcement on 20 September that the Houthis would
cease strikes on Saudi Arabia is particularly welcome,
but obviously that needs to be properly enforced and
carried out. We must not allow this small window of
hope to close. That is one message I took away from
what Mr. Griffiths was saying. It is vital that Yemen
does not become hostage to a wider regional crisis, and
we do hope that the international community can come
together to press the Houthis not to become a vehicle
for wider retaliation from Iran in the region.
Ultimately, though, as we know, any sustainable
peace process needs to be underpinned by a
comprehensive security agreement, and brazen strikes,
such as the Iranian missile strike on the ARAMCO
facilities last year, place that prize in jeopardy.
On the humanitarian side, I thank Director
Rajasingham for his briefing. The core message
that stands out there is that this is still the largest
humanitarian crisis. It was alarming to hear that some
of the factors that brought Yemen to the brink of famine
are returning. We therefore share the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs’ sense of urgency
in that regard. We also hope that humanitarian workers
can be allowed to do their work properly, and we pay
tribute to the work of the Humanitarian Coordinator
and the country team.
What Mr. Griffiths told us about World Health
Organization mercy flights is obviously extremely
important and a bit of good news. I understand that
there has been intimidation of humanitarian workers
and that it is not limited to Houthi areas. I want to
take this opportunity to support the statement that the
Emergency Relief Coordinator issued on 23 December
2019, condemning attacks on the premises of several
humanitarian organizations in Al-Dhale’e that month.
Aid workers must be allowed to deliver their life-saving
support in safety.
Concerning the oil tanker, we can only echo what
Director Rajasingham said. We do need the issue to be
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

resolved. The consequences of a rupture or explosion
would be phenomenal. Accordingly, we urge the
Houthis to let the United Nations assessment team have
access to the tanker. Continued inaction can only be
described as reckless; therefore, we hope that this can
be resolved soon.
The economy is obviously a very difficult issue. We
continue to encourage constructive engagement on the
economy. We look forward to an ongoing injection of
hard currency and greater public financial transparency
because the foreign currency shortfall faced by the
central bank is extremely concerning and could have
serious implications for the humanitarian situation.
To come back to where I started, all of this is
obviously leading up to an expression of support for
Mr. Griffiths as he tries to take the broader political
process forward. However, it is clear from what we
have heard today that we cannot afford any let-up in
our support for that and the Special Envoy’s work.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the Director
of the Coordination Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham, for their timely and insightful briefings.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is delighted that,
since assuming the chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), the mandate of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement has been renewed and that there have been
efforts towards de-escalation.
We wish to reaffirm our commitment to the peace
process and agree with fellow Council members that the
only solution is a political one, inclusive of all Yemenis.
In that regard, we wish to stress the need for women to
be included in the political process and for the process
to reflect the aspirations of youth. That is the only
way for us to achieve a durable solution. We must also
emphasize the need for the Stockholm, Hodeidah and
Riyadh agreements to be fully implemented. In that
vein, we commend the efforts of the Government of
Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council towards
implementation of the Riyadh agreement, noting the
deal reached by both parties, which provides for the
withdrawal of forces from Aden within three weeks. We
encourage further steps towards full implementation.
Five years on, Yemen is still regarded as the world’s
worst humanitarian crisis. It is not our intention to be

S/PV. 8704

grim, nor do we wish to take anything away from the
progress that has been made on the humanitarian front.
However, more must be done, and it must be done as a
matter of urgency. The Global Humanitarian Overview
2020 emphasizes that the number of people in need of
humanitarian assistance will remain close to 2019 levels
of 24 million. The influx of the migrant population has
further compounded the situation.
It is imperative that parties do not actively obstruct
the work of humanitarian personnel. There is an urgent
and critical need for unimpeded humanitarian access.
For many people, that is literally the difference between
life and death. We also underscore that the facilitation
of unimpeded humanitarian relief is enshrined in
international humanitarian law, and to deliberately
obstruct it is an infraction of a well-established law
of our rules-based system. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines strongly condemns any action that breaches
international law and further condemns the act of
obstructing humanitarian access. We call upon all
parties to allow and facilitate full, safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all persons in need.
To conclude, we wish to recall the recent open
debate, during which we reaffirmed our commitment
to upholding the Charter of the United Nations (see
S/PV.8699 et seq.). The situation in Yemen does not
exemplify those aims. If we sit by and allow large-scale
suffering in Yemen to continue, the immutable
principles of the Charter of the United Nations will
become nothing more than hollow talking points
ventilated in patent isolation and disconnected from
a reality of ongoing struggle and hardship felt by
too many. In that connection, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines reiterates its commitment to the principles
of international law and stresses that they must
be vigorously upheld. Our adherence must remain
steadfast, as we endeavour to address global problems
through collective collaboration. We hope that 2020
will bring peace to Yemen.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Director
Rajasingham for their briefings and for the dedicated
work of their teams.
The United States welcomes the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement, with full Council support. With
the renewal of the mandate, we hope to see further

20-011747/19

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

progress on the commitments made in Stockholm,
along with efforts to reach a broader political solution.
The Security Council’s unanimous position on this
issue is noteworthy and signifies a strong collective
support of the United Nations and the role it plays in
Yemen, both politically and in delivering humanitarian
assistance. We thank the United Kingdom for its efforts
in facilitating a smooth mandate renewal.
The United States views ongoing de-escalation
efforts and reports of progress by the Yemeni parties
in implementing the Riyadh agreement as encouraging.
In particular, we welcome reports that work on
security arrangements for Aden is under way, and we
look forward to the announcement of a governor and
a security chief in Aden. Those are important steps
on the path to a broader political settlement. A more
inclusive Cabinet is in the best interest of all Yemenis
and will contribute to a sustainable resolution for this
devastating conflict.
While we are heartened by those positive
developments, the United States remains extremely
concerned about the state of humanitarian access and
the treatment of humanitarian workers, particularly
in the north. The recent strike on the Red Sea Mills,
a critical source of food for thousands of vulnerable
Yemenis, is unjustifiable. We would like to recognize
the significant efforts of the World Food Programme in
restoring operations at the Mills.
We call on the Houthi authorities to reduce the
significant and detrimental impediments to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance, including by lifting access
restrictions and eliminating illegitimate levies on aid
projects, both of which heavily delay the delivery of
essential assistance and place an undue burden on
humanitarian partners attempting to provide critical
and life-saving aid.
The United States stands by the efforts of the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations
to continue to provide humanitarian aid based on the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, despite the increasingly restrictive
environment. To the Houthi authorities we say that, as a
principled humanitarian donor, we want to continue to
provide aid in the areas they control. We believe that all
Yemenis in need deserve life-saving assistance. Please
do not make it impossible for us to continue doing that.
We also note that no progress has been made on
securing clearance to allow United Nations officials to
8/19

16/01/2020

access the site of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which is
still floating off the coast of Al-Hudaydah, under Houthi
control, with 1.14 million barrels of oil and in a rapidly
deteriorating condition. The Council should work
together to prevent what could be an environmental
and humanitarian disaster. The Houthis must grant the
United Nations the necessary visas and clearances to
access the site to conduct vital inspection and provide
necessary maintenance.
In conclusion, the United States continues to
encourage the parties to capitalize on recent progress
and move towards broader political talks. Even as
regional tensions persist, we are encouraged by the
recent signs of progress and hope the parties maintain
this path of restraint and de-escalation. In keeping
with that path, they must stop jeopardizing the lives
of ordinary Yemenis and allow humanitarian workers
to do their work. Too many have suffered from this
conflict and the time has come for a solution.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director of the
Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for
their valuable briefings.
We share the sentiments expressed by Mr. Griffiths
towards His Majesty the late Sultan Qaboos bin Said, and
I thank him for the optimism conveyed in his briefing.
We are determined to participate with all parties to
make 2020, as he said, the year of peace in Yemen. That
sentiment was also echoed by Mr. Rajasingham.
Tunisia continues to closely follow developments
in Yemen. We call on all parties to prioritize the
country’s best interests and to promote dialogue and
negotiations as the only way to overcome differences
and reach a political settlement to end the suffering
of the Yemeni people and preserve the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Yemen. In that context,
my delegation welcomes the positive steps taken thus
far, which constitute signs of hope to build upon,
especially the Riyadh agreement and endeavours to
implement the Stockholm Agreement. We also reiterate
the need to support confidence-building measures
and commitments by all parties to continue to work
to overcome the current situation and reach a political
solution in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and all relevant Security Council resolutions.
Tunisia welcomes the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement. At the same time, we call for concerted
efforts to lay the political foundations for the resumption
of the negotiations towards a comprehensive solution
leading to a transitional period. Parties should also
commit to the outcome of the Stockholm talks, which
are the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, the prisoner-exchange
agreement and the memorandum of understanding
on Taiz.
Tunisia supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy for Yemen, especially
the consultations with all parties to advance the
political process and reach a comprehensive, durable
and peaceful solution.
On the humanitarian situation, my delegation
expresses its solidarity with the brotherly Yemeni
people in view of their suffering as a result of the severe
humanitarian crisis, and commends the role of OCHA
and all humanitarian organizations in addressing
the crisis. Tunisia stresses the need to provide vital
funding to ensure the humanitarian response in Yemen.
We urge the Yemeni parties to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to all beneficiaries in an
expedited, safe and unfettered manner. We call on all
parties to the Yemeni conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law. In
the same vein, we commend the efforts of the legitimate
Yemeni Government and members of the coalition, as
well as donors, to mitigate the humanitarian suffering
in Yemen.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates the need for the
political settlement to gain traction in Yemen, as it is
the only way to overcome this crisis. We also welcome
the fact that all parties are leaning towards calming the
situation and highlight what Mr. Griffiths said earlier
today in that regard. We therefore call for capitalizing
on the achievements made, in accordance with a
common vision of the Security Council based on the
agreed terms of reference.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for
their briefings.
I would like to start on a positive note. First, from
what has been said so far in the Council, we see some

S/PV. 8704

agreement between us. That was expressed earlier this
week (see S/PV.8701), when all 15 members agreed
to extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (resolution 2505
(2020)). The agreement on the situation in Yemen is
slightly reminiscent of the one we reached in this organ
on Colombia a couple of days ago (see S/PV.8702).
I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing. He also
struck a positive note and I think we need to recognize
that so far it has indeed been possible to isolate Yemen
from the escalation in the region. That is very positive.
He mentioned the military de-escalation and some
political progress in Al-Hudaydah with regard to the
prisoner release.
Nevertheless, there is no reason for complacency.
I was appalled when I heard about the attack on the
Red Sea Mills, a site we have been discussing over
the past couple of years and which my American
colleague also mentioned earlier today in her statement.
Those responsible for these kinds of attacks show an
incomprehensible degree of cynicism and barbarism.
The OCHA Director, my American colleague and
the Ambassador of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
all reminded us that we are still facing the largest
humanitarian crisis on the globe, with more than
15 million people in need of humanitarian aid. We
therefore continue to be concerned. I would like
to highlight the comments made by my Tunisian
colleague and the Ambassador of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines. The lack of respect for international
humanitarian law that we have witnessed in Yemen
and in other areas is something we all need to be
concerned about. Germany has highlighted that point
for the past two years while it has been a member of the
Security Council.
I would like to encourage OCHA and Mr. Griffiths
to continue their work and demand that access be
granted to humanitarian workers for the purposes of
opening up humanitarian corridors and starting mercy
flights. People who are severely injured need help and
there are hospitals around the world ready to treat them.
It is unacceptable to prevent them from flying there.
What kind of barbarism is that?
With regard to respect for humanitarian aid workers,
there are reports that humanitarian aid agencies have
been bombed. Prisoner releases continue. We are also
very concerned about reports of ever-increasing violence
against women and of the repression of women. As we

20-011749/19

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

do at almost every meeting, we encourage Mr. Griffiths
to insist on the participation of women in political talks.
I would like to commend OCHA for all its
work. At this stage, I would also like to commend
all humanitarian aid workers and non-governmental
organizations for continuing to do their very important
work in extremely difficult conditions. Let me end by
supporting and highlighting Mr. Griffiths’ optimism.
I hope that he is right when he says that 2020 will
bring peace to Yemen. I hope that a political solution is
reached so that, as Mr. Griffiths said, we can launch a
formal political track.
Germany will continue to support Mr. Griffiths and
OCHA. We will remain one of the main humanitarian
donors. We will also continue to contribute substantially
to the Yemen humanitarian response plan. On the
political track, we are also ready to support the process
by facilitating meetings at various levels.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy, for whom I reiterate our full support,
and the representative of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings.
The urgency of finding a political solution to
the crisis remains and that necessity becomes more
pressing each day. Efforts to de-escalate tensions in the
region must remain everyone’s priority and continue to
be pursued. Yemen must not be a source of regional
tensions. In that regard, attacks on the territory of Saudi
Arabia are at odds with those efforts. The Houthis must
respect their commitment to refraining from carrying
out such attacks.
In the south, the Riyadh agreement must be fully
implemented as soon as possible. We again welcome
the efforts of Saudi Arabia in that regard. A new
Government, including representatives from the south,
must now be formed as soon as possible.
The Al-Hudaydah Agreement must be fully
implemented. We welcome the Council’s unanimous
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement. United Nations
mediation efforts must remain at the heart of the political
process and guide the various initiatives to achieve an
inclusive political solution as soon as possible.
Given the humanitarian disaster, we must focus on
two priorities. First, we must focus on the protection
of civilians, including the protection of humanitarian
and medical personnel and civilian infrastructure.
10/19

16/01/2020

We condemn the attacks on the Al-Raqw market. The
increase in the number of attacks against humanitarian
personnel is extremely worrisome.
Secondly, comprehensive humanitarian access
must be guaranteed. All parties to the conflict must
allow humanitarian access. The restrictions imposed by
the Houthis prevent millions of people from benefiting
from humanitarian aid and must stop immediately.
Respect for international humanitarian law is not
negotiable and applies to everyone.
It is becoming more urgent by the day for the
United Nations to obtain access to the FSO Safer oil
tanker, which poses a serious threat to the environment.
France will remain fully committed to achieving
peace in Yemen. The French authorities will continue
to act in support of de-escalation in the region and a
lasting solution to the conflict.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Martin Griffiths, and the Director
of the Coordination Division of the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Raj Rajasingham, for their briefings on the political
and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We highly
value Mr. Griffiths’ work of and professionalism.
We pay tribute to the courage and dedication of our
humanitarian colleagues, who deliver assistance to the
Yemeni people in very difficult conditions.
The situation in the Republic of Yemen remains
of extreme concern. Despite intense mediation efforts,
the Stockholm Agreement has still not been fully
implemented. The implementation of the Riyadh
agreement on the south of Yemen is supposed to make
a considerable contribution to stabilizing the situation.
Russia, which has historically had friendly relations
with Yemen, views Yemen as an independent, sovereign
State with territorial integrity. We reaffirm our full
support for Mr. Griffiths in his task of convincing the
parties to the Yemeni conflict that there is no alternative
to a political settlement and encouraging them to
develop confidence-building measures and establish a
comprehensive ceasefire.
From the beginning, we have advocated for
an exclusively political and diplomatic solution to
the crisis in Yemen, based on inclusive dialogue
among all Yemeni forces, without exception. We will
continue to support United Nations mediation efforts
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

in Yemen, including through contacts with all political
stakeholders in the country and all interested parties,
both in our national capacity and as a permanent
member of the Security Council.
As in other regional conflicts, a unified position
among all external players is required in Yemen as we
come together in support of our Special Envoy. Early
this week, the Security Council unanimously voted to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (see S/PV.8701). We
firmly believe that a greater international presence in the
country will facilitate the disengagement of opposing
forces in the city itself, help stabilize the situation in
Yemen overall and allow for the start of discussions on
a framework for a comprehensive settlement. We call
on all sides to support the efforts of Mr. Griffiths on
that track.
It is thanks to United Nations mediation efforts
that we see an overall decrease in fighting and in the
number of air raids. Despite a few isolated incidents,
the ceasefire regime has held. Thanks to the agreement
reached on the use of customs revenues from the port of
Al-Hudaydah to pay the salaries of civil servants, ships
have resumed entry and the unloading of commercial
cargo in the port, which opens up additional avenues
for providing humanitarian assistance.
We believe that the political will to find common
ground, demonstrated by the parties in Yemen, will
help to achieve an expeditious political settlement to
the protracted conflict. In that regard, we call on the
parties to the conflict to do all in their power to ensure
that such positive developments lead to a full cessation
of hostilities as soon as possible and, consequently,
save human lives and launch a comprehensive peace
settlement in Yemen, exclusively under the auspices
of the United Nations. That solution would meet the
interests of all that Arab country’s main political forces
and religious and social groups. Ensuring an inclusive
process is one of the determining factors in achieving
lasting stability.
The international community must continue to
make collective efforts to put the conflict on a political
track and provide the necessary assistance to millions
of Yemeni citizens, who, as we have heard today, are
in dire need of assistance and experiencing one of the
worst humanitarian crises. We are convinced that such
a development would serve to not only benefit Yemen,

S/PV. 8704

but also to ensure the security of all neighbouring
States of the region.
While we undertake efforts on the political track,
we must not forget that war, chaos and internal conflict
only help terrorist groups. We call on all Yemenis to
unite in combating that destructive scourge and to
suppress terrorism together with a view to restoring
State stability, ensuring the smooth functioning of
Government institutions and returning the country to
the path of progressive development in an atmosphere
of cooperation with all its neighbours, including Arab
States and Iran.
In that regard, we recall resolution 598 (1987),
which requested the Secretary-General to develop a
regional security architecture, in consultation with
States of the region. We once again draw attention to
the Russian concept of collective security in the Persian
Gulf region, which seeks to resolve conflict situations
and develop confidence-building and control measures.
The escalation of aggressive, accusatory rhetoric and
the artificial stoking of anti-Iranian sentiments are
destabilizing the already tense situation in the entire
Middle East region.
We will mark the fifth anniversary of the outbreak
of the war in Yemen in April. We believe that this
tragic landmark should impel the people of Yemen and
all regional stakeholders to set their differences aside
and reach agreement on a political settlement. It is high
time for States in the Middle East, which possess rich
history, traditions, cultures and vast natural resources,
to take the issues of regional security into their own
hands and engage in a mutually respectful dialogue,
while casting aside negative external influences that
are antagonizing inter-State relations and hampering
prospects for peaceful coexistence and cooperation
under various pretexts. Russia will actively contribute
to the peaceful settlement of regional disputes,
including in Yemen, based on deep trust with the States
of the Middle East.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the
Director of the Coordination Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for their very
important briefings today.
We are pleased that the Special Envoy and the
parties concerned are working tirelessly to resume the
peace talks and to hear that there has been no major

20-0117411/19

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

act of military provocation recently. We hope that this
will continue, and, most importantly, that there are no
setbacks from the existing agreed upon commitments.
In response to the briefings, Indonesia would like
to underscore the following points.
First, we reiterate our full support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy to bring the parties towards the
resumption of peace talks, including the plan of the
Special Envoy to reconvene the prisoner-exchange
committee in the coming days. It is critical that
Yemenis own the process and the outcome. To that end,
Indonesia advocates an inclusive process, facilitated by
the United Nations, with the participation of women and
youth. We also support the visit to Yemen, which we
hope could bring positive momentum towards the peace
process. We are also happy to observe some progress
in the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, and
that key countries of the region are playing a pivotal
role towards the peace process, resulting in some
encouraging tangible progress.
Secondly, we remain deeply concerned, however,
about the humanitarian situation in Yemen. In that
regard, we condemn the attacks on 21 and 22 December
in Al-Dhale’e, which targeted the premises of the United
Nations and international humanitarian organizations,
posing a security risk to humanitarian workers. The
attacks violated international humanitarian law and
resulted in the suspension of some aid programmes.
Indonesia calls on all to respect international
humanitarian law. Given that more than 12 million
people rely on that assistance every month, we also call
on the authorities to ensure safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian workers across the country.
Thirdly, my delegation stresses the critical
importance of the implementation of previously agreed
upon commitments, as that is key to broader progress
in the political process. We will therefore continue
to monitor the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, moving in parallel with the resumption of
the political process. As we have repeatedly mentioned,
we also expect progress on the Al-Hudaydah Agreement,
maintaining the ceasefire and demilitarizing the area
and the ports. Any setback in the implementation of that
Agreement is dangerous, as it constitutes the lifeline
for humanitarian assistance. It is a source of hope for
millions of Yemenis.
As a result, Indonesia welcomes the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support
12/19

16/01/2020

the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) for another six
months to enable the monitoring of and support for the
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. We
reiterate our call for unhindered access for UNMHA
personnel to conduct patrols and effectively monitor
the ceasefire. As the Secretary-General has said, the
Mission brings calm to the people in Al-Hudaydah.
In closing, my delegation urges harder work and
commitment in 2020 to ensure a monumental year for
peace and stability for all Yemenis.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank Special Envoy
Griffiths and Director Rajasingham for their briefings.
China commends Special Envoy Griffiths
for his vigorous efforts to advance the political
process in Yemen and supports the hard work of the
United Nations and relevant agencies to improve the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. We hope that in
the new year, the international community, including
the Security Council, can achieve breakthroughs in
the political settlement of the Yemeni issue. With
respect to this year’s work, we would like to share the
following perspectives.
First, the parties in Yemen need to stay the course
towards a political solution and continue to advance the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the
Riyadh agreement, with a view to reaching an early
relaunching of the United Nations-led comprehensive
political settlement. Despite twists and turns in the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, it has
played a vital role in easing tensions in Al-Hudaydah
and promoting dialogue among Yemeni parties and
must continue to be implemented.
The implementation of the Riyadh agreement bears
directly on the political negotiations in the next step.
China has taken note of the recent consensus reached
between the Yemeni Government and the Southern
Transitional Council on military and security sectors, in
addition to many other provisions of the agreement. We
applaud Saudi Arabia and other countries in the region
for their continued good offices. We encourage Yemeni
parties to jointly maintain solidarity and stability in the
south, in order to safeguard the country’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
China
supports
Special
Envoy
Griffiths’
preparations for the new round of peace talks anchored
in the existing agreements. We support another renewal
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and hope
that the Mission will remain committed to its mandate
and support the implementation of agreements for the
maintenance of overall stability in Al-Hudaydah.
Secondly, the Security Council, countries in the
region and the rest of the international community
must carry out robust good offices, work in synergy
and create the conditions for dialogue and negotiation
among Yemeni parties. The members of the Council
must remain seized of the issue of Yemen and discuss
how to promote dialogue and negotiation among Yemeni
parties through a variety of means. They must exchange
views on how to further implement the existing
agreements, attenuate the situation in Aden and deliver
a complete ceasefire across the territory, among other
such measures. Countries in the region need to continue
to exercise their positive influence on Yemeni parties
to encourage them to build up mutual trust through the
exchange of prisoners and other measures and uphold
the momentum of the ceasefire and dialogue.
China has maintained contact with all Yemeni
parties. On 2 January, the Chinese Ambassador in
Yemen met with President Hadi Mansour of Yemen.
At this meeting, the President reiterated his political
will to spare no effort to advance the implementation
of the Riyadh agreement and actively participate in the
United Nations-led peace process. China will continue
with its diplomatic efforts to encourage the parties to
bridge gaps and broaden consensus.
Thirdly, the international community should
improve the livelihood of the Yemeni people with a
more tailored approach, prioritize the secure supply
of oil, food and drinking water, stabilize currency and
commodity prices, contain cholera and other diseases,
assist in development and reconstruction projects, focus
on education and training for children and youth, and
increase employment.
Given the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen and
the fact that the people of the country have long borne
the brunt of the war, it is imperative for Yemeni parties
to fully coordinate with the humanitarian operations
of the United Nations and other relevant agencies
to prevent further deterioration of the humanitarian
crisis. China has consistently provided humanitarian
assistance to the Yemeni people through bilateral and
multilateral channels while upholding the view that
peace and stability in countries in conflict should

S/PV. 8704

be promoted through development. China signed an
agreement on economic and technical cooperation with
the Yemeni Government. On 15 January, China signed a
further agreement with the Ministry of Health of Yemen
under which China will send a consignment of medical
equipment to the country valued at ¥ 9.8 million.
China stands ready to continue to do more
practical work for the benefit of the Yemeni people,
engage in Yemen’s economic reconstruction and play a
constructive role for the prompt achievement of lasting
peace and stability in Yemen.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Griffiths and Director Rajasingham for their briefings.
Estonia fully supports Mr. Griffiths in his efforts
to find a peaceful solution in Yemen. We also commend
United Nations agencies for their efforts aimed at
improving the humanitarian situation in Yemen and
welcome the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA) (resolution 2505 (2020)).
I was glad to hear that there have been positive
developments and a reduction in violence. However, in
the context of rising regional tensions, it is important
that all stakeholders remain committed to de-escalation.
Fighting will not bring about a solution; that can only be
achieved through inclusive dialogue among all relevant
groups and civil society in the region, including women
and youth. I call on the parties to resume discussions
on a comprehensive political solution without delay
or preconditions.
We welcome all efforts to de-escalate
tensions, including the implementation of such
confidence-building measures as the recent prisoner
exchange in Taiz governorate. However, it is
unacceptable that the civilian population continues to
be harmed by the attacks across the country. We are
also concerned about reports of gender-based violence,
the repression of women, the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict, and arbitrary detentions.
We call on all parties to fulfil their obligations under
human rights law and international humanitarian law
and to hold all perpetrators of violations accountable.
Even though we heard that there was considerable
improvement in 2019, the scale of the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen, as set forth by the briefers, remains
extremely critical, and the human cost of the war is
immense. Some 24 million people still depend on

20-0117413/19

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian assistance. It is therefore crucial that
unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance be
guaranteed throughout the country.
We commend the Government of Yemen and the
Southern Transitional Council for the steps already
taken towards implementing the Riyadh agreement.
The next phase, involving military and security steps,
is undoubtedly challenging, but we urge the parties
to make efforts to fulfil their agreed obligations.
Implementation of the agreement is crucial in order
to move towards a comprehensive political settlement
in Yemen.
The recent renewal of the mandate of the UNMHA
shows that the Security Council is united in its efforts
to help solve the conflict (see S/PV.8701). We call on
the authorities in Al-Hudaydah to ensure the freedom of
movement of the Mission. I would also like to reiterate
the importance of full implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement in building confidence between the parties.
Finally, with regard to the decaying FSO SAFER
oil tanker, we call on the authorities in Al-Hudaydah
to allow the United Nations assessment team to have
access to the ship in order to prevent an environmental
disaster in the Red Sea.
Mr. Bencosme Castaños (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Griffiths and
Mr. Rajasingham for their briefings this morning, which
painted a very full and detailed picture of the political
and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We express our
gratitude to both of them for the immense efforts made
in their respective fields to achieve peace and meet the
pressing needs of the affected population.
At the outset, I should like to recognize the progress
being made in the talks between the Government of
Saudi Arabia and the Houthis, which have led to a
partial de-escalation in hostilities. Notwithstanding
that observation, we condemn the recent attacks,
especially those targeting humanitarian infrastructure
in Al Dhale’e on 22 December. We reiterate as we have
on other occasions that all parties to the conflict have
an obligation to respect international humanitarian law
and refrain from this type of indiscriminate attacks,
which have greatest effect on the civilian population.
We have listened very carefully to the reports of
progress in implementing the Riyadh agreement and
we understand that we must maintain the momentum
to reach a broad and inclusive political agreement
14/19

16/01/2020

based on mutual respect and full implementation of the
commitments undertaken.
With regard to the implementation of the Hodeidah
Agreement, we commend the ongoing work of General
Guha together with the parties to improve humanitarian
access. We urge the parties to continue cooperating
under the auspices of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, and, in this regard, we stress that the parties
must ensure there are no restrictions on the movement
of Mission personnel within the city. Such restriction
undermines the overall implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement, recently renewed by the Security Council
unanimously in resolution 2505 (2020) (see S/PV.8701).
We acknowledge the progress made in the prisoner
exchange, with the release of 200 detainees by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as part of implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement. We also welcome the
announcement of the facilitation of flights for health
reasons from Sana’a airport to countries where patients
can receive badly needed treatment.
The humanitarian situation remains alarming.
In particular, we are concerned at the alerts issued
by humanitarian organizations on the ground about
a possible epidemic of dengue-related diseases. The
climate situation, combined with the virtual collapse of
water and sanitation services as a result of the conflict,
has made it difficult to control this type of disease,
which primarily affects children.
We are further concerned at reports about food
security in the country. The conflict in Yemen continues
to restrict access to livelihoods and prolong the foodand nutrition-insecurity situation of the population
for generations to come. According to reports from
specialized agendas, agricultural production is well
below average, and the prices of food and non-food
commodities remain significantly elevated compared
to pre-conflict levels.
We also wish to echo the representative of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines by expressing that any
political process in Yemen must include the participation
of women as well as men and fully take into account
their needs. It is therefore crucial to provide safe spaces
for women to make their valuable contributions.
We are likewise concerned by reports about
food security in the country. Against a backdrop of
reduced access to income and decreased purchasing
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

power, most Yemenis cannot meet their essential
food and non-food needs. Under these circumstances,
malnutrition remains a serious concern in many
areas. We encourage the parties to commit to the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and a
definitive ceasefire, while working on an inclusive
peace process that will permanently open the door to
new paths leading towards development and prosperity
for the Yemeni people.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Director of the
Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham, for the information that they provided to
us today.
My delegation would like to address the following
two points in our statement today, namely, the political
situation and the humanitarian situation.
With regard to the political situation, South
Africa wishes to welcome the ongoing talks between
the Houthis and Saudi Arabia. We urge all parties to
the conflict to continue efforts aimed at undertaking
dialogue and confidence-building measures that will
contribute to a comprehensive political solution for
Yemen. South Africa remains firm in the belief that
sustainable peace in Yemen will come only through
assertive efforts at dialogue, instead of continued
armed conflict, which has led only to devastation and a
profound humanitarian crisis in the country.
In addition, South Africa calls for the speedy
implementation of the Riyadh agreement between the
Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional
Council. We call on the Yemeni Government and
the Council to agree on forming a joint delegation as
called for by the Riyadh agreement. South Africa also
wishes to reiterate its call for the full implementation
of the December 2018 Stockholm Agreement, including
demilitarizing the port of Al-Hudaydah, and for
all parties to carry out their respective obligations
in accordance with responsibilities under the
Stockholm Agreement.
We welcome the efforts already undertaken to
adhere to the Hodeidah Agreement, which we believe
could be built on in order to create trust and instil
confidence in fulfilling other aspects of the Stockholm
Agreement. Similarly, South Africa welcomes the
exchange of prisoners that has taken place between

S/PV. 8704

the Saudi-led coalition and the Houthis since October
2019. These confidence-building measures are to
be commended and should continue to receive the
sustained support of the Security Council and the
broader international community.
Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian
situation, South Africa remains extremely concerned
about the serious crisis in Yemen. The unprecedented
humanitarian crisis in the country is a strong indicator
of the human toll of continued military action and
conflict that requires an urgent commitment to a
ceasefire and the pursuit of a negotiated peaceful and
inclusive solution to the crisis.
In this regard, South Africa wishes to call on all
parties to the conflict to allow the free, regular and
unimpeded passage of food and other humanitarian
relief and not to take actions that will deprive civilians
of their right to food and health. In this context, South
Africa welcomes the initiative of the coalition, in
cooperation with the World Health Organization, that
medical flights be permitted from Sana’a airport, which
has been closed to civilian air traffic since August 2016.
South Africa also emphasizes that all necessary
measures should be taken to respect the Geneva
Conventions. More broadly, we reiterate our call on all
parties to abide by their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
We wish to reiterate that the only sustainable
solution to this conflict is a negotiated, Yemeniled political settlement that is inclusive and fair and
puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of
Yemen first.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and the Director of the Coordination Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, for
their briefings.
We encourage pursuing de-escalation efforts in
order to achieve a cessation of hostilities throughout the
country. The statistics of the most recent report of the
Civilian Impact Monitoring Project show a decrease in
the total number of civilian casualties in 2019 compared
to 2018 — from 2,049 in 2018 to 1,104 in 2019. That is
mainly owing to a decrease in air strikes, which have

20-0117415/19

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

entailed mass casualties, as well as in the number of
deaths caused by shelling and landmines.
We hope that those trends will continue and that the
next steps in the political process will be able to begin
as soon as possible under the auspices of the United
Nations. This process must be inclusive, with the
meaningful participation of women and young people,
and reflect the ethnic, geographical, social and political
diversity of Yemen’s population. Let us not forget,
however, the already-concluded agreements, whose
implementation is encountering difficulties, as in the
case of the Riyadh agreement. We once again call on all
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement,
including the Hodeidah Agreement, the agreement
on the exchange of prisoners and the statement of
understanding on Taiz.
As we heard earlier, humanitarian access remains
difficult. The operating environment for humanitarian
actors in Yemen remains one of the most restricted of its
kind in the world, entailing interference in humanitarian
operations and restrictions on movement, which only
add to the conflict and continuing insecurity. It is
imperative that all parties facilitate humanitarian access
and respect international humanitarian law. Belgium is
particularly concerned about reports that the Houthis
are now demanding 2 per cent of the budget of every
humanitarian project as a precondition for their assent.
As we also heard, the economic and financial
situation remains of particular concern as well. The
Central Bank stands in need of a foreign-exchange
injection to stabilize the rial. Corruption in Yemeni
institutions is not helpful and, according to the Panel
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014), it could jeopardize peace and
security. The announcement of 19 December 2019 that
the Houthi authorities in Sana’a had banned the use and
exchange of the new bank notes in the areas under their
control places a new strain on already heavily burdened
civilians, in particular in northern Yemen, and further
worsens their economic situation. We also encourage
the Houthis to finally provide access to the FSO SAFER
oil tanker in order to facilitate a review of the situation
and avoid the possibility of an environmental disaster.
Lastly, all parties must uphold their obligations and
commitments under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We are particularly
concerned about the continuation of serious violations
of children’s rights and reports that the Houthis are
16/19

16/01/2020

systematically using sexual violence against women
who are politically active in the areas under their
control. That is entirely unacceptable and must stop.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): First of
all, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his important
briefing on the recent developments in the situation
in Yemen. I share his optimism stemming from the
recent de-escalation. I also thank the Director of the
Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for
his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
This morning, the Security Council is considering
the situation in Yemen following the unanimous
adoption, on Monday, 13 January, of resolution 2505
(2020) on the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (see
S/PV.8701), which is to be commended. My delegation
welcomes this development, as the consensus that
was reached attests to the international community’s
awareness of the need to resolve the humanitarian
crisis that the Yemeni people, particularly women and
children, are enduring with a level of resignation that
must compel us to act. Although complex in nature, the
conflict in Yemen and the parties involved require the
Council’s special attention until a definitive and lasting
political settlement is reached.
The decrease in violence in recent days, and the
consequently reduced number of victims, is good
news on which to build. Attention must be paid to
respecting international humanitarian law, in particular
the protection of personnel responsible for delivering
assistance to those in need throughout the country. In
that regard, my delegation would like to stress the need
to provide substantial support for the implementation of
the Mission’s mandate in order to ensure the unimpeded
delivery and distribution of humanitarian assistance to
the population.
The Niger hopes that the positive developments
since the signing of the Riyadh agreement, as noted
in the two briefings, which have led to a decrease in
the level of violence in the south of the country, will
be consolidated so as to serve as a stepping stone for
the full pacification of the country. Finally, we strongly
urge the parties to the conflict to resume dialogue
and to apply the various provisions of the Stockholm
Agreement. The exchange of prisoners is a welcome
step in the right direction.
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, we support the Special Envoy in his
tireless efforts to help Yemen find through dialogue the
peace and security that it enjoyed not so long ago. We
also call on OCHA to continue its excellent work to
ensure that the current acute humanitarian crisis in the
country does not thwart the return to normalcy that we
all wish to see.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
At the outset, I would like to thank the two briefers
for their briefings and updates.

S/PV. 8704

the Redeployment Coordination Committee to support
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement,
including substantive monitoring of the ceasefire and
the redeployment of forces from the city and port
of Al-Hudaydah and elsewhere. It is also critically
important that the safety of UNMHA and its personnel
be ensured so that the Mission can effectively carry out
its mandate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

Viet Nam notes with deep concern the complicated
humanitarian situation in Yemen. Attacks continue,
causing severe casualties among civilians and
destroying civilian infrastructure. The delivery of
humanitarian aid is impeded. In that regard, we call on
all parties concerned to exercise restraint and facilitate
the humanitarian work of the United Nations and its
relevant partners so that international assistance can
reach the Yemeni people in need in a timely manner.

Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director
of the Coordination Division, United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). I
also welcome the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement.

We welcome the signing of the Stockholm and
Riyadh agreements and stress the importance of
their full implementation. That would contribute to
de-escalation and thereby create favourable conditions
for all parties concerned to engage in constructive
dialogue with a view to achieving a comprehensive and
sustainable political solution to the situation in Yemen,
in accordance with international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security
Council resolutions, and with due respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Yemen.

The Houthi militias have pursed their persistent
policy of stubbornness and stalling regarding the
implementation of their commitments since signing the
Stockholm Agreement under the auspices of the United
Nations in December 2018. Their policy demonstrates
that those militias are not serious about achieving peace;
rather, they defy the efforts of the United Nations and
the Council. Meanwhile, any attempt to circumvent the
implementation of the agreement would not serve the
desired political process but would threaten the road to
achieving peace altogether. Therefore, we reiterate the
Government of Yemen’s insistence on the importance
of implementing all the components of the Stockholm
Agreement, especially the Al-Hudaydah Agreement
regarding the local security forces and local authority,
the withdrawal from the ports and city of Al-Hudaydah
and the exchange of prisoners and detainees. That should
not be subject to any political bids. In the meantime, the
siege on Taiz should be lifted.

To that end, we note with appreciation some recent
progress over the past few months, including a decrease
in acts of hostility in Al-Hudaydah governorate and
southern Yemen, the indirect talks between Saudi
Arabia and the Houthis in Oman and the release of
detainees by Saudi Arabia and the Houthis. We join
other delegations in calling on the parties concerned
to show more political will and build mutual trust by
implementing confidence-building measures.
We highly appreciate and support the efforts
made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
for Yemen. In that regard, we commend the adoption
of resolution 2505 (2020) on Monday, renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), as well as the work of

The Government of Yemen would like to express
once again its support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, to achieve a comprehensive
political settlement of the conflict based on the agreed
terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
inclusive national dialogue and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015).

20-0117417/19

S/PV.8704

The situation in the Middle East

The serious escalation and violations committed by
the Houthi militias, including targeting the premises of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee last month,
the Médecins sans frontières hospital and the Red Sea
mills, are totally deplorable and unjustifiable. The
Security Council should condemn them as an egregious
challenge to all efforts to realize peace.
The Government of Yemen is making major efforts,
as duly instructed by His Excellency President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi and under the supervision and followup of our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, to
overcome the obstacles impeding the implementation
of the Riyadh agreement. The Government is very
eager to implement the provisions of the agreement
according to the chronological order agreed therein
and without any selectivity. In recent days, a matrix
of security and military arrangements has been signed
under the tireless supervision of His Excellency the
President of Yemen and the leadership of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. In that regard, we highly appreciate
the fraternal role and endeavours of our brothers in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in providing ongoing support
to Yemen consistent with the principles of fraternity
and good-neighbourliness, and based on historical
relations with Yemen. Their work laid the foundation
for Riyadh agreement and a new phase of partnership,
reform and consolidation of efforts aimed at thwarting
the Houthi-Iranian project in Yemen, which has caused
all the destruction and chaos in the country. Our goal is
to build a new federal Yemen, in line with the outcome
of the inclusive national dialogue conference.
The interference by the Iranian regime and its
subversive role in Yemen, through its close ties with
the Houthi militias, are unequivocally conspicuous and
constitute a threat to the security and stability of Yemen
and the region, as well as regional and international
peace and security. The Yemeni people will never allow
Yemen to become a field for the adventures and projects
of the Iranian regime, as our people have grown more
determined than ever to continue to thwart the HouthiIranian project.
The Government of Yemen spares no effort to
normalize economic and humanitarian conditions
and to operationalize the State institutions in order to
promote the livelihoods of citizens. It is dedicated to
defining the tasks of those institutions and developing
the mechanisms needed for the next phase, including
reorganizing the work of those institutions and
expanding the payroll system. The Government has
18/19

16/01/2020

taken a number of measures to implement major reforms
in the area of anti-corruption and to operationalize
the national integrity and anti-corruption system, as
well as to reconstitute and operationalize the national
committee to combat money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism.
In their efforts to exacerbate humanitarian suffering
and destabilize the national economy and the exchange
rate, the Houthi militias have prohibited the circulation
and use of the new national currency in the areas they
control. That decision will not only deprive tens of
thousands of civil servants and retirees of their salaries
and money transfers, but will also completely paralyse
economic activity in the areas controlled by those
militias, which will have catastrophic consequences.
The Government of Yemen therefore calls on the
international community, the United Nations, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund to shoulder
their responsibility regarding such procedures, which
exacerbate the humanitarian crisis caused by the Houthi
militias. Those militias have subverted the aspirations
of the Yemeni people, thwarted national unanimity
and taken State institutions hostage. International
organizations operating in Houthi-controlled areas
of Yemen are subjected to obstacles and extortion.
Humanitarian workers are being harassed while the
militias attempt to divert the programmes and aid of
those organizations to specific places and areas in order
to generate financial gains and impede the delivery of
assistance to those in need.
The Government of Yemen reiterates that it stands
ready to facilitate all procedures necessary to ensure
that those international organizations and agencies
working in Yemen can carry out their work. Moreover,
it pledges to continue working in partnership with them
in order to address the humanitarian situation, which is
deteriorating due to the war. In that regard, we express
the gratitude of the Yemeni people for the enormous
humanitarian tasks undertaken by those organizations
to mitigate the humanitarian suffering experienced
by the Yemeni people, who are living in grim and
bleak circumstances.
The Houthi militias are contriving and fabricating
a fuel crisis in the areas they control in order to enhance
the black market so as to enrich their leaders and
finance their military and political activities, thereby
commodifying the suffering of the Yemeni people.
That is taking place despite the fact that fuel imports to
20-01174

16/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Yemeni ports from 1 October 2019 to 10 January 2020,
of which Al-Hudaydah port received 60 per cent, could
cover the fuel needs in the Houthi-controlled areas until
mid-March 2020.
We once again sound an alarm with regard to
potential environmental hazards that might result
from the leakage of the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
as such an event could lead to an unprecedented
environmental catastrophe affecting Yemen, the region
and international navigation. We call on the Security
Council and the international community to shoulder
their responsibility and to bring pressure to bear on the
Houthi militias in order to force them to give access to
the United Nations technical team so that it can carry
out a technical assessment of the tanker, including the

S/PV. 8704

damage it sustained, and to undertake the necessary
maintenance as soon as possible in order to avert
certain calamity.
In conclusion, the Government and people of Yemen
aspire to peace. They look forward to bringing this
war and coup to an end. However, the Houthi militias,
which are supported by Iran and claim the divine right
to either govern or kill the Yemeni people, reject peace.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

20-0117419/19
