A /70/PV.40

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

40th plenary meeting

Monday, 26 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. González
Franco (Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 42
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/70/120)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.2)
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to address the General Assembly today on
behalf of the 120 Members of the United Nations that
are members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM),
and would like to begin by extending the Movement’s
warmest welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, to this meeting.
The Assembly, for 23 consecutive years, has
expressed its overwhelming support for and solidarity
with the Government and the people of Cuba through
its decisive votes in favour of the resolutions calling for
lifting of the United States of America embargo against
Cuba. Last year, 188 Member States voted in favour of
resolution 69/5 on that subject.
The Non-Aligned Movement has always reiterated
its strongest opposition to unilateral coercive measures
with extraterritorial effect. NAM has repeatedly
reiterated its call on the Government of the United States

of America to put an end to its unilateral economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, which
is contrary to international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms and principles governing
peaceful relations among States. It also violates Cuba’s
right to interact with the international community.
The embargo has had and continues to have
extremely adverse impacts on the well-being of the
Cuban people. The direct and indirect damage caused
by the undeserved embargo against Cuba is enormous.
It affects all crucial sectors of the economy, including
public health, nutrition and agriculture, as well as
banking, trade, investment and tourism. It denies Cuba
access to markets, development aid from international
financial institutions and technology transfers, and it
creates impediments for the socioeconomic development
of the country. The embargo is also the main obstacle
to broader access to the Internet, the exchange of ideas
and the development of cultural, sport and scientific
relations. The continuation of the embargo is totally
unjustifiable and hampers Cuba’s efforts to achieve
sustainable development.
The cumulative economic damage to the Cuban
people due to the application of the economic,
commercial and financial blockade of the United States
against Cuba, taking into account the depreciation of the
dollar in relation to the price of gold on the international
market, amounts to $833.7 billion. At current prices,
over all those years the blockade has caused damages
of over $121 billion.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-33534 (E)

*1533534*

A/70/PV.40

NAM considers the establishment of diplomatic
relations between Cuba and the United States to
be an initial positive step in the process towards the
normalization of bilateral relations. At the same time,
it should be noted that the implementation of the
blockade against Cuba remains unchanged. Indeed,
under the current Administration of the United
States, the blockade has been further tightened and its
territorial implementation further intensified through
the imposition of 42 fines on United States and foreign
entities amounting to more than $13.2 billion, the most
notorious of which are the $1.7 billion fine imposed on
the German bank Commerzbank and the $7.6-million
fine imposed on the United States company PayPal.
While the regulations issued by the United States
Departments of Commerce and the Treasury on
15 January were steps in the right direction in areas such
as travel to Cuba, telecommunications and remittances,
they are limited in scope and modify only certain
aspects related to the implementation of the blockade.
Despite the historic decision of the United States
President to notify the United States Congress of his
decision to remove Cuba from the so-called list of State
sponsors of international terrorism — a list on which
Cuba should have never been included — that has not
meant an easing of the intricacies of all the prohibitions
and restrictions established by the blockade laws and
regulations imposed against that country. For its part,
the United States Congress has not approved any of
the bills seeking to eliminate some of the blockade
regulations.
Based on all this, NAM upholds its call for an end
to the economic, commercial and financial blockade
imposed by the United States against Cuba. We recall
that, last year, 188 States Members of the United
Nations voted in favour of the resolution on this
item. That number signifies near unanimity within
the international community in demanding an end to
the five-decade embargo and full adherence to the
principles of mutual respect and non-interference in
the internal affairs of Cuba. Currently, over 190 nations
engage economically and politically with Cuba, while
the United States stands alone in pursuing its unjustified
economic sanctions policy.
The Non-Aligned Movement once again urges the
United States of America to yield to the will of the
overwhelming majority of the international community
and to rectify its failed polices by fully complying
with all General Assembly resolutions that call for an

2/25

26/10/2015

immediate and complete end to the embargo imposed
on Cuba.
Mr. Morejón Pazmiño (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the special honour to address the General
Assembly today on behalf of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC).
CELAC welcomes the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations between the United States and
Cuba, which opens a new chapter in the history of
peace and coexistence between American States. We
acknowledge the intention expressed by President
Obama to end the economic, commercial and financial
blockade that the United States has maintained against
Cuba for 56 years.
However, the embargo remains a reality for the
Cuban people. It undeniably remains the primary
obstacle to Cuba’s normal development. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/70/120) confirms the cost to
Cuba of that policy, which causes immeasurable and
unjustifiable damage to the well-being of the Cuban
people. It runs counter to the desire for peace of the
Latin American people, expressed in the proclamation
of Latin America as a zone of peace. In our opinion, the
economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed
against Cuba contravenes the letter and spirit of the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
CELAC reiterates its vigorous rejection of the
application of laws and measures that contradict
international law, such as the Helms-Burton Law,
including its extraterritorial provisions, and urges the
Government of the United States of America to end its
implementation. The United States Congress has the
authority to completely end the blockade against Cuba.
We note the executive orders issued by President Obama
as of January, including the removal of Cuba from the
list of countries that sponsor terrorism, on which it has
never belonged, which attest to broad powers of the
United States President to modify the unjust policy of
the blockade.
CELAC reiterates its special declaration on the need
for the United States to end its economic, commercial
and financial blockade against Cuba, adopted at the
third Summit of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, held in Belén, Costa Rica, on
28 and 29 January, calling on the Government of the
United States to comply with the series of resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and to respond to the

15-33534

26/10/2015

repeated demands of the countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean to end its economic, commercial and
financial blockade of Cuba. CELAC reiterates its grave
concern about and rejection of the intensification of
the extraterritorial dimension of the blockade and the
growing hindrance of Cuba’s international financial
transactions, which contradict the political will of the
international community.
The Charter of the United Nations enshrines rights,
obligations and principles that have become part of the
legal heritage not only of international law but of all
humankind, and must not be the object of violations
or undermining by any Member. Member States must
adapt their national legislation in accordance with
the rights, obligations and principles enshrined by
our founding Charter. For those reasons, CELAC will
decisively support draft resolution A/70/L.2, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”, and commends the effort of the
sister Republic of Cuba to draft language adapted to
current circumstances.
We stress the inconsistency between the imposition
of unilateral measures that are not supported by
international law and the letter and spirit of the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. We reiterate our call on the United States to
accept the call of the countries of Latin America and
the Caribbean and all regions of the world, as well as
of its own people, to put an end once and for all to its
unjust blockade of the Republic of Cuba.
With those words I close my remarks on behalf of
CELAC. I will now speak in my national capacity.
Ecuador would like to add that it is cause for sadness
to hear the Government of the United States claim to
have ended its 50-year embargo. The United States is
proposing to change its 50-year blockade not because it
has violated inter-American law, international law, the
rights of the Cuban people or human rights, but because
the embargo has not worked. Ecuador believes that this
implies no concession. This is about justice and the
dignity of the Cuban people, who have put up 50 years
of heroic resistance.
Our peoples will never again accept trusteeship,
interference or intervention. Our memory is lacerated
by the abuses and violence of the past, even if we are
asked to forget them and look only to the future as if
nothing had happened. For that reason, Ecuador will

A/70/PV.40

vote in favour of the draft resolution before us not only
because it is a just cause. It is deplorable that in the
twenty-first century some continue to undermine the
founding principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, and to hinder the inclusive
sustainable economic development of other peoples and
States.
Ecuador looks forward with hope towards the
restoration of diplomatic relations between Cuba and
the United States and hopes that the process will lead
to the end to the blockade and the closing of the base
at Guantanamo. That will not constitute a concession
on the part of any Power; instead, it will represent the
triumph of justice and the dignity of the Cuban people,
as expressed by the President of the Republic of Ecuador
in the general debate of this session (see A/70/PV.15).
We reiterate and restate that view today.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): Allow me to register
the following remarks on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. I wish also to acknowledge the presence of the
honourable Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Cuba, His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
The Group of 77 and China welcomes the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations between the
Republic of Cuba and the United States. In that context,
we welcome the bold initiative of President Raúl Castro
and President Barack Obama. That joint initiative is a
significant first step towards the full normalization of
relations between Cuba and the United States. However,
it needs to be followed by the immediate lifting of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba. Since it has been
amply recognized that the blockade is harmful to the
Cuban people, it is high time for the Congress of the
United States to put an end to the embargo. The Group
of 77 and China supports Cuba’s decision to embrace
this rapprochement, despite the illegal nature of the
imposition of the blockade and the immense human and
economic suffering and hardship endured by the Cuban
people for over 50 years.
The Group of 77 and China is of the view that,
although President Obama performed an act of historical
justice when he notified the United States Congress of
his decision to remove Cuba from the list of so-called
State sponsors of international terrorism — a list on
which Cuba should have never been included in the
first place — that has not meant an easing of all of the
prohibitions and restrictions established by the blockade
laws and regulations imposed against that sister

15-335343/25

A/70/PV.40

26/10/2015

country. It is disheartening to note that the United States
Congress has not approved any of the bills seeking to
eliminate some of the remaining blockade regulations.
However, so far, 10 legal initiatives have been presented
in Congress to reinforce several fundamental aspects
related to the implementation of that policy and to
prevent the approval by President Obama of new
executive measures and the implementation of those
already adopted.

areas such as travel to Cuba, telecommunications
and remittances, those measures are limited in scope
and will address only the tip of the iceberg. More
commitments are therefore needed. We must also
denounce the constraints placed on Cuba’s right to
carry out financial transactions abroad. All countries
deserve to be allowed to do business in an open and just
environment, which is a sovereign right that needs to
be recognized.

The Group of 77 and China would like to submit
that, following 17 December 2014, the implementation
of the blockade against Cuba has remained unchanged.
The most notorious proof of that fact are the $1.71 billion
fine imposed on the German bank Commerzbank and the
$7,658,300 fine imposed on the United States company
PayPal. Despite some of the positive overtures that have
been extended to date by Washington, D.C., it remains
a cause for concern that, under the Administration
of President Obama, the blockade has been further
tightened and its territorial implementation and grip
intensified through the imposition of 42 fines on United
States and foreign entities totalling $13,279,148,196.

Despite the difficulties that Cuba has experienced
due to the economic, commercial and financial embargo,
that country, in demonstration of its international
solidarity, has consistently supplied medical assistance
of the highest quality at the international level. More
than 50,000 health workers trained in Cuba are
providing services in 66 countries, including in Sierra
Leone, on the front lines of the Ebola crisis.

The Group of 77 and China joins the international
community in condemning the unilateral blockade of
Cuba and calls on the United States to initiate measures
to immediately repeal those inhumane actions designed
to illicitly punish a nation. Such measures are contrary
to the principles, purposes and spirit of the Charter
of the United Nations, especially the principle of the
sovereign equality of States and non-intervention in
the domestic affairs of Member States. The severe
economic and financial restrictions that stifle the
economic and social development of Cuba further
exacerbate the hardships and suffering of the people of
Cuba. That must come to an end.
The Group reiterates its unconditional support
for the implementation of the recommendations of
resolution 69/5 and takes this opportunity to appeal
once again to the international community to redouble
its efforts to promote constructive and transparent
dialogue between the two countries, with a view to
achieving the objectives of all the resolutions already
adopted by the United Nations on the matter and to
ensure the sustainable and further progress of the
people of Cuba.
While the regulations issued by the United
States Departments of Commerce and the Treasury
on 15 January were steps in the right direction in

4/25

Throughout all these years, the embargo and
blockade have caused damages estimated at more than
$121.19 billion. Therefore, in conclusion, the Group of
77 and China reiterates yet again its call for the embargo
and blockade against Cuba to cease. It is the most
unjust, severe and longest-lasting system of unilateral
sanctions ever applied to any country. Failure to do so
would cause history to judge harshly the players that are
continuing to perpetuate the aforementioned system.
This historical injunction remains ever more relevant
and timely as we move towards the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1). We also need to make a commitment
in this forum not to leave the Cuban people behind.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): It is indeed an honour
for me to speak on behalf of the Group of African
States on draft resolution A/70/L.2, entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
At the outset, the African Group welcomes the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations between the
United States and Cuba, which we view as a significant
step in fostering closer bilateral ties between the two
nations. While noting such positive achievements,
the Group continues to reaffirm its condemnation of
the ongoing economic and financial embargo against
Cuba. We note that it has been over 50 years since those
crippling sanctions were imposed and that it has been
two decades since this item was first placed on the
agenda of the General Assembly.

15-33534

26/10/2015

The African Group is aware that the economic
sanctions continue to cause great economic hardship
for the people of Cuba, particularly the poor and
most vulnerable. We call for an immediate end to the
economic embargo and reaffirm that it is imperative
for the promotion of better standards of living for the
people of Cuba, particularly in view of the theme of
“leaving no one behind”, as enshrined in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
We encourage and fully endorse the ongoing spirit of
dialogue that continues between Cuba and the United
States, aimed at resolving all outstanding issues
between the two nations. While reaffirming our full
support for the draft resolution that we have gathered
today to consider, we continue to reiterate our call on
the Government of the United States to lift the longstanding embargo against Cuba.
Speaking in my national capacity, on this day in
this Hall, let me say that Sierra Leone adds its voice
to all of those who call for a new beginning and a new
chapter in the relationship between the two States
involved. In particular, Sierra Leone joins its voice with
all those asking that the shackles of the past be cut and
the promise of a truly diplomatically and economically
liberated Cuba be allowed to stand. Beyond consensus,
beyond majority and by near unanimity, the Assembly
has called for a lifting of the embargo and this year,
Sierra Leone believes that we will stand on the right side
of history and make that call loudly and emphatically.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
At the outset, the States members of the OIC
welcome the significant step of the restoration of
diplomatic relations between the Governments of the
United States and Cuba, and the importance of that
step in furthering the normalization of the bilateral ties
between both nations. Nevertheless, and in spite of the
aforementioned positive step, the issue of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States against Cuba remains. Such unilateral
action taken by the United States has done harm not
only to the Cuban economy, but also to the well-being
of the Cuban people and Cuban nationals living abroad,
thereby creating unnecessary economic hardship for
them.
Furthermore, the decades-long embargo has
impeded socioeconomic and development progress.
In addition, the unilateral blockade affects not only

A/70/PV.40

Cuba, but also extends to third countries, and entities
and companies that face imposed fines for engaging in
commercial activity with Cuba. The OIC believes that
such unilateral actions run counter to the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. The
OIC reiterates its deep concern regarding the negative
impact of the unilateral blockade on the Cuban people
and believes that the continuation of the embargo is
unjustifiable and hinders Cuban efforts to achieve
sustainable development.
The OIC recalls that the text before us has, over the
past few years, garnered the overwhelming support of
the States Members of the United Nations. Continuing
to disregard the international community’s collective
will weakens multilateralism and undermines the
credibility of the United Nations. The OIC supports
draft resolution A/70/L.2 and calls upon the States
Members of the United Nations to vote in favour of it.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I have the honour to
address the General Assembly on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States.
The Caribbean Community continues to reiterate
its unequivocal opposition to the United States’
imposition of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba, which has been opposed by the
overwhelming majority of the international community
for the past 23 consecutive years. The unilateral
imposition of extraterritorial laws on third States is
contrary to both the letter and the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations, and the embargo itself runs counter
to the principles of multilateralism, international law,
sovereignty and free trade that this body consistently
champions.
The punitive embargo is of particular concern
to CARICOM, which shares a history, culture and
brotherhood with the people of Cuba. Cuba is the most
populous State of the Caribbean region and an integral
part of the Pan-Caribbean process. Caribbean ties with
Cuba have historical significance, cemented by years of
active cooperation at various levels. The States members
of CARICOM continue to maintain close relations
with Cuba through a wide range of programmes of
cooperation in areas including trade, health care,
infrastructure and human resource development. Our
future regional development is in many ways reliant

15-335345/25

A/70/PV.40

26/10/2015

upon our collective advancement and progress. In that
context, we view the embargo as not only a punitive
act against Cuba, but as an impediment to our shared
regional development.

CARICOM States declare our unstinting support for
draft resolution A/70/L.2 on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba.

CARICOM welcomes the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United
States. We believe that this is an important positive step
in the process towards the normalization of bilateral
relations between the two States. We also applaud
President Barack Obama’s expressed intention to open
a new chapter in the relations between both nations.
We commend him for recognizing that the blockade is
harmful to the Cuban people and for urging the United
States Congress to put an end to the punitive policy.

Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I am honoured to speak in this debate on
behalf of the States members of the Southern Common
Market (MERCOSUR) and associated States. At the
outset, I wish to extend a warm welcome to Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, and his delegation.

While the regulations issued by the Departments of
Commerce and the Treasury on 15 January concerning
travel to Cuba, telecommunications and remittances
are steps pointing in the right direction, they are
still limited in scope and only modify some aspects
related to the implementation of the blockade. We
remain guardedly optimistic that the recent overtures
made by the United States will be complemented by
an increased willingness to consider the opinions and
concerns of its international friends and partners. On
that issue, global opinion could hardly be conveyed in
a more convincing or consistent manner. Our welcome
of the recent pronouncements and actions of the United
States Government carries with it the expectation
that the remaining historical wrongs will be righted
expeditiously.
CARICOM reiterates its support for the right of
the Cuban people to self-determination in a manner
beneficial to their social and economic development.
Indeed, Cuba’s peaceful, generous and cooperative
international stance merits nothing less. We therefore
call once more for an end to the embargo, which has
preserved a state of tension between two neighbouring
countries and generated great concern and widespread
unease throughout our subregion.
CARICOM continues to enjoy friendly relations
with both Cuba and the United States. Our two
neighbours — a mere 90 miles apart — have produced
great scholars, scientists and global leaders. They
possess proud and noble histories and are populated by
friendly, open and loving peoples. Recent developments
have renewed our hope for the full normalization of
Cuba-United States relations. However, we consider
the lifting of the embargo to be a prerequisite for any
meaningful rapprochement. It is within this context that
6/25

Like many States represented here, MERCOSUR
and its associated States, having closely followed
regional and international political developments,
welcome the re-establishment of diplomatic relations
between Cuba and the United States of America, and
cannot but recognize that they represent a positive
initial first step towards the normalization of relations,
leading to greater stability in Latin America and the
world. MERCOSUR congratulates both parties on
their bold initiative. However, nine months after the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations between the
two States, the embargo imposed unilaterally by the
United States of America continues to incur significant
humanitarian and economic costs that prevent the
normal development of Cuba.
Since the signing of the Treaty of Asunción,
MERCOSUR has continued to defend the principles
of respect for sovereignty and good-neighbourliness
and rejected unilateral, extraterritorial and coercive
measures, which in this particular case have caused
irreparable damage to Cuba and its people. In that
light, MERCOSUR considers that the economic,
trade and financial blockade constitutes a violation
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
the norms of international law, non-intervention and
non-interference in internal affairs, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and freedom of international
trade and navigation.
MERCOSUR and its associated States reaffirm
their commitment to multilateralism as a legitimate tool
in resolving disputes and an effective way to promote
international cooperation and understanding among
peoples. We believe, now more than ever, that in this
new context, the time has come to put an end to the
unilateral embargo.
In conclusion, MERCOSUR again supports and
endorses the draft resolution entitled “Necessity

15-33534

26/10/2015

of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”, which has been submitted for the twentyfourth consecutive time to the General Assembly, and
urges all Member States to vote for it.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I have the honour to
address the General Assembly on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN): Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my
own country, Malaysia.
We express our support for draft resolution
A/70/L.2, on ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against the Republic of Cuba. ASEAN aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and that made by the representative of South
Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Since this text was first introduced in 1992, the
General Assembly has consistently adopted it by an
overwhelming majority. ASEAN member States have
voted unanimously in favour of the resolution for the
past 14 years. It is our firm belief that differences
between States should be settled through engagement,
not confrontation; by inclusion, not isolation; and in
accordance with the fundamental principles of sovereign
equality, non-interference and non-intervention as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, ASEAN welcomes the restoration
of diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United
States. We also welcome the lifting of a number of
restrictions on travel and remittances by the United
States since 16 January. Those are important first
steps toward the normalization of bilateral relations,
and have been rightly hailed as key to better regional
relations in the Americas. We believe that this positive
move will be mutually beneficial to the peoples of both
countries and contribute to peace, security and stability
and enhanced cooperation in the region.
Going forward, an even more important step will be
for the United States to end its economic, commercial
and financial embargo on Cuba. This would significantly
improve the quality of life and living standards of the
Cuban people and contribute to the economic and social
development of Cuba. Ending the embargo would also

A/70/PV.40

advance the Assembly’s efforts towards achieving an
inclusive post-2015 development agenda.
ASEAN strongly urges the United States and Cuba
to take this opportunity to chart a new way forward. We
recognize that much remains to be done. We encourage
the United States and Cuba to commit to open and
constructive dialogue, without preconditions and
underpinned by mutual respect. ASEAN joins the other
members of the Assembly in reiterating our strong
support for the lifting of the unilateral embargo against
Cuba as soon as possible.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Once
again, Mexico rejects the unilateral measures against
the Republic of Cuba, including the imposition for
more than 50 years of an economic, commercial and
financial embargo that runs counter to international
law and relations among States. We firmly believe that
multilateralism is and will continue to be the best way
to resolve disputes and to ensure peaceful coexistence
among States.
As we have done in previous years, today we
reiterate that the only organs that can impose political,
military or economic sanctions are the Security Council
and the General Assembly. No State should use force to
impose unilateral measures that affect the development
and prosperity of other peoples. About a year ago, in
Veracruz, Mexico, the Heads of State and Government
of the Ibero-American Community of Nations reiterated
their vigorous rejection of laws and measures that run
counter to international law, and urged the Government
of the United States to comply with the 23 resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly with a view to ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against the Republic of Cuba. The third Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States issued a similar
declaration urging the President of the United States to
use the powers granted him by the Constitution to make
significant changes to the way in which the embargo is
being imposed.
We recognize that each State is free and sovereign.
In line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, we must respect the self-determination of
the peoples of the world. Sustainable development for
all peoples must be given priority over economic and
political interests. We therefore welcome the measures
taken by the Cuban Government to meet its international
commitments in the area of development, which will

15-335347/25

A/70/PV.40

benefit its people. In spite of the adverse circumstances
it has faced for over 50 years, the Republic of Cuba
has attained high levels of human development. Cuba
will no doubt be a strategic partner in implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1), which will help to build fairer and more equitable
societies in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Mexico welcomes the re-establishment of diplomatic
relations between Cuba and the United States of America,
which will lead to the full normalization of relations
between the two neighbouring and friendly countries.
We firmly believe that a renewed relationship between
the two countries will also help to decisively strengthen
dialogue and cooperation among all of the nations of the
hemisphere. As part of this process, Mexico believes
that ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba would help to shift and improve
its economy and ensure its full reintegration and access
to financial flows and international investment that
would indisputably benefit our region.
Mexico recognizes and supports the process of
updating Cuba’s economic and social model, which will
allow us to support each other when needed. The visit to
Havana this month by our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Claudia Ruiz Massieu, shows that both countries are
interested in strengthening dialogue and cooperation
and deepening bilateral relations. The Government of
Mexico is consolidating its political and trade relations
with Cuba in an effort to strengthen the economic
complementary agreement.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that Mexico
has always maintained brotherly bonds of friendship,
solidarity and respect with the people of Cuba, and we
once again reiterate our support for the draft resolution
submitted for consideration by the General Assembly.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia eagerly endorses the statements made by the
representatives of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, Ecuador on behalf of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, and Paraguay
on behalf of the Southern Common Market. I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and his delegation to the
General Assembly today.
Like others who have spoken today, we wish to
highlight the process leading towards the normalization
of bilateral relations between Cuba and the United States

8/25

26/10/2015

of America. When the President of Colombia, Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón, visited New York last year, he
said that he had faith that the United States and Cuba
could achieve a working relationship that would enable
the United States to lift the embargo. That is why my
country welcomes the re-establishment of diplomatic
relations between the two countries and is optimistic
about the willingness expressed by President Obama to
end the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba. We firmly believe that such political will
will serve as a basis to make this a reality that would
benefit the people of that sister Latin American nation.
Since resolution 47/19 was adopted on 24 November
1992, my Government, like all Governments of Latin
America and the Caribbean and the overwhelming
majority of the States Members of the Organization, has
expressed its support for Cuba and voted in favour of
the resolutions on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba. The 188 votes
cast in favour of resolution 69/5 reflect the support and
solidarity of Member States and reaffirm the need to
end a policy that has lasted for more than 50 years. My
country believes, as we have said on previous occasions,
that the embargo runs counter to international law and
the spirit and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
In line with the resolution, my country reaffirms
its policy of respect for international law and
adherence to the principles of political independence,
the self-determination of peoples, non-intervention
and non-interference in the internal affairs of other
nations. Consequently, Colombia does not support
such measures, which run counter to the economic
and commercial development and the welfare of the
population. My country considers it indispensable
that Member States make progress in building links of
cooperation and friendship based on multilateralism
and the principle of sovereign equality, enshrined in
Chapter I of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): At the
outset, I would to like to extend my warmest welcome
to Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba.
Viet Nam endorses the statements made earlier
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Group
of 77 and China and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations. We thank the Secretary-General for the
comprehensive report (A/70/120), which lays out the
15-33534

26/10/2015

position of Member States on ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by
the United States of America against Cuba and the
assessments by United Nations agencies of the impact
of the embargo.
Since the adoption of resolution 47/19, on
24 November 1992, the General Assembly has
repeatedly adopted resolutions calling upon the United
States of America to end its economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba, the most recent of
which is resolution 69/5, adopted on 28 October 2014
by 188 votes in favour. Viet Nam’s principled position
opposes the imposition of any unilateral embargo and
coercive measures by one State on another, and today
we will vote unreservedly in favour of draft resolution
A/70/L.2 in its entirety.
Through its vote, Viet Nam wishes to reiterate its
firm conviction that the United States of America’s
blockade against Cuba for more than five decades is
contrary to international law and the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
causes untold hardship for the Cuban people. That
policy runs counter to the common desire of all nations
in the world to build sound and equal international
relations, regardless of their political systems and based
on respect for each nation’s rights to choose its own
path of development. Viet Nam joins other members
of the Assembly in calling for the immediate lifting of
the unjustified unilateral economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), which our leaders adopted one month
ago, has established a new paradigm for development,
cooperation and solidarity among the peoples of the
world. However, that ambitious Agenda will not be
realized if the fundamental freedoms and rights of
States Members of the United Nations are still being
disregarded.
Viet Nam welcomes the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United
States of America. We are encouraged by the United
States President’s explicit intention to open a new
chapter in relations with Cuba, urging the United
States Congress to lift the blockade. We hope that this
important historic opportunity will not be missed.
The continuation of the blockade against Cuba poses
an essential obstacle to the normalization of relations
between the two countries. Lifting the embargo would
be beneficial for the people of both Cuba and the United

A/70/PV.40

States of America, as well as for peace, stability and
prosperity in the region and the world.
Despite the detrimental repercussions of the
embargo, Cuba has overcome difficulties and made
important contributions to the common efforts of the
international community to address global challenges.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to reiterate
Viet Nam’s friendship, cooperation and solidarity with
Cuba. We will continue to do our utmost to help the
fraternal people of Cuba to overcome difficulties and
challenges caused by the embargo.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): Let me start by welcoming
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, and assure him of Egypt’s continued
support and solidarity with the Government and people
of Cuba.
Egypt welcomes the establishment of diplomatic
relations between Cuba and the United States of
America, and welcomes the United States President’s
willingness to work to lift the blockade imposed on
Cuba for more than five decades. We also recognize
the advancements made in the regulations issued by
the Government of the United States of America in
some areas. We hope that those steps will lead to the
normalization of bilateral relations in all their aspects
between the two countries.
However, while that progress constitutes a step
in the right direction, it remains insufficient, as the
imposition of the blockade has remained unchanged,
and the laws and regulations underpinning it continue
to be in force and implemented with the utmost severity.
We still believe that the United States of America
needs to take many steps and brave decisions towards
the immediate lifting of the embargo imposed against
Cuba for the full normalization of their relations. For
five decades, the United States of America has imposed
stringent restrictions on the Cuban people’s access
to food, medicines, education and high-technology
goods. The embargo has had detrimental repercussions
on many sectors of the Cuban economy, generating
unnecessary shortages and suffering for the Cuban
people.
We believe that the embargo continues to be an
absurd and morally insupportable policy, which has
not served the purpose of breaking the Cuban people’s
determination to control their own future. Despite all
the detrimental repercussions and adverse impacts
of the embargo, the Government of Cuba has made

15-335349/25

A/70/PV.40

enormous efforts to meet the needs of its people.
The more than 54 years of the embargo against Cuba
have proved that, in this globalized world, the Cuban
people can still survive, thanks to their perseverance,
resistance and hope.
Finally, Egypt hopes that the dialogue between the
two countries, based on mutual respect and observance
of the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, will lead to the immediate lifting of
the embargo and normalization of the bilateral relations
in all its aspects. In the current new context, we once
again urge the United States of America to avail itself
of this historic opportunity and immediately and fully
comply with all 23 General Assembly resolutions on
the subject, which were adopted by the overwhelming
majority of the international community, and lift the
unjustified embargo, which should never have existed
and must cease once and for all. Egypt will continue its
full support and solidarity with the Government and the
people of Cuba.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela endorses the statements delivered by the
representatives of Ecuador, the Islamic Republic of
Iran and South Africa on behalf of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77 plus China respectively.
The embargo imposed against Cuba by the United
States of America represents a system of unilateral
sanctions that is the most unjust, severe and longlasting embargo ever imposed against any country
in modern history. It has inflicted a massive human
cost on the Cuban population. It is also a flagrant
violation of the principles of respect for sovereignty
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States
and the rights to self-determination and development
of peoples.
The brutal blockade of Cuba was basically designed
to break the Cuban people’s determination to build a free
and sovereign homeland. In addition to the economic,
commercial and financial blockade, the sanctions
system against Cuba has included a set of successive
prohibitions and unilateral coercive measures that
have had a cumulative impact on our Cuban brothers
over more than 50 years and have resulted in economic
losses totalling more than $830 million. The sanctions
also affect any organization or country, of which we are
one, that attempts to maintain fraternal and cooperative
relations — economic, technological, commercial
10/25

26/10/2015

or financial — with our sister republic of Cuba. The
embargo on Cuba is, therefore, an effort not only to
damage its people’s development but also to isolate
them. The vote here today in the Assembly on draft
resolution A/70/L.2, the text of which will undoubtedly
be adopted for the twenty-fourth time, will once again
confirm not only that the United States has failed in its
attempt to isolate Cuba, but that it is the United States
Administration that has completely isolated itself
through its own policy.
Conversely, today’s adoption of the draft resolution
will send a clear, strong message to the United States
that not only should it end the economic, commercial
and financial embargo that it has imposed on Cuba, but
it should also cease its long-term practice of claiming to
be the world’s policeman and imposing its political and
economic decisions and visions on the rest of the world
extraterritorially, in violation of international law and
of respect for other countries’ sovereignty. The United
States economic sanctions on Cuba are reprehensible,
both because they are illegal under international law
and because they are examples of the punitive measures
that the United States often imposes in response to
pressures and interests from extremist groups outside
its own political system.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela commends
the atmosphere of dialogue that has led to the restoration
of bilateral relations between the Governments of Cuba
and the United States of America, and we would like
to highlight President Obama’s acknowledgement
that the sanctions policy has failed every American
Government for more than 50 years. We should add
that the sanctions policy has not only been a failure for
the United States Government, but it has also led to an
extraordinary political and moral victory for the Cuban
people in their resistance and steadfastness.
We would also like to emphasize that, if the United
States Government wishes to maintain cooperative,
friendly relations with the rest of the world, and with
our region of Latin America and the Caribbean in
particular, it should stop interfering in our internal
affairs, stop imposing sanctions as it has done for
50 years to Cuba and is now doing to the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, and stop attempting to impose
its own political and economic ideas on others. Our
relations must be based on respect for our peoples’ selfdetermination and sovereignty.
We would like today’s draft resolution, aimed
at ending the economic, commercial and financial
15-33534

26/10/2015

blockade of Cuba and certain to be adopted by an
overwhelming majority in the Assembly today, to
function as an instrument reflecting what is right and
the need to enforce international law that will contribute
to ensuring that the United States Congress abolishes
all of its coercive measures linked to the economic
blockade of Cuba, such as the 1992 Cuban Democracy
Act and the 1996 Cuban Liberty and Democratic
Solidarity Act, and that the United States finally learns
the lesson that its national legislature does not have the
power to legislate against the world.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will vote in
favour of the draft resolution out of the conviction and
determination that the Cuban embargo has been a huge
injustice and offence against the law that must end once
and for all.
Finally, we would like to welcome the presence
here today of Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Cuba’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and through him send
a message in the spirit of Chávez and Bolívar to the
entire Cuban people and to former President Fidel
Castro and President Raúl Castro, a message of
solidarity, recognition, brotherhood and friendship, in
the confidence that victory is ours. We shall overcome!
Mr. Mukerji (India): India associates itself with
the statements delivered earlier by the representatives
of South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We also
welcome Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to the Assembly today.
At the outset, I would first like to recall that today’s
debate is taking place in the context of some welcome
developments in the bilateral relations between Cuba
and the United States. In that context, I would like
to stress that India warmly welcomes the restoration
of diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United
States. We congratulate the Governments and the
peoples of both nations on that historic event.
Every year, for more than two decades now,
the General Assembly has considered the issue of
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States on Cuba. Each time, it
has consistently rejected the imposition of laws and
regulations with extraterritorial impact and all other
forms of coercive economic measures that hurt the
progress and prosperity of people all over the world.
The Assembly has also called on States, in conformity
with their obligations under the Charter of the

A/70/PV.40

United Nations and international law, to refrain from
promulgating and applying, and to repeal and invalidate,
any laws and measures that have extraterritorial effects
that impinge on the sovereignty of other States. There
can be little doubt that the continued existence of this
embargo in opposition to world opinion, as expressed
by the Assembly, undermines multilateralism and the
credibility of the United Nations itself.
As the world’s largest democracy, with an abiding
faith in multilateralism, India stands in solidarity
with the international community in its unambiguous
rejection of domestic laws with extraterritorial impact.
Embargoes on a country are an obstacle to the full
ability of its people, particularly children and women,
to achieve economic and social development. They also
hinder their full enjoyment of human rights, including,
among other things, the right to development, food,
medical care and social services.
Successive reports of the Secretary-General — and
this year’s report (A/70/120) is no exception — have
established that the United States embargo on Cuba,
particularly through its extraterritorial effects, has
adversely affected the Cuban people and their country’s
development efforts. It has also had a negative impact
on the Cuban economy, which has been forced to
bear considerable extra costs in sourcing products,
technology and services, and it has discouraged
investment and technology collaboration between
Cuba and third countries. In that context, we would
like to acknowledge the Cuban people’s notable
socioeconomic and development achievements, in
particular Cuba’s high Human Development Index
ranking and its achievement of several Millennium
Development Goals ahead of schedule, despite the
difficult conditions that the embargo has imposed on it.
Cuba’s acknowledged expertise in health care, achieved
despite those conditions, enabled it to respond quickly,
effectively and substantively to the Assembly’s call on
all nations to respond to the Ebola crisis in Africa. In
that context, the embargo is very ironic.
While launching the transformative 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), world
leaders have once again strongly urged all States to
refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance
with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. In view of that consensus on the part of world
leaders, the international community should redouble
its efforts to promote an environment free from

15-3353411/25

A/70/PV.40

sanctions and embargoes. In that context, and logically,
India hopes that the recent positive developments in
relations between Cuba and the United States will lead
to a speedy end to the embargo. Until then, we support
draft resolution A/70/L.2, submitted by Cuba, and wish
our brothers in Cuba every success.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): First of all, I warmly
welcome His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and wish to
convey through him the greetings of the people and the
Government of Algeria to our sisters and brothers in
Cuba.
Algeria aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the representative of South Africa on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China, by the representative of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, by the
representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of the Group
of African States and by the representative of Kuwait
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
We also support the statements delivered earlier by the
representative of Jamaica on behalf of the Caribbean
Community and by the representative of Paraguay on
behalf of the Southern Common Market.
Algeria reiterates its stand concerning the continuing
economic, commercial and financial embargo
unilaterally imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba for more than a half-century. The
consecutive annual adoption by an overwhelming
majority of the members of the General Assembly
of a draft resolution calling for the lifting of the
embargo against Cuba reflects the strong desire of the
international community to put an end to that situation.
Let me recall that Algeria has always stressed that
Cuba, like all other Member States, has the right to
freedom of trade and navigation and to expand trade
on a mutually agreed-upon basis with any economic
partner. Algeria has also fully shared the position that
has regularly rejected the imposition of unilateral acts or
extraterritorial regulations impeding the development
of any country and all forms of coercive economic
and trade measures. That position reflects the abiding
principles of Algerian foreign policy.
I would like to stress that a year ago, Algeria
welcomed the courageous and bold involvement of
Cuban doctors in the global fight against the Ebola
epidemic. We thought that it was the right move and
example to follow, as well as an inspiration for the kind
of standard relationship that we all strive for and benefit
from. We were very happy to learn that all those who
12/25

26/10/2015

wanted to create the current more positive atmosphere
have supported that remarkable move. In that regard, I
would like to conclude by welcoming the resumption
of diplomatic relations between the United States of
America and Cuba, and we see as extremely positive
signs other measures and actions taken recently that
will ultimately pave the way for a full normalization
of relations.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of my Pacific neighbour
Nauru and my own country, Solomon Islands, on agenda
item 42, in relation to draft resolution A/70/L.2, calling
for the lifting of the 53-year-old economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
Seventy years ago, States made a solemn
commitment to stand up for the equal rights of big and
small States. We ask our friend and partner, the United
States of America, to maintain an open policy and
embrace trust and confidence in restoring the rights of
Cuba and its people that have been denied them by the
blockade. Let us observe the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of
international law to promote good-neighbourly relations
and make it possible for the Cuban population to freely
practice their political and economic system. We must
recognize Cuba’s convictions, principles and values,
which govern its progress and prosperity. We should
allow the Cuban population to enjoy the same quality
of life as all its neighbours. Only last month, leaders
of the world adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution/70/1). Our new Agenda
calls for a genuine and durable partnership, a new
political relationship and a new form of international
cooperation, so that we can meaningfully transform our
world.
Every year, the Assembly adopts, by an
overwhelming majority, a draft resolution that seeks
to protect commercial freedom, economic rights
and financial justice for the Cuban people. This is
the twenty-fourth year that the General Assembly is
dealing with a more than five-decades-old issue that
has seen 11 United States Presidents and three Cuban
Presidents. Given those facts, optimism and change
are, nevertheless, in the air. There is a new dawn
breaking in Cuban and American relations, which
Nauru and Solomon Islands join all in welcoming. The
rapprochement of the two Governments is a welcome
development. The restoration of diplomatic relations

15-33534

26/10/2015

this year between the two countries is an essential
step towards re-establishing full respect and civility
between the two close neighbours, which are set 90
miles apart from one another geographically.
It must be noted that the economic, commercial and
financial blockade by the United States on Cuba remains
in place, although incremental changes are slowly
taking place. The United States has an opportunity to
break with the past and better understand its neighbour,
Cuba. The United States of America must continue to
put in place policies that allow for the full integration of
Cuba into the global system and eliminate obstacles that
hamper cooperation. Allow me to suggest normalizing
relations by having the United States of America’s
legislative branch repeal laws that have been used to
enforce the embargo.
When the United States and Cuba cooperate,
the whole world stands to benefit. As others before
me have stated, we have witnessed that fact in the
fight against Ebola, and we know that the world will
benefit if the blockade is lifted. Let us have faith in
our people working together to free themselves from
fear and want and to live in dignity. On this occasion,
the Governments and the people of Nauru and Solomon
Islands would like to thank the Government and the
people of Cuba for the medical scholarships provided
to Pacific small island developing States students. In
the last three years, more than 60 Cuban-trained Pacific
islands doctors have returned to serve their people. We
thank Cuba for their solidarity and friendship with our
subregion of the Pacific. Solomon Islands and Nauru
support draft resolution A/70/L.2 in its entirety, and we
call on all peace-loving countries to support the draft
resolution as presented.

A/70/PV.40

socioeconomic development of Cuba, as well as to the
development of regional and international cooperation.
The continuation of sanctions, which is a vestige of the
cold war, amounts to an effort to intentionally hinder
the Cuban people’s implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), which
contains a direct appeal to all States:
“to refrain from promulgating and applying any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures
not in accordance with international law and the
Charter of the United Nations that impede the full
achievement of economic and social development,
particularly in developing countries” (resolution
70/1, para. 30).
We note the decisions of the Government of the
United States to introduce a certain easing of the
embargo regime. We consider that to finally end the
embargo would be a logical outcome of the process
that began with the resumption of diplomatic relations
between the United States and Cuba. The United States
should make all necessary efforts to comply with the
demands of its own domestic public opinion. That
would not only be in the interests of Cuba and the
United States but would also contribute to improving
the situation around the island and allowing the Cuban
people to enjoy their legitimate rights to a life of
dignity, and contribute to bolstering trade relations in
the Caribbean.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for having prepared
a comprehensive report (A/70/120), which outlines
the position of Member States in favour of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo by the
United States against Cuba.

Guided by the founding principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, which specify that any measures
based on discrimination or intervention in a country’s
internal affairs are unacceptable, the Russian Federation,
like the majority of Member States, is resolutely in
favour of a rapid lifting of the embargo against Cuba.
Generally speaking, Russia opposes any economic
pressure against sovereign States, which usually only
aggravates confrontational trends in international
relations. Bearing that in mind, Russia will vote, at this
seventieth session of the General Assembly, in favour
of the draft resolution on the necessity of ending the
economic, trade and financial blockade.

Our position of principle remains unchanged.
We believe that a swift lifting of the anti-Cuban
embargo is an objective and long-overdue necessity.
We believe that unilateral economic pressure by the
United States on Cuba, for purely political purposes,
is not justified under current conditions and that it is a
relic of the past that causes significant damage to the

Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I, too, wish to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Cuba, Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla. My delegation
endorses the statements made by the representatives of
South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
of Ecuador on behalf of Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, and of Paraguay on behalf of

15-3353413/25

A/70/PV.40

the Southern Common Market and associated States.
We also wish to make the following comments in our
national capacity.
Brazil heartily welcomes the restoration of
diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States
of America. We are pleased that the countries chose
to engage in dialogue in order to reach that historic
decision and overcome anachronistic animosities.
That decision can have positive effects for the entire
American continent. Despite significant political
advances, the welfare of the people of Cuba continues
to be affected by the economic, trade and financial
embargo imposed on Cuba by the Government of the
United States.
Brazil reiterates its firm opposition to the embargo
against Cuba, as well as the extraterritorial application of
domestic trade laws and the adoption of discriminatory
trade practices. Such measures constitute a violation
of the basic principles of international law, notably the
respect for sovereignty and the freedom of trade and
navigation. They also affect human rights, humanitarian
law and refugee law, as they are detrimental to the
populations, especially to women and children, whose
protection ought to be a priority, especially the poorest
and most vulnerable segments.
While we acknowledge the statement made by
the President of the United States in regard to the
need to work towards putting an end to the embargo
against Cuba, as well as the measures that have been
adopted to modify the application of the embargo, we
are concerned about the upsurge in the extraterritorial
dimension of the blockade, along with the increasing
intimidation imposed in relation to Cuba’s international
financial transactions.
It is vital that the United States Congress engage,
as soon as possible, in a discussion on the elimination
of the blockade against Cuba. In the meantime, we
call on President Obama to do everything within his
executive powers to reduce the impact of the blockade.
That would not only be in line with the re-establishment
of diplomatic relations between the two countries, but
would also constitute a measure that is necessary in
order to ensure that the United States complies with the
General Assembly’s call urging Governments that have
not yet complied with resolution 69/5 to take the urgent
measures necessary to eliminate discriminatory trade
practices and put an end to the economic, commercial
and financial embargoes adopted unilaterally.

14/25

26/10/2015

Brazil welcomes Cuba’s progress in updating its
economic model. We wish to continue on that path,
but we need support from other partners near and far.
Cooperation with Cuba is systematically impeded
by the illegal, illegitimate and inhumane economic
embargo. My delegation votes in favour of taking
advantage of the space for dialogue and cooperation
that has been recently established, so as to bring an end
to the embargo, which constitutes a flagrant violation
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. As we celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations, putting an end to the
embargo against Cuba would convey a strong message
of renewed commitment to the founding principles of
the Organization in the sense of promoting a culture of
peace and cooperation in the world.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of South Africa on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
In September, the United Nations Summit on the
post-2015 development agenda unanimously adopted
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), which has opened up new prospects
and opportunities and defined new goals for
global development and international development
cooperation. We should strengthen cooperation in
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, so as to
embark on a development path that is equitable, open,
comprehensive and innovative with a view to achieving
common development.
Under these new circumstances, it is necessary to
immediately put an end to the economic embargo and
sanctions against Cuba. For 23 consecutive years, the
General Assembly has adopted, by an overwhelming
majority of votes, resolutions on the need to end the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba. In those
resolutions, the Assembly urges all countries to abide
by the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of
international law and to repeal or invalidate any laws
or measures that are of an extraterritorial nature and
infringe upon the sovereignty of other States or the
legitimate rights and interests of entities and individuals
under the jurisdiction of other State and have an adverse
impact on the freedom of trade and navigation.
It is regrettable that the resolutions have not been
effectively implemented over the years and that the

15-33534

26/10/2015

American economic, trade and financial embargo
against Cuba remains in effect. That not only violates
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant General Assembly resolutions,
but it has also inflicted enormous economic and
financial losses on Cuba, impeding the efforts of the
Cuban people to eliminate poverty, promote economic
and social development and achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. It has hampered the right of the
Cuban people to exist and develop and has adversely
affected economic, commercial and financial
interactions between Cuba and other countries.
China has always advocated respecting a country’s
right to autonomously choose its social system and
approaches to development and has opposed using
military, political, economic or other means to apply
unilateral sanctions against other countries. China
has consistently strictly observed and implemented
relevant General Assembly resolutions. China and
Cuba have maintained normal economic and trade
relations and have exchanged mutual visits, which has
led to mutually beneficial and friendly cooperation in
diverse areas. That has been in line with the wishes of
the peoples of China and Cuba and has been conducive
to the economic and social development of Cuba.
Against the background of multipolarity in a
world of economic globalization, cultural diversity
and the democratization of international relations,
there has been a general trend for countries to carry
out exchanges and cooperation on the basis of equality.
Dialogue based on equality and friendly consultations
offers the best way to resolve disputes. In July, the
United States and Cuba decided to restore diplomatic
relations, taking an important step in the normalization
of relations between the two countries. We hope that
the United States and Cuba will maintain dialogue
and consultation and strengthen the momentum of the
efforts to improve relations between the two countries.
China has noted that the United States has started
to partially lift bans on tourism, commerce and
telecommunication with Cuba and has the intention to
push for the ultimate lifting of the trade embargo. We
hope that the United States will completely abrogate
its policy of economic blockade and sanctions against
Cuba as soon as possible and that the two sides will
develop normal inter-State relations in accordance with
the purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations and the basic principles of international
relations. That will be in the common interests of the

A/70/PV.40

United States and Cuba, as well as of the peoples of the
two countries, and will be conducive to the stability and
development of the entire region of the Americas, as
well as to the common development of the international
community. China will again vote in favour of draft
resolution A/70/L.2, submitted by Cuba under this
agenda item.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin my statement
by welcoming the presence here today of Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, and his delegation. At the same time, I would
like to welcome the presence of the Bolivian Minister
of Mining and Metallurgy, Mr. Félix César Navarro
Miranda.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia associates itself
with the statements delivered on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and the Southern Common Market.
Today, the Agence France-Presse news agency
reported the dramatic case of Noemi Bernardez,
a 7-year-old cancer patient who needs the drug
temozolomide for her chemotherapy treatments. Noemi,
who lives in the Cuban province of Cienfuegos, has a
70 per cent chance of surviving her disease if she can
get that drug, but only 20 per cent if she cannot. As
the report of the Secretary-General (A/70/120) clearly
points out, because of the unilateral application of the
criminal blockade against Cuba, Noemi’s chances of
survival are reduced.
The Secretary-General’s report once again makes
plain the global rejection of the United States of
America’s arbitrary and unilateral imposition of an
economic, commercial and financial blockade against
the Cuban people — and against humankind. The
embargo affects international cooperation, health and
nutrition, education and culture, foreign trade and
foreign investment in Cuba. It also has financial and
banking repercussions and restricts the potential for
the development of tourism, transport, civil aviation
and other areas of the Cuban economy. The embargo
is an example of the unilateralism with which the
United States acts in the world. Notwithstanding the
blockade, however, Cuba serves as an example of social
development, cooperation and solidarity. Bolivia joins
the concert of nations in again repudiating, in the
strongest terms possible, the criminal blockade, which

15-3353415/25

A/70/PV.40

has become one of the deepest open wounds affecting
the spirit of the whole human family.
The United States is unilaterally imposing an
unjust blockade, an illegitimate blockade, an immoral
blockade, an illegal blockade. The blockade violates
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which all of us support, not only in word but in spirit.
The blockade violates the principle of the sovereign
equality of States, the principle of non-intervention
in the internal affairs of States, and the principles of
independence, multilateralism, respect for international
law and self-determination. It violates every human
right, and in particular economic, social and cultural
rights.
We are all victims of that blockade owing to its
extraterritorial character. It is not only Cuba but the
international community that is attacked unilaterally in
violation of international law by the embargo imposed
by the United States of America. Today presents us
with an opportunity not only to vigorously condemn
this violation of international law, this genocidal
blockade, but also to honour and express thanks for the
solidarity of Cuba. Bolivia continues to be a beneficiary
of that absolutely unconditional solidarity, despite the
conditions imposed by the blockade on Cuba. We now
also have an opportunity to honour the dignity and
endurance of the valiant Cuban people.
I would like to conclude my statement by repeating
the words that Che Guevara uttered a few decades ago,
recalling a phrase from José Martí: “When one man is
struck, every true man should feel the blow on his own
face”. In that light, Cuba, as a paragon of solidarity,
gives the world a choice today. We must bear in mind
that girl Noemi. If homeland is synonymous with
humankind and if the embargo is synonymous with
death, the choice has become homeland or death.
We shall overcome.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
call on His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodriguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to introduce draft
resolution A/70/L.2.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Last 17 December, United States President Barack
Obama acknowledged that the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed on Cuba had failed, that
it was obsolete and had not met the goals envisaged and
had harmed the Cuban people and isolated the United
States Government. Since then, President Obama has
16/25

26/10/2015

reiterated that the blockade must be lifted. He has asked
the American Congress to proceed in that direction
instead of acting against the will of American citizens,
who clearly support its repeal. He has committed to
engaging in the debate for that purpose and to use his
executive powers to modify its implementation.
During the Summit on sustainable development
leading to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and during
the recent general debate, more than 60 Heads of State
or Government and delegations expressed appreciation
and congratulations on the announcement of the new
course in the relations between the United States and
Cuba, including the restoration of diplomatic relations
and embassies, and many called for the embargo to be
completely abolished. The interest and hopes aroused
by those discussions and the subsequent vote, which
will take place under new circumstances, is therefore
understandable.
Given the almost unanimous demand on the
part of the international community, symbolized by
the favourable vote of 188 Member States last year
(resolution 69/5), the participation of Cuba in the
Summit of the Americas in Panama this year and
the call by a clear majority of American society and
the Cuban diaspora settled here, the United States
Government has announced a new policy towards our
country. But the measures adopted by the United States
Administration, which entered into force on 16 January
and were later expanded on 18 September, although
positive, only modified in very limited way certain
elements related to the implementation of the embargo.
Many of them cannot be implemented unless others
are adopted that would finally allow Cuba to freely
export and import products and services to and from
the United States of America, to use American dollars
in its international financial transactions and operate
accounts in that currency in third countries’ banks,
and to have access to credit and financing from private
entities and international financial institutions.
The problem is not that the Cuban authorities
hamper the implementation of those measures and
that the Cuban system would need to be modified in
order to facilitate the process, as some United States
officials have asserted. The problem is the relentless
and systematic existence of the embargo. We must not
confuse reality with the wishes and expressions of good
will. In such circumstances as we are now facing, one
can only judge based on the facts. And the facts show, in

15-33534

26/10/2015

a crystal-clear manner, that the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed against Cuba is still
being fully and completely implemented.
Ten months after the announcements made on
17 December 2014, no tangible, substantial modification
has been introduced in the implementation of the
embargo. Cuba’s removal from the spurious list of State
sponsors of international terrorism was the inevitable
correction of an absurdity, but that has hardly had any
impact on the implementation of the embargo, which is
based on a far more comprehensive system of previously
established laws and sanctions.
Just a week ago, a $1.116 billion fine was imposed
on a French bank, Crédit Agricole, which must be added
to the $1.71 billion fine imposed on the German bank
Commerzbank last March for carrying out transactions
with Cuba and other States. In recent weeks, the secure
messaging system SWIFT cancelled a service contract
that covered the first payment by the American company
Sprint to initiate direct phone calls, and several other
bank transfers to Cuba for the operation of charter
flights were withheld.
The meagre Cuban food purchases in the United
States of America, which were among the few exceptions
to the embargo approved in 2000 by the United States
Congress, have declined significantly in the past year,
because they are subject to discriminatory and onerous
conditions. Each purchase must be authorized by a
license, and the granting of credits is prohibited. Cuba
is forced to pay cash and in advance through banking
entities of third countries and is prohibited from using
its own vessels to transport those products.
Something similar has been happening with the
imports of medicines and medical equipment that our
country needs, and since 1992 United States legislation
has imposed conditions on them as well. Cuba is required
to report on the final recipient of the medication it
purchases. It is not allowed to make payments directly,
but only through third parties and in a currency other
than the United States dollar, which obviously entails
additional difficulties, delays and costs.
Numerous other examples could be mentioned.
The example of the case of the Elekta company,
which confirmed on 2 September that it will not be
able to supply the National Institute of Oncology and
Radiobiology nor any other hospitals in Cuba with the
radioactive isotope iridium-192, which ensures the
normal operation of the brachytherapy equipment that

A/70/PV.40

is indispensable for higher quality treatments and more
accurate cancer therapy. That is because its supplier, the
United States company Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals,
refused to sell that isotope to Cuba. The American
company, Small Bone Innovation, Inc., has refused to
supply prosthetic wrists and hand joints to the Frank
País Orthopedic Hospital for patients with rheumatoid
arthritis. Last June, the United States company SigmaAldrich refused to supply the company Quimimpex
with the products, services and technical information
that are indispensable to the chemical industry; and the
North American company Columbiana Boiler Company
informed Quimpex that it was not allowed to export the
cylinders needed to transport chlorine destined for the
treatment of drinking water.
The embargo is a flagrant, massive and systematic
violation of the human rights of all Cubans. It
contravenes international law and has been described
as an act of genocide under the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
of 1948. It is the main obstacle to the economic and
social development of our people. The human damage
it has caused is inestimable. Seventy-seven per cent of
Cubans have been suffering from the embargo since
the day they were born. The shortages and deprivation
that it causes to all Cuban families are incalculable.
According to rigorous and conservative estimates, the
economic damage it has caused after more than half
a century amount to $33,755,000,000, based on the
price of gold. At current prices, that amounts to more
than $121,192,000,000, which is a figure of enormous
magnitude for a small economy like ours.
I hope the representative of the United States of
America will not come here now to tell us that draft
resolution A/70/L.2 does not accurately reflect the spirit
of dialogue or the generous attitude of his Government;
or repeat the hackneyed line that the United States of
America is the social benefactor of the Cuban people,
which wishes only to control its own destiny; or
inflate the figure of $900,000 in donations that Cuban
civil society received in 2015, which the embargo
hampered and our people appreciated; or refer to the
family remittances, which are the result of difficult
savings on the part of Cubans living here, as if they
were Government funds; or consider as a commercial
exchange the export licenses that have been granted but
have not actually led to any concrete exports.
While it is up to the United States Congress to adopt
a decision ending the embargo, the President has broad

15-3353417/25

A/70/PV.40

26/10/2015

executive powers to substantially modify the practical
application of the embargo and its humanitarian and
economic impact. We share the hope that the United
States Congress will change an ineffective, cruel and
unjust policy, anchored in the past, and make decisions
based on the values ​​and feelings of its citizens.

steering commission, the expansion of areas of dialogue
and cooperation, particularly in the fields of aviation
and aviation security, combating drug trafficking,
illegal migration and human trafficking, cooperation in
law enforcement, environmental protection and health,
among others.

Historically, the United States has tried to impose
its domination and hegemony over our country and,
since 1959, to change the political, economic and
social system that our people freely chose in the full
exercise of their self-determination. Several voices
for the United States Government have stated that the
announced policy concerning Cuba means a change in
methods, rather than in objectives. If that is the case,
the process of normalizing relations between the United
States and Cuba will face serious obstacles. The lifting
of the blockade will be the critical element that will
give meaning to the progress achieved over the past
several months in relations between the two countries
and set the pace on the road to normalization.

We are sincerely interested in developing fruitful
relations, including offering quality tourism to United
States citizens, who enjoy the freedom to travel to
Cuba, expanding cultural, sporting, scientific and
academic exchanges and multifaceted cooperation in
areas of common interest, trade and investment. Based
on the premise of our significant differences and in the
spirit of back-and-forth discussion, we have initiated
a bilateral dialogue on human rights. To that end, we
have been guided by the principles that are contained in
the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean
as a Zone of Peace, which was signed in January 2014
in Havana by the Heads of State and Government of
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, and by the principles and purposes enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. That could also
be a modest contribution to the quest for an alternative
way for all of us as human beings and nations to relate
to one another in an era marked by global crisis, the
inevitable impact of climate change, non-conventional
wars that have unleashed ongoing atrocious conflicts,
new forms of terrorism, the existence of huge nuclear
arsenals, extraordinary spending on nuclear armaments
and the risk of pandemics.

As President Barack Obama acknowledged, lifting
the blockade serves the national interests of the United
States and reflects the will of that country’s citizens. It
would be in no way acceptable or productive to require
Cuba to make internal changes as a precondition for
lifting or lightening the embargo. Cuba is willing
to accept the opportunities and face the challenges
of a new era in relations between both countries,
but it will never negotiate its socialist system or its
internal affairs. Nor will it allow any blemish on
its independence, which was won at the price of the
blood of its finest sons and daughters and through the
enormous sacrifices of many generations, dating back
to our first wars of independence in 1868. As President
Raúl Castro Ruz reiterated, both Governments must
find a way to coexist in a civilized manner, despite
their profound differences, and, wherever possible,
go forward together, for the benefit of the peoples of
the United States and Cuba, through dialogue and
cooperation based on mutual respect and sovereign
equality. There is no enmity between the peoples of the
United States and Cuba. The Cuban people expressed
their solidarity with the American people during the
terrible terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 and the
devastating impact of Hurricane Katrina. We appreciate
and recognize the progress that has been recently made
and reflected in the reopening of the embassies, the
visits by the Secretary of State and the Secretary of
Commerce to Cuba and the exchange of delegations.
That is in addition to the implementation of a bilateral
18/25

Fifteen years ago in this very Hall, the historymaking leader of the Revolution Fidel Castro Ruz
stated,
“Humanity should be aware of what we have
been so far and what we cannot continue to be. Our
species has now enough accumulated knowledge,
ethical values and scientific resources to move
towards a new historical era of true justice and
humanism;
“Nothing in the existing economic and political
order serves the interests of humankind. Thus
this order is unsustainable and must be changed.”
(A/55/PV.4, p. 20)
This year, 23 years after the adoption of the first
of the resolutions emphasizing the necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America (resolution
47/19), we have achieved remarkable progress. This

15-33534

26/10/2015

crowning achievement is due to the tireless resistance,
the selfless efforts and firm convictions of our people
and the leadership of the history-making generation
of the Revolution, headed by Commander-in-Chief
Fidel Castro Ruz and President Raúl Castro Ruz. We
are deeply grateful to all of the Governments and
their peoples, parliaments, political forces, social
movements, representatives of civil society and
international and regional organizations that, year after
year, especially in the General Assembly, have upheld,
with their voices and their votes, the fairness and
urgency of lifting the embargo. We have made it this
far thanks to the ever-growing support of the American
people aimed at achieving that laudable goal, and we
express our gratitude to them. We know that the road
that lies ahead of us is long and difficult. As long as the
blockade continues, we will continue to put forward a
similar draft resolution in the General Assembly. The
Cuban people will never renounce their sovereignty or
the path they have freely chosen to building a more just,
efficient, prosperous and sustainable socialism, nor
will they abandon their quest for a more equitable and
democratic international order.
We have sponsored draft resolution A/70/L.2, which
recognizes the reality of the rigorous and oppressive
implementation of the embargo against Cuba and,
in new preambular paragraphs, also recognizes and
commends the progress achieved during the past year.
On behalf of the heroic, selfless and supportive
Cuban people, I ask the Assembly to vote in favour of
draft resolution A/70/L.2, entitled “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/70/L.2.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Godard (United States of America): Last
year, on 17 December, President Obama announced a
new direction in United States policy towards Cuba.
At the same time, President Castro Ruz spoke to the
Cuban people about beginning a new relationship with
the United States. Since then, the United States has
taken a range of historic measures designed to begin
normalizing United States-Cuban bilateral relations,
including by adjusting United States regulations related

A/70/PV.40

to Cuba. Presidents Obama and Castro have met twice
since then. Although normalization will be a long and
complex road, we have made considerable progress.
We regret, therefore, that the Government of Cuba
has chosen to proceed with its annual draft resolution
(A/70/L.2). The text falls short of reflecting the
significant steps that have been taken and the spirit
of engagement President Obama has championed. As
a result, the United States cannot support it. If Cuba
thinks this exercise will help move things forward in
the direction both Governments have indicated they
wish, it is mistaken.
On 20 July, the United States and Cuba established
diplomatic relations and re-opened embassies in one
another’s capital cities. Secretary of State Kerry travelled
to Havana on 14 August for the ceremonial flag-raising
at the United States Embassy, marking the first time
a United States Secretary of State had been to Cuba
since 1945. Secretary Kerry welcomed the occasion as
a day for pushing aside old barriers and exploring new
possibilities. Indeed, he praised both President Obama
and President Castro for “the courageous decision to
stop being the prisoners of history and to focus on the
opportunities of today and tomorrow”.
Since that day, the United States has met with
Cuban Government officials in Havana to set a broad
agenda for bilateral cooperation. We have agreed to
hold dialogues in law enforcement, counter-narcotics
and human rights. We have worked with Cuban
health-care professionals to deliver improved care to
the poorest populations in our hemisphere. We have
discussed ways to address the environmental and
climate change challenges we face in the years ahead.
By the end of the year, we hope to announce several
concrete accomplishments that will benefit both our
peoples.
As we all know, President Obama has also called on
Congress to lift the embargo as soon as possible and has
taken executive action to adjust regulations to facilitate
many transactions involving Cuba. President Obama
has argued that removing the embargo will increase
economic opportunities for the Cuban people through
increased trade and commerce and improve technology
and information flow to the island, a goal we all share.
We do not expect Cuba or the United States to forget
the past overnight. We realize that fully normalizing our
bilateral relationship will require years of persistence
and dedication on both sides. We find it unfortunate

15-3353419/25

A/70/PV.40

that despite our demonstrated bilateral progress, the
Cuban Government has chosen to introduce a draft
resolution that is nearly identical to those presented in
years past. Nevertheless, the United States will not be
bound by a history of mistrust. We remain committed to
the hard work of pursuing genuine bilateral cooperation
with Cuba for the benefit of both countries and for the
hemisphere.
The United States also remains committed to
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all in Cuba, as enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We will
continue to advocate for universal rights on the island
and to build and strengthen connections between the
Cuban and the American people.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Nicaragua would like to explain why it
will vote in favour of the people and the Government of
Cuba, together with the entire international community.
We wish to welcome our brother Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and
his delegation. He has provided us with extensive
information about the impacts today of the criminal
economic, financial and commercial embargo against
his people and Government.
We reaffirm our unconditional support for and
solidarity with the people and the Government of
Cuba for their heroic gesture, the Cuban Revolution,
which showed us the first steps towards dignity and the
restitution of rights to the peoples of Latin America and
the Caribbean. More than five decades of resistance,
full of bravery and sacrifice have elapsed since the
infamous day when a disgraceful imperialistic law
authorized the President of the United States to establish
an economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba, with the aim of provoking disillusionment and
discouragement; creating economic dissatisfaction
and hardship; denying access to supplies; and causing
hunger, desperation, violence and the overthrow of the
legitimate Government of Cuba.
Yet Cuba stands before us. Its people and its
Government, our brothers in solidarity, represent the
dignity and sovereignty of our peoples. They were
always the first to respond to our needs in the face
of disasters and emergencies. They taught us to read,
trained doctors and technicians, cured our diseases and
helped us to create conditions for our well-being and
our happiness on Mother Earth.

20/25

26/10/2015

The embargo, which has been increasing in terms of
its measures and scope, is in fact a policy of genocide. It
has had a negative impact on the economic, social and
cultural rights of the people of Cuba and amounts to a
massive, flagrant and systematic violation of the human
rights of an entire people.
Our President, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra,
in referring to the embargo, has affirmed that the time
has come to end it. The situation has changed. Even
in the United States, the majority of the population is
against the embargo. Conditions have been established
to enable President Barack Obama to decide to take this
step even if it goes against the system. We also recall
that the policy of embargo and sanctions has not led
anywhere. The best proof of that is that, after 56 years,
President Obama recognized that the embargo against
Cuba had been a failure.
Today we welcome the fact that President Obama
has finally decided to take the first steps to begin the
process of normalization and the re-establishment of
relations between Cuba and the United States, which
should be done based on the legitimate interests of each
party, starting with the legitimate interests of the Cuban
people and of the international community, to put an
immediate end to the blockade. We firmly believe that
global solidarity with Cuba and its people will continue
to be resolute until this criminal embargo ends.
The Group of 77 and China, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community,
the Southern Common Market, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the African Union, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and others have
once again reiterated their rejection and condemnation
of the policy of the Government of the United States
and shown their complete solidarity with Cuba and its
demand to put an immediate end to the blockade.
Despite the re-establishment of relations, the
United States has intensified its inhumane embargo
and its measures with extraterritorial dimensions,
heavily impacting exports and imports. The embargo
has resulted in a lack of access to foreign loans and
international markets and has impacted the health and
education systems and the right to food. In short, it has
adversely affected all aspects of Cuban life.
Nicaragua condemns the criminal blockade and
all the measures and extraterritorial ramifications.
Nicaragua rejects any coercive and unilateral economic

15-33534

26/10/2015

measures to attempt to break the will and spirit of
peoples and Governments. It is unacceptable to use
those policies to compel an independent population to
change its regime. The embargo continues to be the main
obstacle to sustainable development and economic and
social programmes in the fraternal nation of Cuba. It
is totally inconsistent with the recently approved 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
This year we have seen courageous decisions
that, in the short term, have led to changing situations
that have been maintained for more than five decades
in relation to Cuba. We maintained the hope that, in
the General Assembly, we can continue to take bold
decisions and to vote unanimously in favour of lifting
the embargo. We have always listened very carefully to
the speaker who preceded me, and we had hoped to hear
something different this time. Regrettably, once again
we heard the same rhetoric as in previous years, the
same arrogance attempting to justify the unjustifiable,
arguing for the continuation of a situation against the
fraternal people of Cuba, which is the result of the
implementation of an obsolete and anachronistic policy
that they themselves have referred to as a failure. The
entire world rejects it.
No, Cuba was not mistaken in presenting draft
resolution A/70/L.2; the whole world supports it.
To conclude, while reiterating my delegation’s
vote in favour of the draft resolution introduced by
Cuba, which we are about to vote on, we wish to recall
the words of the beloved former President of Chile,
Mr. Salvador Allende, who was murdered by dark
forces, as we all are aware. Some day, America will
speak in the voice of the continent, in a united voice
of the peoples, a voice that will be respected and heard
because it is the voice of the people who are the masters
of their own destiny.
Today Latin America and the Caribbean, in
speaking for the continent, demands that the United
States Government once and for all rectify its policies
against our continent. It should immediately put an end
to the criminal embargo against Cuba. It should close
the prisons in Guantánamo and return Guantánamo to
its legitimate owner. It should recognize and finally
accept the will of our peoples to be the masters of our
own fates and, abandoning its imperialist designs and
policies, once and for all establish friendly relations,
cooperation and respect on equal terms for all the
peoples and the Governments in our region.

A/70/PV.40

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before the
voting.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/70/L.2, entitled “The necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,

15-3353421/25

A/70/PV.40

Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Draft resolution A/70/L.2 was adopted by 191 votes
to 2 (resolution 70/5).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote after
the voting, may I remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; and Iceland, a European Free Trade
Association country and member of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.
The re-establishment of diplomatic relations
between Cuba and the United States of America and the
calls of President Obama on Congress to start working
towards the removal of the embargo have created a new
situation for all parties concerned. The EU warmly
welcomes those initiatives and encourages their further
implementation through appropriate steps by both
parties.
In the meantime, however, the main restrictive
measures are still in place. They are even more of an
anachronism given the new circumstances. The United
States trade policy towards Cuba is fundamentally
a bilateral issue. However, beyond the damaging
impact of the embargo on Cuban citizens, the direct
and indirect effects of extraterritorial legislation and

22/25

26/10/2015

unilateral administrative and judicial measures also
undermine EU economic interests.
American legislation such as the Cuban Democracy
Act of 1992 and the Helms-Burton Act of 1996
extended the effects of the embargo of the United
States of America to third-party countries. Within the
framework of its common commercial policies, the
European Union has firmly and continuously opposed
such extraterritorial measures. While we acknowledge
the decisions of the United States Government to lift
restrictions on remittances and family travel to Cuba,
thereby allowing the provision of certain financial,
telecommunication and Internet services, and to
remove restrictions on the export of tools and building
materials to support the Cuban people, we cannot
accept that unilaterally imposed measures impede our
economic and trade relations with Cuba. To address
that problem, in November 1996, the EU Council of
Ministers adopted a regulation and a joint action to
protect the interests of natural or legal persons resident
in Europe against the consequences of those laws.
At the summit between the European Union and the
United States of America held in London in May 1998,
an agreement was reached on a set of measures that
aimed to mitigate the problems caused by extraterritorial
legislation. It covered waivers to Titles III and IV of the
Helms-Burton Act, a commitment by the United States
Government to oppose future extraterritorial legislation
of that kind and an understanding on the disciplines for
strengthening investment protection. It is vital that the
United States of America fully observe and implement
that agreement.
While EU-Cuba political relations are strictly
guided by the 1996 common position, both parties
are engaged in a negotiating process to define a new
and ambitious framework. Since 2014, the European
Union and Cuba have begun negotiating an agreement
on political dialogue and cooperation to strengthen
relations and create an enabling framework for more
effective dialogue, improved cooperation and expanded
economic relations. Human rights are at the core of
EU external relations, including with Cuba. A first
high-level discussion took place in June 2015. The
EU remains determined to pursue a comprehensive
dialogue with the Cuban authorities and all sectors of
Cuban society. We reiterate the right of Cuban citizens
to make independent decisions about their future.

15-33534

26/10/2015

We also reiterate our call on the Cuban Government
to grant its citizens full, internationally recognized
civil, political and economic rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the freedoms of assembly and
expression and free access to information. We call on it
to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights. In addition, following the
visit of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
right to food, we encourage the Cuban Government
to invite other special rapporteurs to visit Cuba. We
welcome the continued broad application of the Cuban
citizens’ freedom to travel, as well as the substantial
amnesty granted to prisoners on humanitarian grounds
on the occasion of the visit of Pope Francis. We note
with concern the continued high frequency of shortterm arrests and appeal for all freedoms to be fully
respected and protected.
The existing restrictions on the rights to the
freedoms of expression and assembly stand in contrast
to Cuban achievements in health care and education.
Similarly, the slow progress of economic modernization
greatly hinders the economic development of Cuba.
In that context, we recall the adoption by the Cuban
Parliament in August 2011 of a set of economic and social
reforms, and we hope that they will be expanded and
implemented in a way that will address the key concerns
of the Cuban population. The economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America contributes to the economic problems in Cuba,
negatively affecting the living standards of the Cuban
people, while having consequences in the humanitarian
field as well.
The lifting of the United States embargo could
facilitate an opening of the Cuban economy for the
benefit of the Cuban people. Together, we again express
our rejection of all unilateral measures directed against
Cuba, which negatively affect the interests of third
parties and therefore violate commonly accepted rules
of international trade.
We urge the Cuban authorities to bring about
real improvements in all the areas that we have just
mentioned. Through its cooperation and the future
framework agreement, the EU is ready to support Cuba
on its path of reform and modernization. Considerable
progress has been achieved in a constructive spirit,
including on human rights, governance and civil
society. We are encouraged by the knowledge that no
subject will be off limits during those processes. Given

A/70/PV.40

that context, the member States of the European Union
voted unanimously in favour of resolution 70/5.
Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and
congratulate him on the historic vote that we have just
witnessed.
Argentina fully supports the statements delivered
by the representative of South Africa, on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China; by the representative of
Ecuador, on behalf of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States; and by the representative of
Paraguay, on behalf of the Southern Common Market.
I would like to make several additional comments on
behalf of the people and the Government of Argentina.
Year after year we meet to adopt by an overwhelming
majority a draft resolution on the necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against
Cuba. Despite its repetitive nature, the appeal retains
its validity. In fact, its ethical, political and historical
foundations have been strengthened by the passage of
time, the persistence of the grievance and the increase
in international support. During the past 20 years, we
have seen that increase transform this cause into a
universal claim. Besides being global in nature, this is
a Latin American and Caribbean cause that unites the
countries of our entire region in a strong and consistent
position of solidarity.
The Argentine Government wishes to express
how pleased and optimistic it is about the restoration
of diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United
States. It congratulates both Governments on their
decision to take the path of dialogue to resolve all
outstanding issues on the basis of equality and mutual
respect. However, we note with concern that, despite
some progress, the embargo against the Cuban people
continues to stifle them in a disgraceful manner. We
therefore hope that, first and foremost, the United
States complies with the commitments outlined and
that the rapprochement and dialogue between the two
countries can quickly and effectively lead to the lifting
of the unjust and illegal embargo suffered by the Cuban
people and Cuban nationals living abroad for more than
half a century.
In spite of the new context, the embargo continues
to exist and to impede the economic, financial, social
and cultural development of the Cuban people. In terms

15-3353423/25

A/70/PV.40

of trade, just to give one example, Cuba is prevented
from freely exporting and importing its products and
services to or from the United States, as the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba clearly explained a few
minutes ago. Notwithstanding the measures announced
by President Obama, which represent progress towards
changing the implementation of some aspects of the
embargo, the laws and regulations that support this
policy remain in force and are rigorously implemented
by the agencies of the United States Government,
constituting a financial, economic, social and cultural
straitjacket to which Cuba continues to be subjected.
This is an unjust embargo because it punishes an
entire population, causes serious economic damage
and impedes development. It should not be forgotten
that the cost to the Cuban economy of this inhumane
action has exceeded $120 billion. It is a massive and
systematic violation of the most fundamental of human
rights.
We wish to recall that the embargo was motivated
by the refusal of a country to accept that a sovereign
people could elect its own political system, its own
way to organize and develop itself and, in a nutshell,
to choose its own fate. It was an absurd and morally
unsustainable decision on the part of the United States
and has even failed in its purpose, which was to crush
the Cuban people.
Argentina strongly opposes the use of unilateral
coercive measures, the extraterritorial implementation
of national laws and the adoption of discriminatory
trade practices. We therefore join and support the
Cuban call for the lifting of the embargo and the laws
and regulations that underpin that policy, which are
rigorously implemented by the United States.
For these reasons, Argentina reiterates its
commitment to the full implementation of the
recommendations of the General Assembly in its
resolution 69/5, and again urges the international
community to redouble its efforts aimed at the
fulfilment of all the objectives that are set out in the
resolutions of the General Assembly designed to ensure
respect for the sovereign rights of the Cuban people to
aspire to their prosperity and sustainable development.
Consequently, Argentina once again rejects the
embargo policy against Cuba imposed by the United
States, a practice that has been in effect for more than
half a century, which in addition to being morally
unjustifiable and to having a serious humanitarian

24/25

26/10/2015

impact is contrary to the spirit of multilateralism. We
therefore hope that the process of normalization of
relations that has begun between the two countries
leads to an early end being put to the embargo.
My country takes this opportunity to also renew
its absolute commitment to the principles of the
sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in their internal affairs, and freedom
of international trade and shipping. We also call for the
prompt return of Guantánamo to Cuba, another unjust
and illegitimate act on the part of the United States.
Argentina hopes that this is the last resolution that
the General Assembly will adopt on this issue and that
next year its content will be fully implemented by the
United States, so that the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba may be relegated to
the past — an unjust past and one that the peoples and
the Governments of the world, by actions of solidarity
of the kind witnessed this morning, will prevent from
being repeated.
Mr. Ja Song Nam (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea wishes to associate itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, as well as with the one made
by the representative of South Africa on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
The diplomatic recognition of Cuba by the United
States symbolizes a total failure of the hostile policy of
the United States against Cuba, which has persisted for
decades. However, the essence of the anti-Cuba policy
of the United States remains the same; the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba is still
in place.
It is the unanimous demand of Member States
that the United States put an end to the unilateral
economic, trade and financial embargo against Cuba as
soon as possible, so that Cuba can achieve sustainable
development in a peaceful environment.
The facts show that the United States embargo
against Cuba, which has lasted for several decades in
an attempt to overthrow the legitimate socialist system
chosen by the Cuban people, is doomed to failure. An
attempt to change a sovereign State’s political and
economic system or overthrow a legitimate Government
through sanctions and blockade is a rampant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and other international
laws, which stipulate the principles of respect for
15-33534

26/10/2015

national sovereignty, the sovereign equality of States
and non-interference in others’ internal affairs.
According to data released by the Cuban
Government, the total economic loss suffered by
Cuba owing to the embargo has reached astronomical
proportions. The extraterritorial Helms-Burton Act,
which expands the scope of the sanctions to other
countries wishing to develop peaceful economic and
trade relationships with Cuba, is hampering the joint
efforts of the countries in the region that aspire to
peaceful and stable development.
In accordance with its consistent stand against all
forms of interference in the internal affairs of States
and sanctions against sovereign States, the delegation

A/70/PV.40

of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as in
the past, voted in favour of resolution 70/5, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”. We once again strongly urge
the United States to lift its embargo against Cuba once
and for all.
In conclusion, I would like once again to extend
our full support to and solidarity with the Cuban
Government and the Cuban people, who are fighting to
safeguard the dignity and sovereignty of their nation in
the face of the United States embargo.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

15-3353425/25
