S/2020/481

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 June 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 1 June 2020 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2480 (2019) on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), by
which the Council requested me, addressing perspectives from all relevant actors,
including my Special Representative for Mali, in consultation with the Force
Commander, to provide the Council with a letter focused on: (a) information on security
challenges in Mali, progress in mission operations, troop performance and rotations, and
an update on the coordination of security responsibilities; and (b) an update on the
integrated strategic framework and related transition plan, as well as a possible exit
strategy, for the Mission on the basis of improved security and political conditions and
of progress in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Security challenges in Mali and Mission operations
As outlined in my recent reports (S/2020/223 and S/2020/476), MINUSMA
continues to operate in highly complex and constantly evolving political and security
environments. It has continued to play an essential role in helping the parties to the
Agreement to overcome differences through dialogue and make progress towards its
full implementation, while stepping up its support for the authorities in their efforts
to protect civilians in central Mali.
In northern Mali, in response to Operation Maliko aimed at focusing national
armed forces operations on strategic locations, MINUSMA increased its efforts to
protect civilians in areas from which the national armed forces had withdrawn,
including Operation Seka to secure the Gao-Labézanga axis, in Gao Region. It also
supported the establishment of a second district police station in Gao and the
reinforcement of the Malian police and gendarmerie in Ansongo, Gao Region; in
Ménaka; and in Goundam, Niafunké and Tonka, Timbuktu Region. On 26 and
27 April, MINUSMA handed over responsibility for providing security for the
Operational Coordination Mechanism camps in Gao and Timbuktu to the Malian
defence and security forces, which had strengthened their presence t here.
In central Mali, as part of its adaptation plan and increased cooperation with the
national armed forces, MINUSMA continued to take concrete steps to strengthen its
aerial and ground troop presence, with a particular focus on high-risk areas in
Bandiagara, Koro and Bankass cercles as part of its Operation Buffalo. MINUSMA
established a number of temporary operating bases to support national armed forces
and local authorities in protecting civilians, while stepping up mediation and
reconciliation initiatives and efforts to fight impunity. As part of its overall support for
security sector reform, MINUSMA continued to assist relevant national commissions,
including in implementing the national community rehabilitation programme aimed at

20-07156 (E)

040620

*2007156*

S/2020/481

promoting the voluntary disarmament of self-defence groups. MINUSMA also helped
with the reinforcement of the Malian police and gendarmerie in Bandiagara, Bankass
and Koro cercles and Sévaré through capacity-building and transportation.
In addition to the efforts by the Mission and national authorities outlined above,
a sustainable approach to stemming the violence in central Mali requires a robust
security and development response that includes the provision of basic social
services, a reduction in community violence and the dismantling of militia groups.
Appeals to young people not to join armed groups need to be coupled with
employment opportunities. A strengthened justice sector is also essential to fight
impunity, including investigating and prosecuting those responsible for atrocities.
The Mission continued its efforts in support of national authorities in the fight
against impunity, which is essential for peace and stability in the country and the
region. In coordination with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Mission is supporting the Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and
Transnational Organized Crime in its investigations and in scaling up its criminal
analysis and case management capacity. As at 20 May, a total of [618] cases were
being investigated by the Unit, including [319] terrorism cases and [77] transnational
organized crime cases. To date, [13] individuals have been detained in relation to
crimes against peacekeepers; no individual has yet been convicted in relation to these
acts. MINUSMA provided technical support to the Special Investigations Brigade,
including in its investigation into the abduction of the political opposition leader
Soumaïla Cissé. It also assisted the Ministry of Justice with its inspection missions in
Kidal (for the first time since 2006) and in Gao.
Troop and police performance
MINUSMA continued to take effective action to improve overall mission
performance and address shortfalls, with a particular focus on mandate
implementation and the safety and security of its personnel. To that end, it revised
some of its standard operating procedures and, in particular, established decentralized
procedures for casualty evacuation in early 2020, contributing to shorter timelines.
The Mission further reviewed and streamlined its integrated situational reporting and
strengthened procedures for the investigation of serious incidents.
In central Mali, the Mission stepped up efforts to ensure an integrated response
to threats against civilians. The establishment of a temporary operating base in
Douna-Pen in January enabled the Mission to conduct four mediation missions in
Koro cercle, Mopti Region, and to support a number of small-scale community
projects. These efforts contributed to the strengthening of ties among the communities
and facilitated access for humanitarian actors. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs joined one of the MINUSMA mediation missions on 10 March
to assess the humanitarian needs of the population. Reconciliation efforts backed by
stabilization projects are vital in that regard, since terrorist armed groups tend to
exploit tensions and conflicts along community lines, while communities with strong
social cohesion have suffered fewer attacks.
Temporary operating bases were established in the villages of Dioungani, Koro
cercle, and Ogossogou, Bankass cercle, less than 48 hours after MINUSMA was
informed about violent attacks there. The Mission’s presence helped to stabilize the
situation and enabled the delivery of humanitarian assistance and the conduct of
human rights investigations. Upon receiving reports of allegations of human rights
violations in Malémana, Ténenkou cercle, MINUSMA notified the Malian authorities,
who requested assistance to travel to the remote location. MINUSMA subsequently
escorted a joint mission, which included the Malian gendarmerie investigation team,
to carry out the investigation.
2/6

20-07156

S/2020/481

The Mission’s improved early warning and quick reaction capacities proved
essential in preventing attacks against civilians in the centre of the country. In early
March, following a series of violent attacks on villages and hamlets in Bankass cercle
that had claimed many lives, the Mission was alerted, including through its toll -free
hotline, to reports of an imminent attack in the area. In response, it conducted
deterrent flights and successfully dispersed the presumed assailants. In parallel,
MINUSMA police operations focused on mixed long-range security patrols with
overnight stay to ensure engagement with communities in remote areas in Bandiagara,
Bankass and Koro cercles that are affected by frequent clashes between militia groups
affiliated with Dogon and Fulani communities.
To better assess the effectiveness of the protection of civilians response in
central Mali, MINUSMA piloted a new incident mapping tool that integrates data
gathered by uniformed and civilian components to measure the impact of patrols and
temporary operating bases. According to the initial findings, patrols conducted in the
framework of Operation Buffalo helped to improve security in the area and played a
key role in preventing the escalation of incidents in high-risk areas in Bandiagara and
Koro cercles. Only a limited number of incidents were recorded in the immediate
vicinity in the days that followed. The deterrent effect of patrols may decrease with
time but remains noticeable for up to two weeks. No retaliatory attacks against
civilians were documented after peacekeepers left an area.
MINUSMA has taken further measures to prevent peacekeeper fatalities and
enhance their safety and security. In keeping with its strategy to counter the use of
improvised explosive devices, further training courses were developed, with a particular
focus on convoy commanders and staff officers. The courses are complemented by
targeted training and mentoring activities by the Mine Action Service for units operating
in high-threat environments. In March, one combat convoy company detected and
cleared five improvised explosive devices while escorting a single convoy. The
implementation of threat mitigation measures for improvised explosive device s by all
contingents has resulted in a high percentage of explosive devices being detected and
neutralized. This has effectively reduced the risk and number of related fatalities, helped
to maintain freedom of movement and built confidence among peacekeepers.
Specialized equipment, such as mine-protected vehicles, was essential in
preventing casualties in northern and central Mali. I reiterate my call for all Member
States to honour their commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping framework and
do everything possible so that peacekeepers receive the equipment and training
necessary to effectively implement their mandate in one of the most challenging United
Nations operations. MINUSMA currently has 550 armoured vehicles: 479 (87 per cent)
that are used daily, 30 (5.5 per cent) that are undergoing maintenance and 41 (7.5 per
cent) that are not serviceable owing to improvised explosive device blasts or other issues
that are beyond the Mission’s ability to repair them and need to be replaced urgently.
Evaluations of the Mission’s force and police components
Since the beginning of 2020, MINUSMA has evaluated the performance of 24
of its military units, of which 1 was rated excellent and 15 satisfactory, while
performance shortfalls were identified for 4 units, including with regard to mandate
understanding, training, command and control. The remaining four units were rated
as needing overall improvement, and specific recommendations were received to
address and rectify the identified shortfalls. Shortfalls are being addressed through
further in-mission training, clarified procedures and requests for additional
equipment. Overall, 17 units have submitted performance improvement plans and are
taking active steps to implement them.

20-07156

3/6

S/2020/481

The MINUSMA police component continued to implement a systematic
performance evaluation system instituted in June 2019. Since then, all 10 formed
police units have been evaluated and found to be performing satisfactorily. Criteria
against which their performance was measured included their ability to engage with
communities and their understanding of the mandate and protection of civilians, as
well as command and control. Challenges identified included the need to increase the
number of armoured personnel carriers or replace damaged ones and expired
ammunition. Recommendations were also made to units to further improve their
language capacity, enhance force protection and increase safety and security
measures, including on patrols. Evaluations were conducted on a quarterly basis and
highlighted improvements and steps taken by units as well as by police contributing
countries over the past months. Performance improvement plans continue to be
implemented by all units.
Since my previous letter (S/2019/1004), no instances of undeclared caveats by
troop-contributing countries have been recorded. There was one case of a combat
convoy company opposing the conduct of a reconnaissance mission on a new supply
route in the absence of night air surveillance over bivouac sites. Although
commanders serving in peacekeeping operations are obliged to comply with
directives, it was recognized that the increasing threat level in the Mission area might
warrant a review of the combat convoy company statement of unit requirements.
Challenges
The increased MINUSMA presence and operational tempo in central Mali have
contributed to further heightening of the expectations of the population vis -à-vis the
Mission. At times, the situation has fuelled frustration in the light of the Mission’s
limited capacity to respond to multiple and concomitant incidents. Allegations of
human rights violations by the armed forces in the centre of Mali have posed
additional challenges for the Mission in its interactions with communities whose
members are victims of such violations. In the context of implementing the human
rights due diligence policy, MINUSMA continues to encourage Malian authorities to
take the steps necessary to prevent human rights violations and swiftly investigate
allegations of violations by the armed forces.
Although confronted with a number of cases of coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
among its uniformed personnel from the start of the outbreak in Mali, the Mission’s swift
action and close collaboration with the authorities allowed it to contain the spread within
its ranks. The majority of affected personnel have since recovered. MINUSMA acted
rapidly to upgrade its medical infrastructure and employ additional personnel to ensure
that it had sufficient medical capacity in spite of increased demand as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Although the outbreak caused it to slow the conduct of some its
activities, MINUSMA nevertheless continued to deliver on key priorities, including
support for the legislative elections, which resulted in an increased number of women
members of parliament. In the same vein, the Mission continued to support monitoring
mechanisms for the Agreement. There has been progress in the participation of women,
with six women now part of the Agreement Monitoring Committee.
Global travel restrictions imposed as part of the measures against the spread of
the pandemic have affected the Mission air operations. Limitations placed on the
rotations of air crews, specialized maintenance teams and the resupply of spare parts
have contributed to a reduction in the number of flight hours. MINUSMA has
prioritized air operations to ensure continued medical and casualty evacuation, as well
as quick-reaction capacity and support for priority missions. Limitations on air
operations have further increased the burden on the combat convoy companies to
ensure that the Mission’s bases are resupplied.

4/6

20-07156

S/2020/481

Troop rotations
To prevent the spread of COVID-19, new deployments and the rotation of
uniformed personnel were suspended at my request. On an exceptional basis, and with
the agreement of the Malian authorities, some critical rotations have taken place to
ensure business continuity. In those cases, quarantine measures prior to and af ter the
deployment were observed.
Coordination of security presences
The Instance de Coordination au Mali continued to serve as the main forum for
coordinating the activities of all security forces present in Mali. On 12 March, its
discussions were focused on the plan to transform the northern city of Ménaka into
an “arms-free” area. Monthly operational coordination meetings, which bring
together representatives of all security forces present in Mali at the staff level,
contributed to a marked improvement in coordination among the security forces.
Implementation of the integrated strategic framework and transition plan
The implementation of the integrated strategic framework continued to
contribute to a more coherent, resource-effective and integrated United Nations
response in Mali, including in the context of the legislative elections and in response
to the COVID-19 outbreak. The framework is fully aligned with national development
plans and the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework. It
remains an essential enabler and coordination tool to ensure a coordinated response
that leverages comparative advantages within the United Nations system.
During the legislative elections held on 19 March and 29 April, the Mission and
the country team provided integrated support to Malian authorities through the United
Nations integrated electoral team in Mali, co-led by MINUSMA and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and in collaboration with the U nited
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women).
MINUSMA provided political, technical, security and logistical support to national
and local authorities and distributed electoral materials in northern and central Mali.
UNDP helped the authorities by providing technical and financial assistance to the
election management bodies, civil society organizations and other stakeholders in the
electoral process. This included capacity-building activities, payment of some
electoral staff, funding of voter outreach activities, election-related conflict
prevention and mitigation and preventive measures against communicable diseases
during elections. In addition, MINUSMA, UNDP and UN-Women coordinated efforts
to promote the participation of women and young people in the electoral process,
which had a positive effect. Considerable efforts were made by the Mission and
UNDP in support of the Government to put in place preventive measures against the
spread of COVID-19 during the polls.
In central Mali, MINUSMA and the country team facilitated the return of 3,120
displaced persons to the Femaye commune in Djenne district through good offices
and inclusive community dialogue. MINUSMA, together with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNDP, the United Nations Children’s Fund,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Health
Organization and non-governmental organizations, developed an action plan to
address challenges faced by returnees, with a focus on security, protection, shelter,
health, water and sanitation.
MINUSMA has worked closely with the United Nations country team to ensure
an integrated response to the COVID-19 pandemic. A task force was established to
facilitate a coordinated response, and several projects were launched to assist national

20-07156

5/6

S/2020/481

and local authorities. MINUSMA, with technical support from the World Health
Organization, has redirected resources to help with three large-scale projects aimed
at reinforcing the capacities of the Ministry of Health and local authorities, by
procuring equipment and material to respond to the COVID-19 outbreak and to
prevent the virus from spreading further.
In collaboration with the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
European Union and UNDP, MINUSMA provided critical supplies to 21 tribunals and
34 prisons in Bamako and in the centre and north of Mali.
Following the transition workshop held in November 2019, the Mission and the
country team validated a transition calendar on 23 January. Considering the highly
complex and rapidly evolving political and security situation in Mali, the calendar is
focused on the implementation of the integrated strategic framework to ensure a more
coordinated United Nations response and strengthened capacity of partners in relevant
transition-related sectors. The calendar also includes the undertaking of a gendersensitive and human rights-sensitive conflict analysis to strengthen gender equality
in the long term and a study to identify the capacity of partners and areas to be
reinforced, with a view to an eventual transfer of tasks.
Possible long-term exit strategy for the Mission
The eventual withdrawal of MINUSMA should depend on the fulfilment of a set
of political and security conditions, including the full implementation of the
Agreement and the strengthening of national capacities and regional initiatives to
stabilize the situation in Mali and the Sahel region. As the Mission works to support
Malian parties and authorities in achieving these objectives, it is vital to continue to
assess developments on the ground and maintain the focus on the steps necessary to
achieve the ultimate targets.
The overarching objective should remain the creation of conditions for a more
stable and peaceful situation in Mali, with sufficient capacity for the State to defend
national territorial integrity and sovereignty and protect its civilians, thereby allowing
for the reconfiguration or withdrawal of the United Nations peacekeeping mission.
The full implementation of the Agreement is an important milestone in achieving a
successful transition. Other critical milestones include strengthening the capacity of
the State to protect its citizens, peacefully manage political disputes and provide basic
services and long-term development. There is no viable exit strategy without national
ownership. Its development will need to be based on constructive dialogue and
partnership between national authorities and the international community to address
priority peacebuilding needs and the underlying causes of recurring instability. As
outlined in my previous letter, any premature withdrawal of MINUSMA risks
reversing the hard-won gains made in Mali since the establishment of the Mission in
2013 and the considerable investments made by the international community since
then, with potentially devastating consequences for Mali and the Sahel region.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

6/6

20-07156
