United Nations

S/PV.6151

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6151st meeting
Friday, 26 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. İlkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Hernández-Milian
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Rogachev
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2009/277)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-38266 (E)

*0938266*

S/PV.6151

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

in the meeting, in accordance with the rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

Adoption of the agenda

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2009/277)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
the Czech Republic, Georgia, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Morocco,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 25 June
2009 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, in which he requests that the Senior
Political Affairs Adviser at the Office of the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
Mrs. Alice Mungwa, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mrs. Mungwa to take the seat reserved
for her at the side of the Council Chamber.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 16 June
2009 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2009/324 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Friday, 26 June 2009, regarding the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate

2

I invite Mr. Holmes to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/277, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. John Holmes.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council.
On this day in 1945, 50 States gathered in San
Francisco to sign the United Nations Charter in an
expression of their determination, in the words of the

09-38266

S/PV.6151

Preamble, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge and the untold sorrow of war and to ensure the
use of armed force only in the common interest.
That determination to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war remains unfulfilled in all too
many parts of the world. The sorrow and, I would add,
brutality of war continue to be felt by untold millions
of civilians, trapped by conflict or forced into flight. It
is precisely against them and their rights and interests
that armed force is so often used with devastating effect.
As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277) before the Council today makes clear, a
large part of the reason for that distressing state of
affairs lies in the fundamental failure of parties to
conflict, deliberately or otherwise, to respect and to
ensure respect for their obligations to protect civilians.
It is a failure that demands, in the words of the
Secretary-General, a reinvigorated commitment from
us all to the Council’s agenda on the protection of
civilians and to promoting respect for the principles of
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law.
In the last 10 years, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict has assumed a prominent place on the
Council’s agenda, as manifested in these regular open
debates, the Secretary-General’s periodic reports and
the four thematic Security Council resolutions on the
protection of civilians.
Most importantly, concern for the protection of
civilians has increasingly permeated the countryspecific deliberations and decisions of the Council.
Regular meetings of the Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians and the systematic application
of the revised aide-memoire — a published, userfriendly version of which has been distributed to the
Council this morning — should further enhance the
Council’s response to protection issues in a more
comprehensive and systematic way.
Yet, and as the five months since my last briefing
have once again shown (see S/PV.6066), the reality on
the ground has not changed in the same way at all. We
cannot be remotely satisfied with the situation that we
see in so many parts of the world today. Lip service to
the principles of international law is no substitute for
real action. And the latter is in sadly short supply.
Much greater efforts are required to enhance
compliance and, for that matter, accountability on the

09-38266

ground — that is to say, compliance by all parties to
conflict with the applicable law and with the demands
and decisions of the Council, and accountability for
those individuals and parties that fail in those respects.
The Secretary-General’s report sets out five core
challenges. The first is enhancing compliance by
parties to conflict with international humanitarian law
and human rights law, with particular concern over the
conduct of hostilities. The lack of compliance leads not
only to the death and injury of hundreds of civilians in
conflicts every week, but to the displacement of
thousands more. The word displacement does not do
justice to the reality — that is thousands of innocent
civilians forced every single week to flee attacks and
the destruction of their homes, their communities and
their livelihoods, and to fall into an existence marked
by danger, suffering and psychological anguish.
While the weapons have finally — and
thankfully — fallen silent in Sri Lanka, deaths of
civilians in places such as Somalia, Afghanistan and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo constantly
remind us of the urgent need for parties to conflict to
be much more scrupulous in their efforts to spare
civilians from the effects of hostilities.
In the Somali capital Mogadishu, for example,
the eruption last month of renewed hostilities between
forces aligned with the Transitional Federal Government
and non-State armed groups has been marked by the
bombing of civilian areas and street battles, with little
or no regard for the safety and security of the civilian
population. Since the first week of May, more than 200
civilians have been killed and over 800 wounded,
while some 160,000 people have fled their homes.
In Afghanistan, the number of civilians killed and
injured in the fighting continues to rise as the conflict
intensifies, particularly in the south.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan reports that 261 civilians were killed in
May alone. Anti-Government elements remain
responsible for the majority of these civilian deaths
through attacks on residential areas and schools, the
use of improvised explosive devices and, often,
targeted or otherwise reckless suicide attacks.
Suicide attacks and bombs left in public places
have become so commonplace, not just in Afghanistan
but also in such places as Iraq and Somalia, as to
warrant no longer the same degree of attention and

3

S/PV.6151

outrage as they once did. Yet their impact on civilians
is no less devastating, the responsibility of those who
orchestrate them no less grave, and the need for
systematic and effective condemnation from those in
positions of authority and influence, including religious
authorities, no less urgent.
Civilians continue to die in Afghanistan also as a
result of the actions of pro-Government forces,
particularly during air strikes. I welcome recent
statements from the incoming leadership of United
States and international armed forces in Afghanistan on
the need to reduce civilian casualties, review rules of
engagement and ensure their strict observance.
We will monitor such efforts closely, just as we
continue to carefully monitor the situation of the
civilian population in the North and South Kivu
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Since January, a wave of attacks on the civilian
population by the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda, including all too common acts of rape and
other forms of sexual violence, has driven more than
370,000 people from their homes.
Alarmingly, the allegations of violence and abuse
committed against civilians extend to members of the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo engaged in Operation Kimia II in South Kivu.
Elsewhere in the region, the Lord’s Resistance Army
continues to spread fear and death among the civilian
population, with frequent attacks and abductions in
Haut Uélé.
The choice of weapons is critical in minimizing
and reducing the impact of hostilities on civilians. We
have seen significant progress in efforts to address the
humanitarian impact of cluster munitions with the
adoption last year of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. Such progress is welcome, but there is a
broader concern, expressed in the report, at the
indiscriminate and severe humanitarian impact of
explosive weapons more generally, particularly when
used in densely populated areas, as we have seen in
recent conflicts. I join the Secretary-General in urging
Member States, in consultation with relevant United
Nations and other actors, to consider this issue further,
including addressing the widespread use of improvised
explosive devices in densely populated areas.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, the
Council has an important role to play in promoting
systematic compliance with the law in situations on its

4

agenda. This includes consistently condemning
violations, without exception, and demanding
compliance. It also includes the threat and application
of targeted measures in cases of non-compliance, and
requests for reports on violations and the mandating of
commissions of inquiry where concerns exist regarding
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law.
But the Council’s concern cannot be limited only
to those situations formally on its agenda. Even
conflicts that are not perceived by all Council members
to have implications for international peace and
security can have a dramatic impact on the protection
of civilians and can warrant Council action.
As I mentioned in my briefing in January (see
S/PV.6066), it is relatively straightforward, if not always
productive, for us to raise concerns over the conduct of
hostilities and other protection issues directly with
States and national armed forces. But, as humanitarians,
we cannot talk only to one side. We must be able to
engage and seek compliance by all parties to conflict,
including non-State armed groups — the second of the
five challenges identified in the report.
Unpalatable though this may be for some States,
the simple yet brutal reality is that the failure to engage
armed groups is always likely to mean more, not fewer,
civilians killed and wounded. It is essential also to
gaining access to those in need and to establishing a
safe and secure environment in which the activities of
humanitarian organizations are accepted and respected.
Various initiatives can and have been pursued to
this end. These include training and the conclusion of
special agreements or codes of conduct, through which
groups commit to comply with their obligations. As
recommended by the Secretary-General, as a first step
towards a more comprehensive approach to addressing
the actions of non-State armed groups, I would urge the
Council to convene an Arria formula meeting to discuss
the experience of United Nations and non-governmental
actors in engaging armed groups, and to help identify
additional measures that the Council and Member
States could take to improve their compliance.
The inclusion of protection activities in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and other
relevant missions has been a significant feature of the
Council’s efforts to improve protection on the ground.
From Sierra Leone in the past to the present-day
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan,

09-38266

S/PV.6151

peacekeeping operations have made and continue to
make important contributions to the safety and security
of civilians. The challenge now, as identified in the
report, is to maximize their impact by addressing the
disconnect between mandates, intentions, expectations,
interpretations and implementation capacity.

First is burdensome bureaucracy. Permissions and
travel notifications restrict the movement of
humanitarian actors, while customs and quotas on
goods stifle the flow of aid. The result is that those in
need do not receive the assistance they need when and
where they need it.

Practically, that means providing clear and
practical guidance to heads of missions and force
commanders on implementing protection mandates. It
means the development, on a more systematic basis, of
mission-specific protection strategies and the spread of
best-practice innovations. It also means, to paraphrase
resolution 1674 (2006), ensuring not only that
protection is prioritized in decisions concerning the use
of available capacity and resources, but more crucially
still that the capacity and resources provided are
genuinely appropriate for the task of protecting
civilians.

In Gaza, for example, the criteria used by the
Israeli authorities for allowing the import of goods
remain unpredictable. Medical supplies can be subject
to particularly long delays. Israel’s decision in March
of this year to allow the unrestricted entry of all
foodstuffs from Government-approved sources remains
unimplemented and, despite major shelter and
reconstruction needs following the hostilities earlier
this year, only a fraction of the required construction
materials have so far been allowed into Gaza.

These and other issues will be addressed in the
forthcoming independent study commissioned by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to be
completed this summer. Its recommendations for
improving the impact of protection mandates will be
shared with the Council.
Among the protection tasks assigned to
peacekeeping missions, creating conditions conducive
to the provision of humanitarian assistance has in many
cases been critical. It has, no doubt, helped save lives
in such places as Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan, but peacekeeping missions are
not present in all situations. Moreover, humanitarian
organizations should not need to rely on such missions
to help ensure their access to civilians in need. The
Council itself has called on all parties concerned,
including non-State actors and neighbouring States, to
cooperate fully with the United Nations in providing
safe, timely and unimpeded access to civilians in
armed conflict.
Yet, as detailed in the annex to the report, our
access to conflict-affected populations is too often
unsafe and not timely enough, and too frequently
impeded. Millions of vulnerable people are deprived of
assistance as a result. Enhancing access to those in
need is identified as the fourth challenge in the report.
Many factors interfere with access, but three
constraints are the most severe and most widespread.

09-38266

In the Sudan, the convening of the now-expanded
high-level committee represents significant progress
towards renewed cooperation to facilitate humanitarian
action in Darfur. The committee must now be
replicated at the State level in Darfur in order to
eliminate inconsistencies in implementation and
maximize aid effectiveness, especially given the
upcoming hunger gap and rainy season.
Secondly, all too often parties to conflict neglect
to ensure the well-being of conflict-affected populations
during intense hostilities, even when they need
emergency medical assistance. In Somalia, for
example, the renewed hostilities in Mogadishu have led
some humanitarian actors to cease activities in recent
weeks, including providing medical services for the
civilian population at a time when humanitarian needs
are significantly rising. It is critical that parties to
conflict allow and facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in such circumstances,
including through such operational measures as
de-conflicting arrangements, days of tranquillity, and
humanitarian pauses. They must also allow safe
passage to civilians seeking to flee zones of fighting.
The most abhorrent and worrying constraint on
access stems from violence against humanitarian
operations and staff themselves, which has steadily
increased over the past decade, including a sharp rise
in attacks affecting United Nations agencies since
2006. The year 2008 was the worst on record for all
humanitarian actors taken together.
I am currently particularly concerned for
humanitarian personnel in Afghanistan, Chad, the

5

S/PV.6151

Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia. The
dangers and deaths in Somalia and Afghanistan are
well known. Three local humanitarian workers with
non-governmental organizations were murdered earlier
this week in Afghanistan. In Chad, violent criminality
continues to impede humanitarian operations, including
situations where humanitarian convoys accompanied
by armed escorts have been caught in the crossfire. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, attacks on
humanitarian workers have averaged one every three
days since the start of 2009.
Such incidents are unfortunately not aberrations,
and they will not disappear without concerted action.
Humanitarian workers are targeted on occasion for
political reasons. Relief supplies and assets are viewed
as soft targets for criminal exploitation.
Critical in this regard is broadening the
understanding and acceptance among all actors, State
and non-State, of the purpose of independent, neutral
and impartial humanitarian action. The Council has an
important role to play in bringing this about. Possible
steps in particular situations include calling on parties
to allow and facilitate the provision of assistance, to
allow safe passage for civilians seeking to flee zones of
fighting, to conclude and implement agreements to
expedite the deployment of humanitarian staff and
assets and to condemn systematically acts of violence
targeting humanitarian workers.
Above all, the Council should ensure that
constraints on access have consequences for those that
impose them and not just those that suffer because of
them. That means, for example, applying targeted
sanctions against individuals obstructing access or
perpetrating attacks against staff, and even being ready
to refer situations involving the prolonged and wilful
impediment of relief, or attacks against humanitarian
workers, to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Just as constraints on access must have
consequences, so too must other violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law —
and with obvious good reason. It is to a large degree
the absence of accountability and, worse still, the
absence in many instances even of any expectation or
fear of accountability that allows violations to thrive.
Addressing this culture of impunity is the fifth
challenge identified in the report.
Ensuring accountability begins with training
combatants on the law, issuing manuals, orders and

6

instructions setting out their obligations and establishing
effective disciplinary measures to ensure their
observance. It includes adopting national legislation
for prosecuting genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and other serious violations of human rights
law. And it extends to ratification of the ICC Statute
and full cooperation with the Court and similar
mechanisms.
For the Council, it means insisting on such
cooperation and, if necessary, enforcing it through
targeted sanctions. And it means systematically requesting
reports on violations and mandating commissions of
inquiry to examine situations of concern.
In practical terms — in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example — this translates into
ensuring accountability for the seemingly endless and
appalling stream of acts of sexual violence attributable
to all parties. It also means that allegations of
violations committed by members of the Armed Forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC),
including but not only in the context of Operation
Kimia II, be investigated and their perpetrators held to
account. The establishment by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo of a rapid response and early warning cell to
collect information on cases of ill-discipline and
human rights violations committed by the FARDC is a
welcome step, but in the meantime the FARDC must
redouble its efforts to instil discipline and respect for
the law into its troops.
In Afghanistan, accountability means prompt and
credible investigations into air strikes and other
incidents causing the death or injury of civilians or
damage to civilian property, with adequate and timely
information provided on the outcome of investigations
and payments made to those affected. And in situations
like that of Sri Lanka, it means key members of the
international community and this Council supporting
international calls for an independent investigation into
alleged violations committed during the hostilities.
Accountability also means reparations. I would
urge the Council to call on States to establish, or itself
to mandate, in relevant contexts, mechanisms to
receive claims alleging violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
The last 10 years have provided us with a
tantalizing sense of the potential of the agenda on the

09-38266

S/PV.6151

protection of civilians. We now have to realize that
potential by meeting these five core challenges.
We will consult with Member States on further
possible steps to make the most of the tools at the
Council’s disposal in advance of the next debate on
protection of civilians, in November, which will mark
the tenth anniversary of the Council’s consideration of
the protection of civilians as a thematic issue.
Ultimately, the aim must be to enhance compliance and
accountability, not just in respect of the law but also,
crucially, in respect of the demands and decisions of
this Council. The Council’s willingness and ability to
uphold and enforce its own demands and decisions is
inevitably the real test of its commitment to the
protection of civilians.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes, in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the
texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. We have 49 speakers
who wish to take the floor today.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Mr. President, at the outset
I wish to thank you and the Turkish presidency for
organizing this debate on the protection of civilians
during armed conflict. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
John Holmes for his important briefing.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later by the
representative of the Czech Republic. I should like here
to make some specific points.
Battles of the past were largely conducted on
battle fields. The middle of the last century marked a
turning point in the nature of contemporary conflict,
especially as it relates to civilians. The last century
witnessed such distressing phenomena as ethnic
cleansing, crimes against humanity and genocide, for
which we unfortunately have too many examples.
These abhorrent practices, this new manner of waging
war, are something that the international community
must continue to address, for complacency in tackling
this challenge may well equal complicity.

09-38266

As a point of departure we would like to highlight
once again the Geneva Conventions, which lie at the
core of international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians. This Council has on numerous
occasions reaffirmed its commitment to protect those
most vulnerable in armed conflict and has repeatedly
condemned systematic and widespread violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, most
recently in our January debate on this very issue. The
revised aide-memoire adopted at that time
(S/PRST/2009/1, annex) provides valuable guidance
for Council action, integrating the many different
aspects of the protection of civilians.
There continues to be a humanitarian imperative
that all States be bound by the very real need to reduce
human costs in armed conflict, in particular the
imperative to uphold the rights of civilians. The
Council can and has pronounced itself on these issues
and can impose targeted measures and individual
sanctions against individuals responsible for grievous
violations of humanitarian law and human rights.
Recent
normative
and
methodological
advancements have allowed us to increasingly bring to
light the plight of women and children, especially
young girls, in armed conflict, as well as to address
certain types of weapons. Yet despite the advances
made in implementing international humanitarian law
and the work being done by a plethora of actors on
these issues, Croatia is concerned by the heavy toll that
civilians in many conflict areas around the world
civilians continue to bear. This year alone, our
discussions on this subject have been held against the
distressing backdrop of the suffering of civilians in
such places as the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Gaza and the Sudan.
In situations where prevention has failed, national
Governments need to be held accountable for arresting
and prosecuting those who have committed grave
crimes, as the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with the parties to an armed conflict. If
Governments fail to investigate, prosecute and
adequately punish violations of international
humanitarian law committed by members of their own
armed forces or committed on their territory, recourse
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) can and
should be considered. That is where the Security
Council can play an important role, as it did by
referring the situation in Darfur to the ICC.

7

S/PV.6151

Last year, at the open debate on the protection of
civilians, Croatia called for more consistent attention
from the Security Council on this issue. We have been
pleased to find that, over the past year, important
progress has been made. The Council agreed to
negotiate the expansion of triggers in the area of
children in armed conflicts and adopted resolution
1820 (2008) on sexual violence in armed conflict.
We look forward to the upcoming report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
1820 (2008). We also look forward to the issuance of
the study undertaken by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on how United Nations
missions can contribute more to the protection of
civilians. While we acknowledge that many
peacekeeping operations have strong provisions in
their mandates on the protection of civilians — which
we salute — and often act in close cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, UNICEF and the Office of the High
Commissioner on Human Rights on the ground, more
attention needs to be given to the implementation of
these provisions, including to possible lessons learned
from a variety of situations.
Croatia is concerned about reported cases where
Governments or armed groups are denying access to
humanitarian assistance. Preventing food and other
supplies from reaching civilians, especially children,
desperately waiting for assistance has in many cases
developed into another deplorable method of war. We
strongly condemn attacks on humanitarian personnel
and we urge all parties to conflict to ensure their safety.
When we talk about civilians in armed conflict,
let us not forget that many of them have ended up with
disabilities, both physical and psychological. We
should intensify our efforts to help them live a
dignified life, especially during the delicate time of
post-conflict peacebuilding.
We are on a good path towards addressing the
many challenges that still lie ahead of us. We have a
good basis and practice on which we can build,
including on how to be more systematic in our
approaches to protection issues. When we make
decisions and adopt resolutions in this Council, we
should therefore also ask ourselves what impact they
will have on civilians on the ground. Let us use the
power we have in order to be advocates for those who

8

have no voice. In the end, that is the best legacy we can
leave both for them and ourselves.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): On 14 January,
in this Chamber, the Security Council held an open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Fewer than six months have passed since then. Our
presence here today to discuss the same topic for the
second time within such a short span is clear evidence
of the importance of this topic. I therefore thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/277) and Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his briefing.
Joining all members of the Council in celebrating
the tenth anniversary of the Security Council’s first
consideration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as a thematic issue, my delegation commends
the progress recorded so far thanks to the aggregate
endeavours of all stakeholders, particularly those
women and men of United Nations missions dispatched
to the field to contribute to lessening the suffering of
civilians in certain parts of the world.
We are, however, deeply concerned about the
persistent and pervasive violations as well as the
increasing indiscriminate and excessive use of force
against civilians in conflict situations. We continue to
be disturbed by the growing number of deaths and
injuries inflicted upon civilian populations. We also
continue to be preoccupied by the widespread
displacement of civilians in most conflicts and by the
threat that it could provoke another conflict as a
consequence of the resulting social tension and a
myriad of problems for the host location. While aware
of the many reasons that have been put forward to
explain this situation, we are convinced that the most
visible and undeniable reason is the common failure to
comply with international law, especially international
human rights and humanitarian law, as well as the
common failure to ensure humanitarian access for
civilians, especially access to food, fuel and medical
treatment, as clearly mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report and its annex.
In this regard, my delegation should have liked to
see the situations of civilians in armed conflict
presented in a more structural manner in the report.
Supported by the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/PRST/2009/1, annex) and
with more weight given to analysing the situation on

09-38266

S/PV.6151

the ground, a more structural report would provide a
better foundation for more adequate, timely and
convincing recommendations.
As it has in all Security Council debates and
other meetings on this topic, my delegation reiterates
Viet Nam’s consistent view that the State must bear the
primary responsibility for protecting its civilians and
that, as the largest and most representative organization
of States, the United Nations system has a critical role
to play, particularly in political mediation, peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian and development
assistance.
In this regard, and given the comprehensive
nature of any feasible solution, we wish to underline
the imperative to enhance coordination among United
Nations bodies — above all the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and all United Nations
field missions — in responding to the needs of civilians
in armed conflict, not only in physical security terms,
but in political and socio-economic terms as well.
Reality has proved that, while possibly effective
in certain cases, dialogue with non-State armed groups
must be carefully considered and approached in the
overall framework of cooperation with the States in
question in order to avoid the unintended legitimization
of illegal or even internationally recognized terrorist
groups. Similarly, to end impunity, as called for in
resolution 1674 (2006), we support, inter alia, the
implementation of justice and reconciliation mechanisms,
including national, international and mixed criminal
courts and tribunals and truth and reconciliation
commissions, as appropriate. Nonetheless, we believe
that the referral of situations to international criminal
courts or similar mechanisms should be considered on
a case-by-case basis to avoid the risk of infringement
of national sovereignty resulting from generalization.
Furthermore, having attended informal meetings
of the Expert Group and benefited in certain measures
from the information provided by OCHA before the
renewal of the mandate of some United Nations
missions, my delegation remains affirmative in its view
that the establishment of any new mechanism within
the Security Council must be thoroughly studied before
a decision is made in order to avoid operational and

09-38266

institutional duplication, as well as financial implications.
This approach is all the more necessary in the context
of the ongoing United Nations reform to improve the
efficiency of each and every United Nations body,
including the Security Council.
Recalling the six reports considered by this
Council, which contain more than 100 recommendations,
and the eight presidential statements adopted by this
Council over the past 10 years on this issue, I wish to
conclude by joining the Secretary-General in calling
for greater focus on the effective, actual translation of
these documents into improvements in the protection of
civilians on the ground so that civilians can eventually
be truly freed from the scourge of armed conflicts
mushrooming in many parts of the world in this
twenty-first century.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening this debate,
which comes at a time when the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts is assuming particular importance.
Although the obligations stemming from international
instruments on international humanitarian law, human
rights and refugee law are well known, the scope and
impact of conflicts continue to have serious effects on
people in various regions of the world.
We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his statement and introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277). We also
appreciate the document from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs that has been
issued today.
The number and complexity of current conflicts,
the lack of respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law and the use of ever more
sophisticated weapons that have indiscriminate effects
on civilian populations have all served to increase the
challenges facing the Security Council. They also
constitute the backdrop against which to evaluate the
results obtained in implementing the recommendations
that have been made in the 10 years that this item has
been on the Council’s agenda. Unfortunately, the
catalogue of acts of aggression of various kinds from
which civilians suffer has become part of our daily
lives. The diverse nature of the situations that have
been mentioned today is also something that the
Council should respond to appropriately.
Mexico expresses its concern about the fact that
in recent conflicts the parties involved have made

9

S/PV.6151

illegal and excessive use of force and have used
weapons that have been prohibited under international
humanitarian law. My delegation would like to reiterate
the importance of the principles pertaining to
distinguishing between civilian and military targets, to
proportionality and to the prohibition of indiscriminate
attacks and of certain weapons. We should recall once
again that we have an obligation to abide by and
enforce international humanitarian law, as established
in the 1949 Geneva Conventions.
The lack of access to humanitarian assistance, the
use of cluster munitions and the availability of small
arms, as well as the right to housing, land and property,
are just some of the challenges that require concrete
action, given their pernicious effects in the proliferation
of armed conflicts and in the toll in innocent lives.
We once again call on the Members of the
Organization to take every necessary measure to
facilitate and guarantee the safe, unobstructed and
timely delivery of humanitarian assistance to people
affected by conflict. In that regard, we recall the
relevance of resolution 1502 (2003), for which Mexico
advocated, on the protection of United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones.
We join the Secretary-General in calling on States
that have not yet done so to ratify without delay the
Convention on Cluster Munitions and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction.
Given the negative effects of the excessive
availability of small arms and light weapons in
exacerbating conflicts, Mexico would like to reiterate
its commitment to honour and promote the
implementation of Security Council arms embargoes.
We urge States to honour their commitments under the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as those
under the relevant regional conventions in that regard.
With regard to the issue of housing, land and real
property, we should strengthen the Council’s
commitment to ensure that refugees and internally
displaced persons are able to freely return to their
homes in safety.

10

As the guarantor of international peace and
security, the Security Council has the obligation to take
every measure necessary against those who commit
any violation that threatens or severely endangers
civilians during armed conflict. Mexico believes that
Council resolutions on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict should be grounded in the norms and
principles of international humanitarian law. That will
make it possible to strengthen and further develop that
body of norms. It would also confer greater legitimacy
on the decisions and actions of the Council.
My delegation acknowledges the efforts by the
international community to strengthen international
humanitarian law, as exemplified by the initiative
launched by the Government of Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to draw up
the Montreux Document on pertinent international
legal obligations and good practices for States related
to operations of private military and security companies
during armed conflict. Those initiatives contribute to a
better understanding about the participation of
non-State and non-traditional actors in armed conflict.
In the first few months of its participation in the
Security Council, Mexico has endeavoured to adhere to
the principles underpinning this issue and to contribute
to developing agreements conducive to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
With regard to the humanitarian crisis in Sri
Lanka, we encouraged the Government’s efforts to
protect civilians and persons displaced by the conflict.
We also called on the parties to always respect
international humanitarian law. Furthermore, we
repeatedly called on the Government to coordinate its
efforts with those of the United Nations agencies in
order to evacuate the people trapped by the conflict, as
well as to ensure the best possible accommodation and
conditions for displaced persons in dignified and safe
facilities in which they could receive basic
humanitarian assistance, including appropriate care in
hospitals. Although the military part of the conflict has
come to an end, various sources have mentioned grave
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights norms committed by the
parties that warrant investigation by an independent
commission. Accounting for what has happened is not
merely about justice, it is also a necessary step in
facilitating the process of national reconciliation in
every society emerging from conflict.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

With regard to the situation in the Middle East,
we have underscored that all parties should constantly
abide by the provisions of international humanitarian
law, honour their international obligations and avoid
actions that may put civilians in danger. Since the end
of the crisis in Gaza at the beginning of this year,
Mexico has emphasized the need to put in place an
international monitoring mechanism to ensure a lasting
ceasefire, the opening of the border crossings, an end
to the illicit trafficking in weapons and humanitarian
assistance to the population.
The situations that I have just referred to, as well
the others that have been mentioned today, illustrate
that the responsibility to protect — a principle adopted
by the General Assembly in 2005 — is not an abstract
concept but rather one whose real value we can
appreciate when we face crisis situations. Let us not
fall into an endless theoretical debate while reality
outpaces our Organization’s capacity to act.
We should bear in mind that violations of the
norms and basic principles of international humanitarian
law constitute war crimes, and that it is the Member
States who bear the primary responsibility to investigate
and prosecute those allegedly responsible for them.
Transparency and accountability acquire an essential
prime significance when it comes to protecting civilians
in armed conflict. Should States lack the capacity or
willingness to prosecute alleged perpetrators, the
International Criminal Court has the jurisdiction to
take up such crimes, as set forth in the Rome Statute.
In the case of Darfur, following the presentation
of the report of the Prosecutor early this month, we
underscored that it was unacceptable that hundreds of
thousands of individuals have been murdered, raped or
forcibly displaced without access to basic humanitarian
assistance. Mexico has repeatedly affirmed that the
decision of the Government of the Sudan, in response
to the Court’s decision in March, to expel humanitarian
organizations that were providing humanitarian
assistance was unfortunate, to say the least. It has only
increased the harmful consequences for the civilian
population in Darfur.
To conclude, Mexico reiterates the urgent need
for all parties to conflict to put an end to flagrant
violations against civilian populations. It is essential
that the international community focus its attention on
the prevention of conflicts and the promotion of a
culture of respect for the principles and norms that

09-38266

enshrine the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and the eradication of impunity. The report of the
Secretary-General and the aide-memoire submitted by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
are an excellent foundation for our future work in this
area.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for preparing his report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277). I
am also deeply grateful to Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for his briefing.
Substantial progress has been made on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict since the first
debate of the Council on this subject 10 years ago. The
Council has since produced a number of wellestablished normative frameworks, including one that
was laid out in resolution 1674 (2006). As a result,
awareness has been raised among Member States and
the Council has adopted a growing number of decisions
related to this issue to advance the cause in countryspecific deliberations.
We welcome the recently adopted practice of
convening a meeting of the Security Council Expert
Group on the Protection of Civilians to receive a
briefing from the Secretariat on up-to-date and detailed
information on the protection of civilians prior to
consultations on the mandates of specific peacekeeping
missions. All Council members should take full
advantage of these briefings.
What is most important now is to put those
established normative frameworks into practice.
Despite the progress to date, we have grave concerns
about ongoing civilian casualties all over the world, be
they civilians, journalists or humanitarian workers. We
cannot accept child soldiers, sexual violence or any of
the other violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law that take place somewhere in the
world every day. We have to redouble our efforts.
Today, I would like to highlight three points.
First of all, we should emphasize that it is States
that have the primary responsibility to enhance
compliance with international law and to protect
civilians. At the same time, we need to address the
serious impact that non-State groups are having. We
are appalled by the use of civilians as human shields
by, for instance, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam,
and deliberate attacks on civilians by the Lord’s
Resistance Army. Non-State armed groups often

11

S/PV.6151

deliberately use civilians to attain their political and
military ends, and fighting inevitably produces civilian
casualties.
It is essential to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law by non-State actors as
well. We believe that the protection of civilians should
be a priority in any conflict situation, be it a civil war
or an anti-terrorist operation. At the same time, we
recognize the legitimate right of sovereign Governments
to combat illegal armed groups and terrorist
organizations.
It is not always easy to attain the two objectives
at the same time: on one hand, to fight against a rebel
group or terrorist organization and, on the other, to
protect civilians and minimize casualties. But both
objectives must be pursued simultaneously to the
fullest extent. The international community, in
particular the Security Council, needs to discuss in
depth how to achieve both objectives and, particularly,
how to ensure humanitarian access and compliance
with international humanitarian law by non-State
armed groups. There are suggestions in the report of
the Secretary-General, and we can start from there.
The second issue is the mandate of peacekeeping
operations. Protecting civilians is an effective way to
contribute to social stability and prevent the recurrence
of a conflict. The Council has therefore mandated
many peacekeeping operations to protect civilians.
However, as the report makes clear, a substantial
gap exists between the high expectations placed on a
mission to carry out the mandate when the Security
Council takes a decision and the actual implementation
on the ground of those mandates. The Council needs to
address this discrepancy in all its aspects, including
mandate formation, mission planning, human and
financial resources, necessary equipment, standards of
operation and rules of engagement.
The Working Group of the Whole on United
Nations
Peacekeeping
Operations,
under
my
chairmanship, has committed to address these issues
through discussions with troop-contributing countries,
police-contributing countries, major financial contributing
countries and other major stakeholders. The Working
Group will make every effort to formulate concrete
measures that will facilitate improving operational
capacity to implement complex mandates. I urge
members to extend their full cooperation so that the
Group may complete its task on time.

12

The independent study on the protection of
civilians commissioned in the Secretariat by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will also
attempt to address these issues, and we look forward to
its findings.
The third point is the human security perspective.
I would like to emphasize how important it is for the
protection of civilians that we work to empower
individuals and communities to prevent the recurrence
of a conflict. Empowerment is vitally important if
vulnerable people, such as refugees and internally
displaced persons, are to be able to stand on their feet
again and begin to rebuild their lives.
Empowerment is at the very core of human
security, which the Friends of Human Security, under
the co-chairsmanships of Mexico and Japan, have been
promoting. I am very grateful for the commitment of
Ambassador Heller on this. Appropriate assistance for
empowerment, such as income-generating activities,
education and health services, are key components in
protecting civilians and ensuring human security.
Through the Friends of Human Security, we will
continue to make every effort to operationalize this
approach in the activities of the United Nations. We
believe that doing so will provide added value so that
civilians are properly protected irrespective of their
legal status when they find themselves caught in the
midst of conflict.
In conclusion, Japan supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General. We
attach importance to the briefings of the Expert Group
and to applying the revised aide-memoire to review
mission standards. It is my conviction that we should
measure the progress in meeting our common
challenge not by the number of documents or analyses
that we prepare, but by the number of lives we can save
and the people we protect on the ground. The Security
Council is responsible for considering specific action
based on the information and recommendations
presented to us. The Council must monitor closely and
ensure the implementation of any decision it has taken.
To that end, we are ready to consult with other Member
States and the Secretariat.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the holding of this
debate. We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes for his briefing.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Council’s first discussion of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. For the past decade, the international
community has focused increasing attention on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and the
Council has adopted numerous resolutions and
presidential statements in this regard.
However, in today’s world, there are still large
numbers of civilians who find themselves harmed and
affected by armed conflict. The international
community therefore still faces a long and arduous task
in protecting civilians. We are deeply concerned about
the threats posed by armed conflict to the lives and
property of civilians. We urge all parties to conflict to
respect international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions of the Council by protecting the lives,
property and legitimate interests of civilians.
The Council, as the nucleus of the United Nations
collective security mechanism bears the main
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The protection of civilians should
be addressed comprehensively within the larger
framework of a political process aimed at the peaceful
resolution of conflict. It is important to tackle this
problem upstream and to do everything we can to
prevent and reduce the number of conflicts in order to
eliminate the harm to civilians caused by armed conflict.
Responsibility for the protection of civilians falls
first and foremost on national Governments. The
international community and external organizations
may provide constructive assistance. However, while
doing so they must abide by the relevant provisions of
the United Nations Charter and fully respect the will of
the countries concerned and their sovereignty and
territorial integrity. They must do all they can to avoid
wilful intervention in that regard. When it comes to
fighting impunity and achieving justice, we are in
favour of granting an important role to national courts
and tribunals as the main avenue to achieving that goal.
The Council has an active role to play with regard
to advancing the call for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. However, China has never been in
favour of the Council resorting to the use of or
threatening the use of sanctions at every turn. Special
care must be taken in particular when addressing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It must be
reemphasized that national Governments have the right
to take law enforcement action to fight terrorists,

09-38266

extremists and separatists in their territory, in order to
safeguard their own and the region’s security, peace
and stability.
Law enforcement action taken by national
Governments in the fight against terrorism has nothing
to do with armed conflict. Therefore, the international
community may not take steps to limit or intervene in
the legitimate law enforcement actions of national
Governments, based on the pretext of the protection of
civilians.
The majority of conflicts take place in the
underdeveloped regions of the world. One of the many
and varied causes of armed conflict is poverty and the
accumulated lack of progress in economic development.
The United Nations has an important role to play in
mobilizing international resources and providing
financial and technical assistance to the countries
concerned.
When it comes to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, we must not rely solely on the efforts
of the Council. The General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and regional organizations
should play their respective roles in helping to develop
national economies, resolving conflict and protecting
civilians. China also welcomes the active involvement
by non-governmental organizations in that regard.
China is ready to work together with other members of
the international community to achieve concrete results
on the protection of civilians through pragmatic and
effective efforts.
Mr. Hernández-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): It an honour for Costa Rica to speak today in
its capacity as the Chair of the Human Security
Network and on behalf of the following members:
Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand, Slovenia and
South Africa as an observer.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the priorities of the Human Security Network
and we would like to thank the Turkish presidency of
the Security Council for the organization of this
important debate. I also thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs for his presentation
today and welcome the submission of the report
(S/2009/277) of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians and its annex on constraints on
humanitarian access.

13

S/PV.6151

It has been almost 10 years since the first
peacekeeping operation was given an explicit mandate
on the protection of civilians in Sierra Leone. At this
tenth anniversary, we have accumulated important
achievements and established a comprehensive
framework in the Security Council. It is comprised of
four thematic resolutions on the protection of civilians,
as well as other milestone resolutions, including 1325
(2000), 1612 (2005) and 1820 (2008), which refer to
the protection of specific groups such as women and
children. At the country-specific level there has been
also significant progress. Today almost all peacekeeping
missions have protection-related activities. There are
currently eight missions mandated with the specific
task of providing physical protection.
In addition to that, we have entered into a new
era of multidimensional peacekeeping operations with
large civilian components including human rights
verification, humanitarian relief, capacity-building,
restoration of infrastructure and services, security
sector reform and others. As the report clearly states,
“Protection of civilians is not a military task alone”
(S/2009/277, para. 53). We share that view and believe
that a comprehensive approach and inclusive protection
strategies are the most effective ways to address and to
respond to human security threats to civilian
populations in armed conflict.
However, despite the increased attention by the
Council, the prevalence of civilian casualties and the
number of people affected by armed conflict are still
overwhelming. The changing nature of conflict and the
complexity of protecting the safety, dignity and
integrity of individuals during armed conflict continue
to pose new challenges to our collective response.
Costa Rica is deeply concerned about the
recurrent attacks against camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons, as well as against
humanitarian workers; the use of sexual violence and
forced displacement as tactics of war; the prevalence of
child recruitment; the proliferation of illicit trafficking
and misuse of small arms and light weapons; as well as
the danger posed by anti-personnel mines and the
explosive remnants of war. We also deplore the
continued targeting of civilians in many parts of the
world, the indiscriminate use of force and the use of
civilian populations as human shields.
All parties to a conflict must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, in

14

particular the principle of proportionality and the
principle of distinction between civilian targets and
military objectives. Furthermore, we call upon all
parties to armed conflict to exercise maximum restraint
in the use of force, including the choice of weapons, in
order to minimize the impact of hostilities on civilians.
The Security Council is called upon to play an
important role in ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law and compliance by all parties to an
armed conflict. It must respond firmly, systematically,
consistently and promptly to prevent violations of
international law and to protect civilian populations in
all situations without distinction. That also includes
creating the conditions conducive to rapid and
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance while
ensuring the safety of humanitarian personnel.
We also recognize the importance of including
the protection of civilians as a component of
peacekeeping mandates, as well as clear guidelines and
rules of engagement for their effective implementation,
without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the
host Government to protect civilians. More substantial
interaction between the Security Council, the
Secretariat, the host country and the troop-contributing
countries can also contribute to bridging the gap
between the decision-making process and actual
implementation on the ground.
In addition, it is also fundamental to address other
major constraints faced by peacekeeping operations
such as resources, equipment and pre-deployment
training. We look forward to reviewing and discussing
the findings of the upcoming and soon-to-be-published
independent study of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the implementation of
protection of civilians mandates in peacekeeping
operations.
The respect for and implementation of
international humanitarian law are inextricably linked
with the fight against impunity. Ending impunity for
violations of applicable international humanitarian law
and human rights law should be viewed as part of a
comprehensive approach to the quest for sustainable
peace, justice, truth and national reconciliation. There
must be a concerted effort to cooperate with national
judicial systems in order to build their capacity and to
ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice and
prosecuted in conformity with international standards.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

Restoring the rule of law, security sector reform
and transitional justice mechanisms are also key areas
in which national systems should be strengthened and
supported through enhanced international cooperation.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) and various
“mixed” courts and tribunals play an important
complementary role in prosecuting persons suspected
of international crimes. It is of the utmost importance
that national and international criminal justice
institutions receive all necessary support on the ground.
The Human Security Network takes note with
interest of the January 2009 establishment of the
Security Council Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians and the recommendations made in the
Secretary-General’s report to hold regular meetings of
the Group in advance of the establishment or renewal
of peacekeeping mandates.
As I said at the outset, this year marks the tenth
anniversary of the inclusion of the theme of the
protection of civilians on the Security Council agenda.
The Human Security Network supports the call made
by the Secretary-General in his report to seize the
opportunity of the open debate in November to
reinvigorate the Council’s commitment to the protection
of civilians.
I would like to conclude by making also a few
remarks in my national capacity on two issues that we
consider fundamental for more effective protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict.
First, with regard to the challenge of ensuring
compliance with international humanitarian law by
non-State armed groups, we believe it is necessary that
affected States allow a more systematic protection
dialogue between humanitarian organizations and such
groups. We are aware that such dialogue depends on
the military reality on the ground, that it cannot
prejudge the legal status of the non-State parties
involved in these situations and that it must be in
accordance with the core humanitarian principles of
impartiality, humanity, neutrality and independence.
However, we believe that the conclusion of special
agreements or arrangements such as humanitarian
zones, humanitarian corridors or days of tranquillity is
crucial to reduce the number of civilian casualties and
people affected by the conduct of hostilities.
In addition, promoting understanding of the
responsibilities of armed groups towards civilians and
seeking their adherence to those responsibilities are

09-38266

elements that are important for the success of
protection strategies in many conflict situations. The
vast experience of humanitarian organizations, such as
the International Committee of the Red Cross, in
engaging with various armed groups, has demonstrated
the potential benefits of such a dialogue for the civilian
population. In this regard, as suggested in the report of
the Secretary-General, we support the organization of
an Arria formula meeting to discuss the experience of
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations,
as a first step towards developing a more comprehensive
approach towards non-State armed groups.
Finally, I want to stress the need to improve the
early warning and rapid response capacity of the
Security Council with respect to any situation that
could represent an imminent danger to the safety,
security and well-being of civilian populations. We
agree with the report that pre-emptive action can
significantly contribute to that end and that the Council
should make use of all the tools at its disposal,
including punitive measures, to prevent the escalation
of hostilities in situations such as the recent crises in
Gaza and Sri Lanka. The Council’s credibility depends
on its willingness to give equal treatment to the
protection of civilians in all situations, even those not
formally included in the Council’s agenda.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for this
opportunity to address once again the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome
the Secretariat’s ongoing commitment to this matter,
and in that regard I thank Mr. John Holmes for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277) and, in particular, for the tireless work of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), in particular its work on the ground to help
the victims of disasters and catastrophes.
France endorses the statement to be made by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.
We have just marked the 150th anniversary of the
Red Cross and will soon be commemorating the
sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. Yet
despite the commitment of the international community
and the mobilization of the Security Council, violations
of international humanitarian law are increasing in
number and in gravity.

15

S/PV.6151

For France, respect for international humanitarian
law is not negotiable. As President Sarkozy recalled on
4 May, on the ninetieth anniversary of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies,
all parties to armed conflict, States and armed groups
alike, must respect such law. That obligation is not
subordinate to the imperatives of combating terrorism;
nor is it conditional on respect for such law by other
parties. We reaffirmed that principle at the time of the
offensive of the Sri Lankan army against the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam, as we do with respect to the
fight against terrorist and extremist movements in
Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Philippines. The Council
could and should intervene more strongly to translate
that principle into reality.
By calling for the 29 January debate on respect
for international humanitarian law, France wished to
initiate a process. We are pleased today that the
Secretary-General has decided to consult with members
of the Security Council with a view to making
recommendations for action at our next open debate on
the subject.
Protection mandates for peacekeeping operations
clearly are among the means for action at the Council’s
disposal. In the most recent review of the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
protection of civilians was given top priority for the
Mission. Since then, the Mission has made efforts to
carry out that task more effectively, by seeking greater
mobility and scope for reaction by its troops, deploying
joint military-civilian protection units and establishing
pilot rapid response projects. It has set up a high-level
human rights protection team. If such measures prove
satisfactory, they could be extended to other United
Nations missions.
In Southern Sudan, we call on the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) to continue and expand
its efforts to prevent ethnic confrontation and, when it
arises, to minimize its consequences. I join our Japanese
colleague in recalling that the responsibility to protect
civilians lies first and foremost with Government
authorities. A peacekeeping operation can act when it
those authorities fail to do so or it can support their
action, but that by no means diminishes the primary
responsibility of the States that host such operations.
We welcome progress in the joint study
commissioned by OCHA and the Department of

16

Peacekeeping Operations on the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations. We participated in financing
it. We hope that the outcome will be presented to the
Security Council and that it will be followed up in the
more general context of our deliberations on
peacekeeping missions.
Protection of civilians is a crucial element of the
initiative we have launched jointly with the United
Kingdom. Preliminary work is under way in the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Takasu of Japan, to help
us better understand the difficulties in implementing
complex mandates. An initial progress report on the
French-United Kingdom initiative should be issued in
August.
Never have so many humanitarian personnel been
deployed on the ground, yet never have there been so
many constraints on their activities. States have the
responsibility to ensure safe and unimpeded access for
humanitarian personnel, international organizations
and non-governmental organizations and for their
supplies and equipment. We welcome the inclusion in
the report of the Secretary-General of an annex on
constraints on humanitarian access. We hope that in
future reports that general annex will be supplemented
with information on country-specific situations. We
reiterate our request that such reports deal specifically
and in a detailed manner with the question of
protection of civilians.
We welcome the meeting of the Expert Group on
the Protection of Civilians in Côte d’Ivoire, Afghanistan
and the Sudan. There will soon be a discussion on the
adequacy of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for the protection
needs in Darfur. In order to make effective use of the
aide-memoire (S/PRST/2009/1, annex) on the protection
of civilians that we adopted in January, the Expert
Group must monitor the growing needs of civilians on
the ground on a more regular basis during the mandate.
Its discussions must also be held sufficiently in
advance of the negotiations drawing up the mandates,
so that the conclusions can be integrated into them.
Lastly, women and children deserve special
attention. The Security Council Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians could broach the issue of
follow-up of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008) in order to ensure better
implementation on the ground.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

Effective protection of civilians clearly entails a
resolute fight against the culture of impunity. The
allegations of violations of the international
humanitarian law must be the subject of an impartial
and independent inquiry. Those investigations should
involve all parties. The Gaza conflict showed that. In
that region of the world, as elsewhere, all civilians,
whether Palestinian, Israeli or other, must be protected.
States must try and punish those who violate
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In the Republic of the Congo, for example, that means
in-depth reform of the security, legal and prison
systems. Failing that, international criminal law must
be able to try the most serious crimes, and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s cooperation in
that regard is exemplary.
France calls on all States to adhere to the Rome
Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court. Arms and submunitions do unacceptable damage
to civilian populations. A draft law is being considered
by the French Parliament to authorize the ratification
of the convention adopted in Oslo. France is also at the
forefront of the movement to attain a robust and
binding arms trade treaty that will take full account of
the requirements of international humanitarian law.
To conclude, I would like to underscore that,
while the General Assembly prepares to debate the
responsibility to protect, it is urgent to make that
concept operational. It is an ambitious concept, and it
is not solely a matter of the Security Council
intervening in mid-crisis to stop the most atrocious
crimes, which we are all, of course, determined to do.
Above all, we must act in advance to avert those
crimes and to strengthen the early-warning and
monitoring systems in the risk areas. France will not
spare its efforts to achieve a consensus on that point in
the next few months.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
the report (S/2009/277) and to Mr. Holmes for the
updated information on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The Council has now been considering the topic
for 10 years. In that time, we have managed to make
considerable progress in the humanitarian sphere, but,
unfortunately, as was noted in the report, the civilian
population still suffers the majority of the casualties in
conflicts, and that fact remains a burning issue for the

09-38266

international community. We are convinced that, to
correct the situation, we need in particular to refrain
from selective approaches to violations of international
humanitarian law and to adhere to a strict observance
of the lawful norms of protection.
We fully agree with the conclusions of the
Secretary-General on the increased danger for the
civilian population of the violation of the requirements
of selective and proportionate use of force and on the
need to condemn such breaches without exception. A
sad example in that regard, was the death of some 150
civilians, most of whom were women and children, in
Afghanistan as a result of air strikes by foreign forces
on a populated area in May this year. Clearly, the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
did not learn its lesson from the sad statistics on the
death of more than 800 Afghan civilians in 2008. We
support a careful investigation of such incidents and
punishment of the perpetrators. We call on the interested
parties to inform the Security Council of their efforts.
We emphasize the responsibility of all parties,
including foreign forces, to ensure the security of
civilians and the strict observance of the norms of
international humanitarian law. Like the SecretaryGeneral, we express our concern about the death of
civilians owing to the actions of private military and
security companies. Their share of the responsibility
must be borne by the people who recruit them.
We believe that the contact of humanitarian
organizations with non-State armed groups can be
established only with the consent of the Government of
the relevant States. Moreover, the practice of such
contacts must be approached with great caution so as
not to legitimize existing outlawed units. We believe
that it is unacceptable to consider terrorist organizations,
especially the Taliban and Al-Qaida, as some sort of
armed opposition groups with which one could
allegedly conduct a dialogue on humanitarian matters.
For additional clarification, we need a
recommendation vesting investigation committees with
the mandate to study specific situations. In our view,
the status and competence of such committees would
need to be specified.
We vigorously condemn attacks on humanitarian
personnel. We support the need to ensure unimpeded
humanitarian access to the affected population. At the
same time, we emphasize that humanitarian work must

17

S/PV.6151

be conducted on the basis of the principles of
impartiality, neutrality and humanity.
In that regard, we have noted that, in the annex to
the report, we find the example of the situation in the
Caucasus after the events of August 2008. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for the positive
assessment of Russia’s actions to provide humanitarian
assistance in the region. We express our concern that
the Georgian legislation on the so-called occupied
territories is, in fact, hindering international
humanitarian work in South Ossetia.
Early-warning and war- and conflict-prevention
systems provide the basis for protecting civilian
populations. In that regard, the international community
must seek scrupulous observance by all parties of
international law and the relevant decisions of the
Security Council.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset,
Mr. President, let me thank you for organizing this
debate and Under-Secretary-General Sir John Holmes
for his important briefing, as well as for the constant
commitment of Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in this area. Austria associates
itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union, as well as with the statement made by
the representative of the Costa Rica on behalf of the
Human Security Network.
Over the past 10 years, the Council has developed
a comprehensive protection agenda, imposing clear
obligations on parties to conflict and providing a
toolbox for Security Council action. The issues
addressed include compliance by parties to a conflict
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, unhindered access for humanitarian organizations
to people in need, accountability for serious violations
against civilians, and the protection of civilians
through peacekeeping missions. Austria is a fervent
supporter of that protection agenda, and we stand ready
to contribute to its implementation.
We welcome the Secretary General’s report
(S/2009/277) before us that identifies the major
challenges that we are facing in the implementation of
the protection of civilians agenda. The report provides
an excellent basis for our further work. Let me also
welcome the access annex attached to the present
report. More specific reporting on access constraints
will enable the Council to react in a more effective way.

18

Systematic attention needs to be paid to
protection concerns in the daily deliberations of the
Council. Therefore, Austria welcomes the establishment
of the Security Council Expert Group on the Protection
of Civilians, which has already demonstrated its
usefulness in better addressing protection concerns. We
hope that the Council will make full use of the
potential of this innovative mechanism.
More consistent and comprehensive reporting on
protection issues in the Secretary-General’s regular
reports would enable the Council to act more
systematically regarding the protection of civilians,
and particularly of women and children. The aidememoire on the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2009/1,
annex) offers a very good framework in this regard. Also,
the challenges identified in the Secretary-General’s report
should receive particular attention.
The question of how to enhance the protection of
civilians through peacekeeping operations has been
identified as a major challenge. In recent years, several
peacekeeping missions have been mandated by the
Council to ensure the physical protection of the civilian
population. Indeed, its mandate to provide protection to
refugees and internally displaced persons was a strong
factor in Austria’s decision to contribute troops to the
European Union Force in Chad and the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT).
Austria has also contributed to the independent
study commissioned by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, which seeks to analyse the
experiences so far in the implementation of such
protection mandates in peace operations. We look
forward to discussing the findings and recommendations
of that study. It is our hope that they will contribute to
the overall reform efforts of United Nations
peacekeeping and to the further strengthening of the
protection agenda of the Council. Our aim must be to
have more effective and better resourced peacekeeping
missions that are in a position to implement their
protection mandates in a credible and consistent
manner. Let me add that the recent mission of the
Security Council to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo gave us a very good opportunity to observe at
close range the complexities that United Nations
peacekeeping missions and troop-contributing countries
may face in the implementation of their mandates.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

That is why we applaud the recent positive
developments in several peacekeeping operations, in
particular the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, such as the
adoption of a comprehensive strategy to combat sexual
violence and the decision to give clear priority to the
protection of the civilian population. From our point of
view, the task assigned to MINURCAT of
strengthening national police capacities in Chad is
another important positive development. We need to
take the lessons from such experiences and see how
they can be applied to other missions.
Ensuring better compliance of parties to conflict
with international humanitarian law has already been
rightly identified by many speakers as another area
requiring priority attention. This is a particular problem
with regard to many non-State actors. The Council
needs to continue consistently to call for compliance
by all parties to a conflict and to ensure investigations
in cases of alleged violations and consequences for
non-compliance. We welcome the experiences gained
by the United Nations in negotiating with parties to a
conflict, in particular non-State actors, in order to
improve humanitarian access and compliance with
international humanitarian law. Important efforts have
also been undertaken to secure commitments from
non-State actors to stop the recruitment of child
soldiers and to end the use of landmines.
The Security Council should further contribute to
strengthening the rule of law by supporting criminal
justice mechanisms and other mechanisms for
accountability and by affirming its opposition to
impunity. Fighting impunity should be seen as part of a
comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace,
justice, truth and national reconciliation. More efforts
are needed to strengthen national systems in order to
build their capacities to ensure that perpetrators are
brought to justice and that victims are granted an
effective remedy.
A further issue that needs urgent attention from
the Security Council is the vulnerability of civilians in
relation to the abundance of weapons, mainly small
arms and light weapons. Austria also welcomes the
emphasis placed by the Secretary-General on the
devastating humanitarian consequences of weapons
with area effects, such as cluster munitions. The
victims and survivors of these weapons need special
attention and protection. The provisions on victim
assistance in the new Convention on Cluster Munitions

09-38266

comprehensively address the immediate concerns of
victims. In our view, this should become the new
international standard for victim assistance. Austria
calls on all States that have not yet done so to sign and
ratify the Convention as soon as possible.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Security Council’s first consideration of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This anniversary
provides us with a good opportunity to take stock and
to reaffirm our commitment to protecting civilians
from the devastating effects of armed conflict, as
emphasized by the Secretary-General in his report.
In response to this call of the Secretary-General,
Austria is therefore planning to organize a debate of
the Council, on the occasion of the tenth anniversary,
during its presidency of the Council in November.
Austria’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Michael Spindelegger,
has a strong personal commitment in this area and
therefore intends to preside over that important
meeting personally. The aim of the debate should be to
identify a set of concrete measures to address current
challenges in the protection of civilians. We look
forward to working with all interested delegations and
the Secretariat towards this goal.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for having organized this
important debate. I also thank Mr. John Holmes for his
objective briefing today.
In 2005, the World Summit endorsed the principle
of the responsibility of protect civilians against the
carnage of war, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. The Summit affirmed that the
principal responsibility to protect their citizens lies
with the States concerned, and that the international
community is responsible for assisting them in that
task, as is the Security Council through its resolutions,
in particular resolution 1674 (2006). That affirmation
has allowed us to identify measures to protect civilians
in armed conflict. Such measures must, however, be
strictly implemented.
Despite the progress that has been made in the
codification of international humanitarian law and in
the adoption of general principles on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the international community
can hardly be pleased with the inadequacy of that
progress at the practical level. The lack of progress is a
source of great concern and, in some case, of
disappointment. A large gap has opened between our

19

S/PV.6151

words and our deeds. The number of casualties in
armed conflict, including under foreign occupation, has
not declined, and no one can doubt the suffering of the
victims of armed conflict, famine, torture and similar
types of prohibited behaviour, sexist and sexual
violence, violence against children, the recruitment of
children, human trafficking, the problem of refugees,
internal displacement and lack of access to humanitarian
assistance.
A living example of this is the Gaza Strip, where
1.5 million Palestinians are deprived of all the basic
needs of life and of humanitarian assistance, including
United Nations assistance. Gaza has become a large
prison that one cannot get out of or into. The Israeli
occupying authorities are not satisfied with that but
have conducted military actions against Gaza for 22
consecutive days. The authorities used all means of
destruction, including internationally prohibited
weapons — white phosphorous most specifically. The
Israeli authorities struck at everyone; they did not
discriminate among civilians and military. The Israeli
occupation deliberately targeted civilian installations —
schools, hospitals, United Nations infrastructure,
property. We all know that record, and United Nations
officials have been clear in this regard.
More than 1,300 martyrs have been noted, more
than a third of them children, and more than 5,300
people have been wounded. This is in addition to the
almost total destruction of infrastructure in Gaza and of
more than 24,000 buildings or living units.
In today’s world, States and groups are murdering
civilians in ways that appear deliberate or are adopting
strategies that are probably going to be targeting
civilians. We would recall that wars have been launched
on behalf of counter-terrorism or in so-called selfdefence, to the detriment of the rules and principles of
international humanitarian law. The majority of
casualties have been civilians. This applies to the
Israeli aggression in Lebanon in 2006 and to the war in
Iraq, as well as the invasion of Afghanistan.
We should not forget the victims of internal
conflicts. For example, the majority of the population
of Somalia have been victimized, become refugees or
homeless, are hungry and without the basic necessities
of life. In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, civilians are still suffering from daily
violence and violation of their rights and from armed

20

conflicts. The list is long. Everyone knows that list, so
I do not need to repeat it.
The international community, represented mainly
by this Council, not only has the right to take measures
but has the responsibility to act if the parties directly
concerned have not managed to protect civilians or
have shown a lack of will to do so, or if it is proven
that the parties in question are the aggressors. We do
not understand how the Security Council would remain
mute, would not go after the perpetrators of war
crimes — the Israelis, especially for the crimes
committed in Gaza, crimes that have been proven and
reaffirmed in the summary of the investigation group
established by the Secretary-General to look into the
damage and losses to United Nations facilities in Gaza.
It was published, but no measure was taken in this
area, for a very simple reason: States that have the
right of veto in the Council want the aggressor to be
above the law and not to be subject to accountability.
We are awaiting the results of the investigation
by the group that was established by the Human Rights
Council to investigate the crimes committed in Gaza.
We hope the international community will take
measures on the basis of those results.
Thousands of Palestinians have been killed or
wounded in Gaza without any mercy. Everyone has
seen it. The international community has seen it.
Internationally prohibited weapons were used against
civilians. Justice demands that the perpetrators of those
crimes be pursued by the International Criminal Court.
The Security Council must understand that this is
extremely important for its credibility.
This debate should be important and effective.
Civilian protection is a problem that needs to be
managed according to a comprehensive approach, and
we must see the causes and effects. In this area we
must reaffirm these matters.
First, we need to pay special attention to
preventing armed conflicts and the expansion of armed
conflict. This requires internationally coordinated
efforts to deal with the hunger, poverty and injustice
that victimize many populations throughout the world.
We need to reactivate preventive diplomacy and come
up with early warning mechanisms to prevent conflicts
and the expansion of conflicts.
Secondly, we need to promote the protection of
civilians as a priority of United Nations peacekeeping

09-38266

S/PV.6151

operations. It falls under resolution 1674 (2006). These
missions must have the means and resources that will
enable them to carry out their missions.
Thirdly, the Security Council must be able to take
measures in a balanced and transparent way, and not
according to double standards. Everyone must comply
with their accountability and punishment obligations.
We must prevent violations of international
humanitarian law.
Fourthly, we must prohibit the production of
certain weapons whose victims are mostly civilians,
especially cluster munitions. The use of cluster
munitions has created many casualties, especially after
military conflicts have ended.
Fifthly, we reaffirm the importance of implementing
the proposals contained in paragraphs 37, 59 and 60 of
the report of the Secretary-General. I reaffirm the
importance of those paragraphs.
This Council has been clear, in its resolution
1674 (2006) regarding humanitarian access without
any impediments for people who need such assistance.
The Council needs strict measures for access to civilian
populations and for staff access to those people. That,
in turn, requires the opening of crossing points on the
part of Israel to allow the free flow of individuals,
goods and funds from and into Gaza. The opening of
those passage points is necessary to take into
consideration the needs of the blockaded population
and is extremely important for rebuilding and for
erasing the traces of the Israeli aggression.
We hope that these discussions will be successful
and that we will take the necessary measures, because
this question is extremely important for humans and
human dignity.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General and the briefing by
Mr. Holmes, the humanitarian coordinator.
We would like to thank you for organizing this
debate, Mr. President. This report of the SecretaryGeneral comes on the tenth anniversary of the first
consideration by the Security Council of the protection
of civilians in a thematic debate on this issue. It is
deplorable that civilians still account for the vast
majority of casualties and continue to be targeted and
subjected to indiscriminate attacks and other
violations. However, civilians continue to be victims of
targeted attacks, forced displacement, sexual violence,

09-38266

forced conscription, indiscriminate killings, mutilations,
hunger, disease and loss of livelihood.
Over the past 10 years, the Security Council has
received several reports and adopted several presidential
statements and resolutions with specific attention given
to the protection of civilians. While such developments
are commendable, they are of limited value if they do
not translate into concrete improvements in the
protection of civilians on the ground. We need to
commit ourselves to practical action and a clear path
from policy statements to actual implementation on the
ground. We need to move to forward and develop a
more systematic approach to protecting civilians and
ensuring that there is sustainable support for civilians
even after the conflict has ended.
The inclusion of protection activities in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, such as the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), was a significant
action by the Security Council. Furthermore, over the
years, the Security Council has taken important steps to
improve protection for specific groups, such as women
and children. The Security Council has also endeavoured
to enhance protection for refugees and internally
displaced persons by mandating peacekeeping missions
to protect camps and other sites from armed attacks
and to maintain their civilian and humanitarian
character by supporting the disarmament and separation
of combatants.
However, there is need for a common
understanding among United Nations Member States
about what peacekeeping missions should be mandated
to do and what they should not do. Questions — such
as the degree of robustness of modern United Nations
peacekeeping, how protection-of-civilian mandates can
best be implemented or what other peacebuilding tasks
should be undertaken by United Nations peacekeepers
and for how long — need to be answered. These
peacekeeping activities require a strong consensus
among contributors of troops, police and other
personnel as to what extent the personnel who are
required through a mandate should be guided.
The proliferation and fragmentation of non-State
armed groups has contributed to the increasingly
asymmetric nature of conflicts. We have seen this in a
number of trouble spots, such as Somalia. This has a
profoundly negative impact on civilians, as armed
groups have sought to overcome their military inferiority

21

S/PV.6151

by using strategies that flagrantly violate international
law, including attacks against civilians and the use of
civilians to shield military objectives. Although these
armed groups are bound by international humanitarian
law and must refrain from committing acts that would
impair the enjoyment of human rights, we know that
for some groups, such as the Lord’s Resistance Army,
attacks and the commission of other violations against
civilians are deliberate strategies intended to maximize
casualties, intimidate the population and destabilize
communities. All of that must stop.
As partners, it is critical that Member States
support or at least not impede efforts by other parties,
such as religious groups, traditional leaders and civil
society organizations, to engage armed groups in order
to seek improved protection of civilians. However, the
reality is that many times this engagement proves
futile. When such efforts fail, alternatives must be
considered which should not be restricted to systematic
condemnation of violations committed by armed
groups and demands to comply, together with the
application of targeted measures.
While the Security Council has indicated its
intention to ensure that mandates include clear
guidelines as to what missions can and should do to
protect civilians, this clear direction from the Council
should be informed by a realistic assessment of what is
on the ground following consultations with the
Secretariat, troop and police contributors, other
stakeholders, regional organizations and, more
especially, countries that are affected in the regions
where there may be conflict. Currently, there is a
disconnect between mandates, intentions, expectations,
interpretations and real implementation capacity because
of some of these omissions. However, this assessment
should take place within a broader policy framework
that includes clear direction as to possible courses of
action, including in situations where the armed forces
of the host State are themselves perpetrating violations
against civilians, as well as regarding the tasks and
capabilities needed for implementation. The question
of States and State troops violating civilian rights is a
common feature, as demonstrated in the recent field
visit by the Security Council mission.
The report provides pertinent recommendations
premised on the overriding need to enhance compliance
and accountability in conflict, that is, compliance by
all parties to conflict with the applicable law with the
and demands and decisions of the Security Council.

22

For our part, we want to underscore two of them which
we consider critical in the protection of civilians and
for achieving sustainable peace.
First, renewal of peacekeeping mandates should
ensure that relevant protection concerns and possible
responses are incorporated in the Council’s actions.
Secondly, the timely deployment in relevant situations
of peacekeeping missions with robust protection
mandates to ensure the protection of civilians on the
ground should occur in collaboration with other key
players, such as countries in the region and countries
affected by the conflicts.
Finally, the protection of civilians does not stop
with the end of hostilities. Ensuring that civilians
receive needed humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation
and reconstruction is key for sustainable peace,
sustainable security and sustainable development.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Holmes for his briefing, as well as
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/277).
As other speakers have noted, this year marks the
tenth anniversary of the first Security Council debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In his
report, the Secretary-General cites some encouraging
actions that the Council has taken over that decade, but
he also lays out the many challenges that still lie ahead
if the international community is to take the steps
necessary to protect civilians and translate the
Council’s actions into concrete improvements on the
ground. The Secretary-General has made several
recommendations that the Council should review
carefully in order to be able to better promote the
protection of civilians in armed conflict worldwide.
Civilian protection must be a core principle in all
military operations. The United States understands that
protecting civilians is a vital priority. In Afghanistan,
while Taliban and Al-Qaida forces deliberately employ
tactics designed to increase the number of innocent
civilian deaths, the international coalition continues to
fight those Taliban and Al-Qaida forces with as few
civilian casualties as possible. We deeply regret every
innocent civilian life that is lost. United States forces
serving in Afghanistan operate under rules and orders
designed to minimize civilian casualties. We will
continue to review them to improve their effectiveness.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

As Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said recently, we
are making reduction of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan a priority. The new commander of the
International Security Assistance Force has made it
clear that he will move quickly to implement that
priority.
The United States believes that all nations must
abide by international humanitarian law. We are
determined to act to prevent violations of international
humanitarian law and committed to working with the
international community to defeat violence in a manner
consistent with our values, legal obligations and ideals.
At the 2005 World Summit, Member States
reached a mutual understanding that all nations have
the responsibility to protect their civilian populations
and that the international community has the
responsibility to protect civilians when States are
unwilling or unable to do so. The Security Council
reaffirmed that commitment in resolution 1674 (2006).
The Council has taken that principle into account, in
part, in its actions on the Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Resolution 1674 (2006) also reaffirmed another
principle, namely, that ending impunity for violations
of international humanitarian law is essential if a
society is to come to terms with its past, prevent future
abuses, establish accountability and promote
reconciliation. International and hybrid tribunals have
been successful in prosecuting crimes that involve
violations of international humanitarian law. But as the
Secretary-General rightly points out in his report, to
truly end impunity we must help to establish functioning
national judicial systems so that criminals may be tried
locally and senior leaders can be held responsible for
atrocities committed in their own countries.
We must take special note of the most vulnerable
populations in conflicts, including women and
children. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
sexual violence is widespread and sometimes used as a
weapon of war. We must redouble our efforts to
address the issue in all of its aspects, from prevention
measures that include efforts to change attitudes about
the status of women, to the treatment of victims and to
better accountability for perpetrators. In that regard, we
look forward to the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008), which deals
with women, peace and security. The Council must
ensure that the provisions of that resolution, especially

09-38266

those related to sexual violence, are implemented and
that there are clearly understood consequences if
individuals, including peacekeepers and relief workers,
are themselves found guilty of such crimes.
The compulsory recruitment of children as soldiers
is, sadly, still a reality. In armed groups such as the
Lord’s Resistance Army and in a number of countries,
children continue to be exploited in that awful manner.
Now that the fighting has ended in Sri Lanka, we are
beginning to identify children who were forcibly
recruited into the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.
We have witnessed too many instances in recent
months in which Governments and armed groups have
not allowed sufficient access to vulnerable populations.
The Secretary-General’s report makes 15 specific
recommendations to address this issue. It includes an
annex detailing constraints on humanitarian access. We
are certain that the recommendations and annex will
become a useful tool in helping to ensure civilian wellbeing.
In several instances, peacekeeping operations
have been asked to take on more robust mandates that
include the protection of civilians as a priority. But we
must ensure that peacekeepers have properly defined
and realistic mandates and the appropriate skills and
resources to fulfil their missions.
The Secretary-General’s report states that a
protection-of-civilians mandate in peacekeeping
missions remains largely undefined, as both a military
task and as a mission-wide task. Given that conclusion,
we look forward to the upcoming study by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on how best to
put into actual practice guidelines for protecting
civilians. We hope that the study will also provide
guidance that will help the members of the Security
Council when we consider renewing the mandates of
specific missions.
Finally, let me thank and commend the men and
women of United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations whose dedication to the cause of
protecting civilians amid crisis and strife is critical to
our ultimate success.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We thank you, Sir, for having convened this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Given that
the Council is once again taking up this question in the

23

S/PV.6151

course of six months, the importance of the issue is
evident. We also thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his briefing on this matter.
Despite the recommendations emanating from the
debate held in January 2009 on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, civilian populations
unfortunately continue to be the victims who suffer the
most in conflicts — sometimes due to deliberate acts
and often through such heinous and barbaric acts as
sexual violence, assassination, suicide attacks,
massacres of entire populations and the use of
sophisticated weapons. All of that takes place in
violation of international humanitarian law, Security
Council resolutions and other relevant international
legal instruments, as well as without regard for the
principle of the responsibility to protect, which was
adopted by the United Nations in 2005.
Parties to conflict should therefore be reminded
of their obligations to respect the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and their two Additional Protocols,
especially that which establishes a clear distinction
between civilians and combatants. As parties to armed
conflict, non-State actors are under the same obligations
to protect civilians. It is therefore crucial that such
groups be fully aware of their responsibility.
In addition, we agree with the Secretary-General
that it is important to maintain an ongoing dialogue
with such groups in an effort to educate them as to
existing legal norms, while avoiding the perception
that doing so legitimizes their existence. That approach
has already made it possible to convince some armed
groups to release child soldiers.
Because the protection of civilians is a
multifaceted undertaking, the scope of peacekeeping
operations has been expanded to take into account
concerns associated with fully protecting civilians.
Nevertheless, in order to increase efficiency and
eliminate persisting ambiguities in peacekeeping
operations, it is important that the Security Council set
out realistic and robust mandates that include clear
rules of engagement. That task is both a challenge to
and a responsibility of the Security Council and troopcontributing countries. In that regard, we await with
great interest the completion of the joint independent
study on the implementation of the mandate to protect
civilians, which is being carried out by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations with the

24

purpose of making a contribution to better addressing
the issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict.
Protecting civilians also means ensuring that
there are no obstacles to humanitarian access, as so
aptly noted in the annex to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/277). We condemn all such restrictions.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
collective and shared responsibility that requires all
concerned parties to display true political will and firm
commitment. However, States bear the primary
responsibility for this and must take all measures
necessary to create an enabling security environment
and to meet the fundamental needs of civilians,
displaced persons and refugees. This involves strict
respect for the principles of international humanitarian
law, in particular by facilitating the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and ensuring respect for the
humanitarian nature of camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons. The protection of
humanitarian personnel must therefore also be fully
ensured as they struggle side by side with populations
in distress, sometimes even giving their own lives.
To strengthen the protection of civilians, we
believe that creation of national complaint mechanisms,
together with the total independence of the judicial
systems to which victims have access, could also
contribute to efforts to combat impunity, which is
unfortunately still thriving. Subregional, regional and
international organizations must also shoulder their
responsibilities in this area, while fully respecting
States’ sovereignty and territorial integrity.
With regard to the Security Council, as the
guarantor of international peace and security, it must
contribute to strengthening the rule of law and ensure
the implementation of existing judicial mechanisms,
such as the International Criminal Court, with complete
impartiality and in accordance with the fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter and human
rights.
As weapons are the root cause of the tragedies,
atrocities and horrifying events witnessed in armed
conflicts, we encourage all States to join the efforts
under way to draw up and adopt an arms trade treaty.
Finally, the Council is duty-bound to ensure the
implementation of the various arms embargos
stipulated in the context of the Council’s own
sanctions.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing, the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/277) and you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I would also like to confirm our support for
the statement that will be made by the representative of
the Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
The tenth anniversary of the Council’s first
decisions on protecting civilians is an important moment
to take stock and to identify the current obstacles to
work on this issue. We welcome the fact that
humanitarian access is given particular profile in the
report’s annex, as well as the quality of the evidence
presented. We hope that the report’s five core challenges
will provide a coherent framework for the consistent
inclusion of information on protection issues in the
Secretary-General’s reports on country situations.
We share the Secretary-General’s view that there
is still insufficient accounting and redress for violations
of international humanitarian law. We believe that this
Council should be ready to address flagrant and
widespread violations committed against civilians, even
when they take place in situations of internal armed
conflict.
Allow me briefly to mention a few of our
concerns in the context of specific country situations.
In Burma, civilians are caught up in the conflict
between the Government and ethnic groups. This was
most recently highlighted by the flight of thousands of
Karen people to Thailand, following the violence along
the border. The Burmese Government must fulfil its
responsibilities under international humanitarian and
human rights law and begin an inclusive political
dialogue that can lead to national reconciliation in its
country.
In Sri Lanka, the priority now is to ensure that the
immediate needs of internally displaced persons in the
camps are met. While we recognize the steps that have
already been taken by the Government, there must be
unhindered access for the United Nations and
international humanitarian aid agencies. Further efforts
are also needed to ensure steady progress in the political
process towards national reconciliation. We welcome
the commitments entered into by the Government of
Sri Lanka to address a number of post-conflict issues,
including the need for an accountability process to
address violations of international humanitarian law

09-38266

and the grievances associated with them. We expect
these commitments to be fulfilled.
The Under-Secretary-General and some delegations
have mentioned the situation in Afghanistan. Let me be
clear that we deeply regret incidents in which civilians
are killed as a result of actions by international forces.
We have strict procedures and training regimes,
frequently updated in the light of experience, intended
both to minimize the risk of civilian casualties and to
investigate any that do nevertheless occur. We intend to
remain at the forefront of United Nations discussion
and activity to ensure that the protection of civilians in
Afghanistan remains high on the political agenda.
As we noted in the debate on international
humanitarian law held in January (see S/PV.6066), the
Security Council must find new and better tools to
follow up on our decisions and ensure that international
humanitarian law is fully implemented and enforced in
specific conflicts. The report rightly underlines the
importance of supporting accountability measures at
the national level. But we must also consider
international accountability mechanisms to combat
impunity, including referral to the International Criminal
Court where appropriate. United Nations engagement
with non-State actors presents an opportunity to embed
an understanding of obligations under international
humanitarian law without granting recognition or
status to those parties. This is an opportunity that is too
often missed.
We look forward to seeing the results of the
independent study which has been commissioned by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on
the implementation of protection mandates. It will be
important for this Council to consider that report
carefully as part of continued consultations between
now and November. We sincerely hope that the General
Assembly will consider that report too. We also support
the Under-Secretary-General’s suggestion of an Arria
formula meeting focused on the experience of engaging
armed groups. These meetings can be very valuable, as
was, we believe, the Arria formula meeting we held
earlier this week on the harrowing and pressing subject
of sexual violence.
Deployed military contingents are just one part of
a larger equation when it comes to peacekeeping
missions fulfilling their protection mandates. To date,
we have relied on the flexibility of military actors, but

25

S/PV.6151

no military in the world has a comprehensive doctrine
on how to undertake the protection of civilians.
Nevertheless, the outstanding protection work that
United Nations peacekeeping personnel are creatively
doing in the field provides many examples of good
practice. Where individual missions have protection
strategies and plans of action, we would like to see
more detail about them in country reports.
We should also make use of existing mechanisms
to deal with these substantial issues. Like Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, we are encouraged by the work of the
informal Security Council Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians thus far. We have some ideas on
how to enhance the format, for example by improving
the timeliness of the Group’s inputs to Council
deliberations and the format and quality of
documentation for the Group.
An inherent part of the initiative on peacekeeping,
which we are pursuing with our French colleagues, is
the improvement of the information upon which the
Council bases its decisions on mission mandates. We
acknowledge that there has been at least a perceived
disconnect between protection language in mandates
and what is realistically achievable in the field. We
must work harder to achieve consensus on the extent
and feasibility of protection activities.
Finally, we would like to see the Council show
genuine readiness to engage at the prevention stage of
the conflict cycle, rather than at the resolution stage.
As our Chinese colleague, Ambassador Liu Zhenmin,
said earlier, it is important to tackle these issues
upstream. This will require the Council to be more
receptive to information, more willing to become
seized of threatening situations and more ready to take
appropriate early action. The United Kingdom stands
ready to play its part in this.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I too thank Under-Secretary-General John Holmes
for his comprehensive briefing.
Today a great number of casualties in armed
conflict continue to be civilians, and the numbers are
constantly increasing. We condemn in the strongest
possible terms all deliberate acts against civilians and
deaths resulting from the indiscriminate and excessive
use of force. The challenge for all of us is to stop such

26

killings and reverse the alarming trend. On this issue,
the credibility of the Security Council is also at stake.
Council members will all recall that our debate in
January (see S/PV.6066) was held in the shadow of the
tragic developments in Gaza. Indeed, what happened in
Gaza was a stark reminder of the vulnerability of
civilians in times of armed conflict. It also proved once
again the need for all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. That
said, Gaza has not been the only case where civilians
have faced danger during armed conflict. Indeed, the
issue of the protection of civilians has been particularly
high on the agenda of the Council during recent years,
and especially since the beginning of this year, for we
have been witnessing extremely dire challenges in
many parts of the world, in terms of providing a safe
and secure environment for civilians.
It was in that frame of mind that my delegation
studied carefully the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/277), which gives a comprehensive
account of the latest situation in various theatres and
the difficulties encountered in protecting civilians. The
report clearly demonstrates the magnitude of the task
incumbent upon all of us to ensure the effective
protection of civilians in times of conflict. This should
be a collective and multidimensional effort, with the
primary obligation and responsibility resting first and
foremost with States. Yet the entire international
community, including non-governmental organizations
and international organizations, has a responsibility to
protect civilians.
Almost everything has already been said this
morning in terms of what can and what should be done.
The Secretary-General’s report also offers some useful
recommendations, so I will not elaborate any further on
those points. However, allow me to highlight one issue
of a very sensitive nature that bears the risk of
undermining or weakening our efforts if it is not
handled carefully. It related to non-State armed groups.
Given the inevitable ambiguity of that term and the
many different types of entities that fall under the
category, we feel that one should be extremely careful
in dealing with such groups. This is particularly
important as many terrorist organizations attempt to
abuse the term and what it entails in their quest to gain
international attention and support.
Combating terrorism is both the right and the
obligation of every State. Nothing should be allowed to

09-38266

S/PV.6151

weaken our resolve to fight that scourge. It is the
activities of the terrorist organizations themselves that
put the lives of civilians in danger, so international
organizations, and non-governmental organizations in
particular, should be vigilant in conducting their work
in conflict areas and not allow themselves to be
exploited by such groups and organizations.
Before concluding, I would also like to stress
that, in effect, it is through strengthening the rule of
law, human rights, democracy and governance that we
can secure the long-term and lasting protection of
civilians.
We should also ensure that the perpetrators of
violence against civilians are held fully accountable for
their actions. They should know that they can run, but
they cannot escape, and that they will face justice
eventually. The international community has the duty
to do more in that direction, including through
capacity-building and technical assistance.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Before we proceed, may I kindly remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to conclude its
open debate today.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.
Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): First of all, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the organization of
this meeting of the Security Council on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. As we approach the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
it is appropriate and timely to commend the Security
Council for its sustained efforts to ensure the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Through that resolution
and others that followed, as well as through the
relevant presidential statements, the Council has built
and continues to build a solid normative body. The
Secretariat is also to be commended for the work it has
done, of which the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/20009/277) is a fine example. I would like also to
thank Mr. Holmes for his contribution to the debate.
The document presented by the Secretariat
reiterates a sad truth that we all know too well: civilian
casualties in armed conflict, which still far outnumber
those of combatants, continue to threaten or breach
international peace and security in some corners of the

09-38266

planet. In the face of such threats or breaches, the
Council cannot stand silent or hesitate. Rather, it
should make appropriate and non-selective use of the
instruments provided for in the Charter to put an end to
gross violations of international humanitarian law.
Among such instruments, those set forth in
Chapter VI should be given careful consideration as a
means to stimulate and support the peaceful settlement
of disputes. When Chapter VII action proves necessary
and sanctions emerge as a potentially effective tool, as
proposed in the report, they should be specific and
targeted, so as not to impose further suffering on the
affected populations. In those cases where a
peacekeeping mission is established, it might be
necessary and even morally imperative to give it a
clear mandate to help protect civilians.
While my delegation fully recognizes the
increasing importance of that task in peacekeeping
operations, we concur with the view expressed by the
Secretary-General that it is not exclusively military in
nature. Rather, it is and must be multifaceted. To that
end, we favour a comprehensive approach that seeks to
help address, alongside security concerns, the
underlying political, economic and even cultural
factors of armed conflict and violence against civilians.
Such an approach lies at the heart of some success
stories in peacekeeping, such as the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. Another key element of
success is the need for close cooperation with national
authorities, given the primary responsibility of the host
Government to protect its own population.
A particularly challenging aspect of the issue
before us today is compliance with international
humanitarian law by non-State actors, who must not
forget or ignore the fact that they are bound by such
law. My delegation recognizes the benefits of dialogue
with such actors as a way of obtaining guarantees
regarding the security of humanitarian personnel and
access to populations in need of assistance. It is
essential that the humanitarian purposes of such a
dialogue be entirely clear to all participants and that
the principles of independence, neutrality, impartiality
and humanity, as set out in General Assembly
resolutions 46/182 and 58/114, be fully observed at all
times.
Observing such principles is crucial in addressing
constraints faced by humanitarian actors in ensuring
safe, timely and effective access to those in need.

27

S/PV.6151

Difficulties can also be overcome or mitigated by
enhanced cooperation and coordination of humanitarian
actors with States, which have the primary responsibility
for the well-being of their populations. As their citizens
are the main beneficiaries of domestic and foreign
humanitarian assistance, consistent with such principles,
States can only gain from such enhanced cooperation
and coordination. By strictly observing those General
Assembly resolutions, humanitarian actors can also
help to prevent attacks against their personnel, assets
and supplies, as such observance counters
misperceptions that, in some cases, lead to such
attacks. States can also contribute to the safety of
humanitarian actors by educating their agents on the
purposes and benefits of humanitarian assistance
consistent with those four principles, as well as on the
need to ensure the safety and security of all those
involved in delivering such assistance.
It is fitting to recall here the decision taken by the
General Assembly last year, in its resolution 63/139, to
establish World Humanitarian Day on 19 August as a
tribute to those who have lost their lives in the
promotion of the humanitarian cause. We hope that this
will help to raise awareness of the importance of
humanitarian activities worldwide and will thus have a
positive impact on the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel.
My delegation expects continued engagement by
the Security Council in efforts to promote the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, within its
powers and functions under the Charter. This
endeavour must be as participatory and transparent as
possible, since the involvement of all interested
Member States cannot but contribute to fostering the
support of States for the Council’s work on this crucial
item on the international agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The State
of Qatar attaches utmost importance to the question of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and I
thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to participate in
today’s important debate. I wish also to thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
important briefing.
Today’s open debate takes place 10 years after the
Security Council’s first discussion on the protection of

28

civilians in armed conflict. That important discussion
led to the Council’s adoption of many resolutions
calling for improved conditions for civilians affected
by war and its attendant humiliations. In spite of the
efforts that have been made — such as the inclusion of
protection in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
the establishment of a Council Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians and plans to address violence of
all kinds, including killing, maiming and sexual
violence — any such developments remain of limited
value, as the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2009/277), if they do not translate the provisions of
Council resolutions into concrete fact.
In that regard, we recall the report’s observation
that the protection of civilians is not a purely
humanitarian task; rather, it is a multifaceted task. The
first and most important facet is ensuring compliance
with laws on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including in situations of foreign occupation,
in accordance with international law and, in particular,
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. It also involves combating impunity
and ensuring the protection of civilians and their
human rights without discrimination or selectivity of
any kind.
The State of Qatar condemns the targeting, killing
or maiming of civilians in armed conflict or in
situations of foreign occupation. We condemn all acts
of reprisal against civilians or against civilian targets
such as schools and hospitals. We note the observations
in the report of the Secretary-General regarding the
core challenges to improving the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, including in situations of foreign
occupation, and we endorse the report’s reference to
the fact that those challenges are fundamentally
reflected in the lack of full compliance with
international legal commitments on the protection of
civilians.
In our region, more than 1,000 Palestinian
civilians lost their lives in January’s Israeli aggression
against the Gaza Strip. That was a result of the
consistent targeting of infrastructure, which caused
enormous damage to homes, hospitals and schools,
including schools operated by the United Nations, in
clear breach of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, specifically the Geneva
Conventions, in particular the Fourth Convention,
which includes provisions on the protection of civilians
under foreign occupation.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

Another important challenge is to avoid subjecting
civilians to the consequences of hostilities, as is
currently the case in Afghanistan, and to prevent the
killing of civilians by rebel elements, as is the case in
the Sudan. Millions of civilians in zones of armed
conflict and foreign occupation are suffering, in
particular women, children, the disabled and the
elderly. Their lives and prospects are under threat both
during and after crisis situations, because there are
constraints on the needed assistance. Here, we take
note of the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, on constraints on humanitarian access. We
stress the importance of continuing to compile
information on the humanitarian crisis facing civilians
under foreign occupation and in armed conflict
situations.
Under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, especially the Geneva
Conventions and in particular the Fourth Convention,
which contains provisions related to the protection of
civilians
under
foreign
occupation,
primary
responsibility lies with the parties to the conflict and
with the occupier to protect those under its authority
and to provide for their basic needs.
The State of Qatar believes that hindering the
provision of humanitarian assistance constitutes
collective punishment of an entire innocent people.
This is a phenomenon that is growing in breadth and in
severity. The Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip are
suffering because of unjustifiable constraints on and
measures against the provision of humanitarian
assistance. Following the Israeli aggression against the
Strip, Israel, the occupying Power, has continued to
refuse entry to the Strip of all goods, including
necessary building supplies. The border crossings
remain closed.
Education is a basic human right which is
jeopardized in zones of conflict or foreign occupation.
Educational infrastructure has been paralysed in the
Gaza Strip since last January. The situation has
prompted Her Highness Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser al
Missned, UNESCO Special Envoy for Basic and
Higher Education, to call upon the Security Council to
provide the necessary protection for education in the
Gaza Strip and to investigate the crimes committed
there, including the targeting of a United Nations school.
The occupying Power’s obstruction of humanitarian
operations has disrupted education in the Strip, and we

09-38266

call upon the Security Council to mandate its various
bodies to attach great importance to the right to
education in zones of armed conflict and foreign
occupation, and to focus on this issue in its future
deliberations.
Ensuring accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law, including the Geneva
Conventions and the Fourth Geneva Convention in
particular, which includes provisions on the protection
of civilians under foreign occupation, international
human rights law is the ideal vehicle for enhancing the
protection of civilians on the ground. The problem lies
in the consistent failure to implement international
legal mechanisms in a fair and equitable manner and in
the adoption of double standards and attitudes with
respect to such situations. That in turn leads to a lack
of accountability for parties that breach that law and
commit such crimes, thus allowing them more latitude
to pursue their violations at leisure.
Impunity for serious violations of international
law has cast a heavy shadow over every initiative that
held out hope for peace and stability. Repeated
impunity frustrates victims, fuels their desire for
revenge and allows the perpetrators to feel that they are
above the law. It ultimately encourages the offender to
commit further violations.
The time has come to translate our commitments
into concrete action on the ground. We would like to
stress the importance of the Security Council’s acting
to implement the recommendations of the United
Nations fact-finding panel in its investigation of a
series of Israeli attacks on United Nations facilities and
staff in the Gaza Strip, including schools run by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We also stress the urgent
need to examine one of the relevant recommendations
that a thorough and unbiased investigation be made of
all violations of international humanitarian law in the
Gaza Strip.
We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities and meet its obligations to
protect civilians in armed conflict, and to ensure
respect for the instruments of international law and the
Security Council’s own resolutions, which provide the
legal basis for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including under foreign occupation. The rule
of law is a fundamental issue in armed conflict. We
need to recognize that respect for international law

29

S/PV.6151

constitutes the true beginnings of world peace and
stability.

It should be translated into concrete improvements in
the protection of civilians on the ground.

The President: Before giving the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic, I
intend, with the Council’s permission, to continue until
1.15 p.m. because I still have 30 speakers on my list.

In general, the European Union also emphasizes
the need for close coordination and meaningful
positive synergies of policies on the protection of
civilians within the framework of United Nations
activities in other areas, such as human rights, gender
equality, children in armed conflict, the rule of law,
small arms and light weapons, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and security sector
reform.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, the
European Free Trade Association country Iceland,
member of the European economic area, as well as
Armenia, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine align themselves with this statement.
Let me thank the presidency of the Security
Council, Turkey, for organizing this debate and
commend Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his informative briefing
on the issue. The European Union thanks the SecretaryGeneral for submitting the current report (S/2009/277)
and supports the recommendations therein.
First, the European Union remains of the view
that the protection of civilians is a key aspect of the
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
that has to be comprehensively, systematically and
consistently incorporated in all Security Council
mandates. At least eight of the current operations have
an explicit mandate to protect civilians, and we
welcome that development. We look forward to
considering the results of a study of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on how to
make the activities of the United Nations missions
more effective in that regard.
The European Union expresses its firm support
for the work of the Security Council Expert Group on
the Protection of Civilians. The Expert Group is an
innovative tool for deeper consideration of protection
issues and its potential should be fully used. In turn,
the European Union encourages the Council to give
further practical relevance to its own aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2009/1, annex) on the protection of civilians.

30

The European Union emphasizes the need to
operationalize the concept of the responsibility to
protect. All heads of State and Government endorsed
the principle of responsibility to protect in 2005, and
the European Union continues to call for the full
implementation of that principle by the Security
Council, as well as by the General Assembly.
Regretfully, civilians continue to be gravely
affected by conflicts. The Security Council must react
to the changing nature of threats to international peace
and security. The European Union calls on all parties to
conflicts to ensure the protection of civilians at all
times and to comply with international humanitarian
and human rights law. Thus, we strongly encourage the
Governments concerned to engage in full protection of
internally displaced persons and their return and in the
protection of children affected by the armed conflict.
International humanitarian law should be fully
respected. All violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law should be investigated
and those responsible should be held accountable.
The European Union also supports the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Security Council
Working Group on that subject. We urge the Working
Group to redouble its efforts in transforming the
normative work of relevant Council resolutions into
results at the field level.
Women’s participation in the peace processes is
fundamental to the protection and promotion of
women’s human rights in conflict-affected situations.
The European Union strongly supports enhancement of
the role of women in protection issues, also in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008), which reconfirm that
guaranteeing the protection of women and girls in
armed conflict through effective institutional

09-38266

S/PV.6151

arrangements contributes significantly to promoting
and to maintaining international peace and security.
The European Union is looking forward to the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008).
In many conflict situations, impunity prevails due
to the lack of political will. Therefore, the Security
Council, once again, should make clear that any assault
on the civilian population, including genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity,
is completely unacceptable. In that context, we would
also like to stress the importance of the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1820
(2008). The European Union encourages all States to
provide their full support to the International Criminal
Court by acceding to the Rome Statute and cooperating
with the Court.
The European Union continues to support efforts
by the United Nations and its agencies, as well as by
civil society and non-governmental organizations, to
alleviate the suffering of civilians on the ground and to
work towards achieving durable stability. Safe,
unhindered and timely access to civilian populations in
conflict is a fundamental condition for the fulfilment of
mandates and missions of humanitarian actors. We
encourage humanitarian personnel on the ground to
follow the principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence, and we call on the
recipient countries to ensure their safety and security.
The European Union is dedicated to systematic
consideration of the issues of human rights, gender and
children affected by armed conflict in the planning and
conduct of its European Security and Defence Policy
missions and operations, including their mandates and
staffing. The European Union attaches particular
importance to enhanced European Union-United
Nations cooperation in the area of the protection of
civilians in those theatres of operation where the
United Nations and the European Union have missions
deployed side by side. The most prominent example of
such deployment is in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where the European Union has two missions
deployed: the EU security sector reform mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the EU police
mission in that country.
Furthermore, the European Union is determined
to assist in implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) with the aim of achieving more concrete

09-38266

progress on gender equality issues and thus adding to
the credibility and effectiveness of those missions and
operations on the ground.
The European Union joins the Secretary-General’s
call on the international community to seize the
opportunity of this tenth anniversary of the protection
of civilians to reinvigorate its commitment to this
agenda and, above all, to make the protection of
civilians more systematically and consistently a reality
for all those caught in conflicts. Let me reassure the
Council of the European Union’s continued commitment
to the issue of the protection of civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Graham (New Zealand): I thank you for
convening this debate, Mr. President. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2009/277), which
provides a thorough assessment of the first 10 years of
Council involvement in the protection of civilians and
highlights the challenges that Member States must still
address to ensure better protection for them. We
commend the Council for its ongoing consideration of
this issue and we especially thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes for his comprehensive briefing this
morning.
The immediacy of the need to protect civilians is
evident from the new and ongoing conflicts around the
world. Sadly, we continue to see civilians suffering
seriously and disproportionately, even in the short time
since the last debate on this subject in January.
The 26-year conflict in Sri Lanka has cost the
lives of many of its people and led to a serious
humanitarian crisis. New Zealand joined with others in
condemning Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam attacks
on the civilian population, its forced recruitment of
soldiers, including, reportedly, children, and its use of
civilians as human shields. At the same time, New
Zealand was very concerned by reports of Sri Lankan
Government forces using heavy artillery in areas with a
dense civilian population.
While the fighting is now over, we remain deeply
concerned about the plight and safety of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) who fled that conflict. We
join other countries in urging the Government of Sri
Lanka to improve access to the IDP camps for
humanitarian agencies in order to ensure that all those

31

S/PV.6151

affected by the conflict receive the assistance that they
so urgently need.
The Secretary-General’s report illustrates that
there is still much work to be done to ensure the
effective protection of civilians in armed conflict. In
this regard, there are three thematic areas which New
Zealand would like to cover.
First, with respect to peacekeeping mandates,
New Zealand strongly supports the inclusion of civilian
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. This approach is an important
and evolving practice of recent years and one means
for the United Nations to help address the serious
problem of civilian casualties in armed conflict.
Paragraph 16 of resolution 1674 (2006) was an
important step in this regard, as were paragraphs 125
through 128 of the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the latter of which reflected
important agreement by Member States relating to the
protection of civilians.
However, improvements need to be made in the
clarity and specificity of these mandates, in order that
all parties — the Council, peacekeepers and civilians —
may have a common understanding and shared
expectations. Little progress has been made towards
developing the necessary capacities and doctrines that
need to accompany protection of civilians mandates in
order for them to be effectively implemented. Like
others who have spoken, we encourage the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) to address this as a matter of priority and we
look forward to the findings of the independent study
commissioned by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO.
Secondly, with regard to the deliberate targeting
of humanitarian workers, the increasing incidence of
intentional attacks on humanitarian workers in conflict
zones is deeply disturbing. In addition to threatening
the safety of these unarmed civilian workers, the
attacks constrain the effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance, including that offered by the United
Nations. New Zealand welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s strong recommendations in this regard, and
we look to the Security Council to assist in their
implementation.
New Zealand urges parties to armed conflict to
respect international humanitarian law, in particular the
duty to respect and protect humanitarian assistance

32

personnel. A related concern for New Zealand is the
rising frequency of attacks on journalists and members
of the media in conflict areas. Journalists have an
important role to play in the monitoring of conflicts
and in ending impunity for serious crimes.
Thirdly, it is imperative for the protection of
civilians that impunity be ended for those who attack
civilians and humanitarian workers. Impunity allows
those responsible not to be held to account for their
actions, denies justice to the victims of these actions
and their families, and sends the message that the
international community is not prepared to take action
even when serious crimes occur.
New Zealand supports the International Criminal
Court, which has an important role to play in bringing
the perpetrators of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide to justice. We have worked closely with
others to encourage widespread ratification and
implementation of the Rome Statute. It is in the
interests of all States that there be accountability. We
urge all countries that have not yet done so to become
party to the Rome Statute and to take steps within their
own jurisdictions to combat impunity.
In conclusion, New Zealand recognizes the critical
importance of the protection of civilians agenda, and
we welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendations
in his latest report. New Zealand stands ready to work
with other Member States, the Council and the
Secretariat to ensure that progress in protection of
civilians becomes a reality for those on the ground.
The President: I
representative of Israel.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Carmon (Israel): Mr. President, I would first
like to thank you for convening this important meeting
and for your leadership of the Council this month. On a
personal note and since this is Israel’s last intervention
in the Council for the month of June, I wish to
congratulate you personally on your many years of
remarkable diplomatic service to your country and to
the international community.
This year marks a decade since the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has been on
the Council’s agenda. During this period, there has
been progress in some vital areas, such as child
recruitment, and we have also seen an increased
awareness of the horrific consequences of sexual
violence used as a tool in conflict. In spite of these

09-38266

S/PV.6151

advances, it is clear that other areas of concern
stubbornly resist our efforts to make improvements. In
response to these continuing challenges, and using the
spotlight of this anniversary, it is now an appropriate
time for stocktaking.
In this regard, we look forward to the
forthcoming study jointly commissioned by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on the protection of civilians mandates of peacekeeping
missions. The Secretariat and Member States should
carefully consider its findings and conduct a
meaningful review of strategies found to have fallen
short of expectations. More resources might also be
devoted to replicating, where appropriate, elements of
protection mandates that have proven successful.
In its latest report, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations recognizes the important role
of the Secretariat in promoting protection activities in
peacekeeping, particularly relating to children and
gender. Israel supports the progressive enhancement of
mission activities in these areas, including through the
strategic deployment of child protection advisers. We
also endorse the addition of grave sexual violence to
the triggers for the listing of parties on the SecretaryGeneral’s annexes related to children and armed
conflict.
I would like to turn to the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
(S/2009/277), a document that contains a number of
deficiencies and inaccuracies that must be addressed
here. We were dismayed to find that the report does not
acknowledge the Hamas terrorist organization’s actions
against civilians of my country. It does not note that for
eight consecutive years those terrorists subjected the
southern part of my country to a ceaseless barrage of
rockets and mortars fired from Gaza into Israel,
terrorizing, maiming and killing Israeli civilians.
Israel’s civilians — men, women and children —
are not accidental casualties. Hamas, in the old terrorist
tradition, deliberately targets Israeli civilians and has
proudly acknowledged that strategy on a number of
occasions. Those actions, which provoked last winter’s
military campaign, should have warranted at least a
brief mention in the report, but they did not.
During those months, the majority of the
international community acknowledged the perilous
humanitarian situation of the citizens of southern

09-38266

Israel. The very least OCHA should do in a report
entitled “The protection of civilians in armed conflict”
is to acknowledge that humanitarian problem. If the
authors of the report do not consider the daily
bombardment of Israeli civilians an issue related to the
protection of civilians, then what is? We demand a
clarification of that omission.
Moreover, the report ambitiously verges on
drawing judicial conclusions concerning international
humanitarian law, although it is unclear on what
mandate, expertise and procedure those are based. The
report makes no mention of Israel’s extraordinary
efforts to avoid civilian casualties or of its
implementation of the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF)
own operational standard procedures in the aftermath
of any military operation. As part of its normal
practice, the IDF has conducted five in-depth
investigations concerning the recent conflict. These
reflect Israel’s democratic oversight, which ensures
rigorous attention to Israel’s laws, as well as those of
the international community.
Not only does the report omit any mention of
Hamas’s terrorism perpetrated against Israeli civilians,
but its weak treatment of Hamas’s terrorism practised
against Gaza’s civilians is inexplicable. It is troubling
that, in the face of overwhelming evidence, the report
finds only that concerns exist as to whether Hamas
used civilians as human shields. In that regard, it is
worth noting that the most recent report on children
and armed conflict (S/2009/158) found that Palestinian
families were too terrified of Hamas retribution to
speak publicly against the group’s use of Gaza’s
children. It is regrettable that the current report on the
protection of civilians does not see fit to mention that
fact. Moreover, while clear evidence exists of Hamas’s
cruel misuse of civilian infrastructure, contrary to the
most basic humanitarian values, the report shies away
from addressing that practice in an appropriate manner.
The report is fundamentally flawed. It is flawed
for its omissions, it is flawed for its errors and it is
flawed for its selective use of language. With those and
other deficiencies, the report does not help civilian
protection, which the report acknowledges is
increasingly challenged by asymmetric conflicts
involving States with obligations, on the one hand, and
non-State armed groups, on the other. In spite of that
recognition, the report fails to seriously address the
actions of non-State parties who have made a mockery
of the concept of protection of civilians.

33

S/PV.6151

Many States around this table, as well as in the
wider membership of the Organization, know exactly
what terrorism is all about. They have paid the terrible
price levied by terrorism and have decided to confront
this phenomenon. Like Israel, they have felt the
importance and urgency to protect their own citizens,
which is the primary obligation of any responsible
State. They also know the difficulty of confronting this
new enemy, which considers innocent civilians to be
legitimate targets. None of those States would tolerate
a politicized, unjust and biased treatment of its struggle
against terrorism. Neither does Israel.
Let me stress that the issues contained in this
statement have been addressed to our Secretariat
colleagues in the past two weeks, highlighting the
deficiencies of the report. We understand that we were
not the only ones to have done so, to say the least. We
also understand and trust that coordination within the
Secretariat will improve in the future and that
misrepresentations will not be repeated, thus avoiding
futile politicized semantics, wrong accusations and
deliberate omissions.
In conclusion, Israel will continue to seriously
address the issue of the protection of civilians in a
constructive manner. For Israelis, as victims of
terrorism, the protection of civilians is not a theoretical
exercise; it is a reality that we have been grappling
with for over 60 years. It is unfortunate that, on a daily
basis, terrorism presents us with the dilemma arising
from the need to uphold human rights while protecting
civilians on all sides. Israel takes the issue to heart,
whomever it concerns and wherever they may be. We
expect substantial improvements in future reports so that
the international community can engage in a relevant,
accurate and in-depth debate on this important issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia, who will be this morning’s
last speaker.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your work as President
of the Security Council during this month, and to
express our gratitude for the convening of this debate.
We also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his presentation.
Colombia has taken careful note of the seventh
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians (S/2009/277). Several of the challenges
identified in the report should receive priority attention

34

both from States and from other relevant actors. In that
regard, I would like to underscore the challenges
concerning respect for international humanitarian law;
strengthening the capacities of peacekeeping and other
operations; guaranteeing access to humanitarian
assistance in compliance with international norms; and
accountability.
Other matters addressed in the report, such as the
changing nature of conflicts, the proliferation,
fragmentation, identity and motivation of non-State
armed groups, and dialogue with those actors, should
be the subject of further consideration in order to
ensure that they fall within the scope of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and applicable
international law.
All States and relevant actors must give the
highest priority to the protection of civilians and to
abiding strictly by international humanitarian law and
other international norms in that regard.
Through its democratic security policy, the
Government of Colombia has given priority to the
strategic goal of strengthening and guaranteeing the
rule of law throughout its national territory. The
consolidation of that policy has made it possible for us
to put firmly in place conditions to protect Colombians
and allow them to enjoy their rights. These efforts
include a comprehensive policy on human rights and
international humanitarian law that is focused on
prevention and on ensuring appropriate punishment for
any violations, including those involving members of
the security forces of the State.
The strengthening of democratic authority and the
State’s control over its territory is reflected in the
continued reduction in the number of all acts of
violence and criminality. Since 2002, 51,407 members
of illegal armed groups have been demobilized. That
process, which is being implemented in the framework
of special legislation, has made it possible to provide
victims with justice, truth and reparations.
Combating drug trafficking, the financial source
of violence and terror, is also a national priority. The
United Nations report issued a few days ago showed a
dramatic reduction in illicit cultivation and drug
production in the country in 2008. These results will
have to better security for Colombians. The commitment
of the international community to combating drug
trafficking and terrorism is essential to consolidating
these achievements.

09-38266

S/PV.6151

We support the call of the Secretary-General in
his report on States that are not parties to the Ottawa
landmine Convention to ratify it without delay. Colombia
will host the second Review Conference of the States
Parties to the Ottawa Convention, from 30 November
to 4 December this year in Cartagena. We expect, on
that occasion, to assess the progress made in
implementing the Convention and to define a plan of
action to address the persistent challenges in the
eradication of anti-personnel mines throughout the world.
We also agree with the Secretary-General on the
urgency of implementing controls over the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, a prerequisite for
improving the protection of civilians. My country will
continue to promote this issue in the General Assembly
and hopes that the Council will emphasize the
importance of adopting effective measures in this field.
Regarding humanitarian assistance, Colombia
joins in the condemnation of attacks against humanitarian
personnel. In addition, we emphasize the responsibility
and primary role of States in the provision and
coordination of humanitarian assistance within their
territories. We recognize the importance of international
cooperation and the facilitation of access for humanitarian
entities in accordance with international norms.
In Colombia, the Government is the main
provider of humanitarian assistance. This year, UnderSecretary-General John Holmes visited our country and
verified the progress achieved and the budgetary and
programmatic efforts of State agencies working in this
field. We have taken note of the challenges identified
with his Office to improving the various programmes.

09-38266

I should note that progress in terms of the
security situation in Colombia can also be seen in
improved access and enhanced safety for humanitarian
staff, enabling them to carry out their work throughout
the country. This includes international institutions,
which provide valuable cooperation. The State will
continue to focus on preventing and controlling any
situation that could hinder the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
We note, moreover, that the report emphasizes the
importance of lasting solutions for refugees. It is
essential that States fully honour their international
obligations to protect refugees, including those under
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
other relevant instruments. Colombia fulfils its
commitments under this Convention and has supported
the work of institutions working in this field, such as
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
Colombia reiterates its support for efforts to
protect civilians and ensure respect for their rights, in
conformity with the United Nations Charter and the
norms of international law. My delegation will remain
actively engaged in the discussions on this subject in
the various bodies and institutions of the United
Nations.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers on my list for this morning. I intend, with the
consent of all members, to suspend the meeting until
3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

35
