UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL

2490th

MEETING:

NEW

27 OCTOBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. .. ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ..

1

.. .. .... . ... .... ... .. ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... .. .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2490)
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b)

Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of’the Security Council (S/16051);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

VPV.2490

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2490th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Abdullah

SALAH

(Jordan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (WAgemW2490)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16048);
tb) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16051);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General conceming the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the
question of Namibia (S/15943)
The meeting was called to order at 11.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16048);
(4 Letter &ted 18 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (s/16051);
(cl Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Counfl resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Niunlhla (S/15943)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the reuresentative of Senegal to take a 1ulace at the
Council tabie.

27 October

1983, at 10.30 a.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara (Senegal)
took a pIace at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the President of the Council for Namibia and the
other members ,of the delegation of the Council to take
places at the Security Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wasiuadin vicePresident of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and
the other members of the delegation tookpkzces at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mueshihange took a
pIace at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with decisions taken at the 2481st to 2486th and
2488th meetings, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola, Argentina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kenya, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, Peru, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria),
Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Muiiiz (Argentina), Mr.
Lqwaila (Botswana), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. PeIIetier
(Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. KuIawiec (CzechosIovakia), Mr. lbrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Republic), Mr. van Well (FederaI Repubric of Germany), Mr.
Somogyi (Hungary), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (rsamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya),
Mr. AbuIhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Mutioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Arias SteIIa (Peru), Mr.
Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. von Schimding (South Apica),
Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. AbdaIIa (St&n), Mr. EI-Fattal
(Syrian Arab RepubIic), Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Rupia
(United Republic of Ta-nzania), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Vene-

z&eta), Mr. Goiob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia)
took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

issue that was not germane to the question of independence for that Territory.
11. As is well known, the meetings of the Council ,
resulted in the adoption of resolution 532 (1983), in which :
the Council decided to mandate the Secretary-General to
undertake consultations with the parties concernedwith a
view to securing the speedyimplementation of resolution ’
435 (1978). The Secretary-General carried out his mission
brilliantly and submitted the report contained in document
S/15943. I take this opportunity to express to the
Secretary-General our appreciation for his painstaking
efforts and, in particular, for the way in which he conducted the consultations in southern Africa and for his
insistenceon conf%ng the consultations to the remaining
outstanding issuesconnected with the principle of the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and within the
framework of resolution 532 (1983).

5; The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Turkey and
Uganda in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kirca (Turkey) and
Mr. Otunnu (Uganda) took the places reservedfor them at
the side of the Council chamber.

12. For Africa and the international community as a
whole, it was a good augury that the five Western Statesof
what is known as the contact group decided to play a
major role in the intense and delicate negotiations that
finally led to the’adoption of the United Nations plan for
-the independenceof Namibia, approved in resolution 435
(1978). At that time my country had the honour of serving
as President of the Organization of AfricanUnity (OAU),
and we stated on its behalf that the United Nations plan as
a whole did not deal with all of Africa’s aspirations to
ensurethe achievement of the independenceof the people
of Namibia, but that we acceptedit as the minimum African position, in the hope that it might lead in a few months
to proclaiming Namibia an independent and free country
joining the family of other free and independent nations.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom Arabic): Member of the Council have before them document S/16085,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by
Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Togo, Zaire
and Zimbabwe. I should also like to draw the attention of
the members of the Council to document S/16081, which
contains the text of a letter dated 25 October from the
representatives of Canada, France, the Federal Republic
of Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States
addressed to the President of the Council.
7. The first speaker is the representative of the Sudan. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

[208&h meeting, paras. 87-96.1

8. Mr. ABDALLA
(Sudan) (intmpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President,-allow me at the outset to express to you and
to the members of the Council my delegation’s thanks and
appreciation for being allowed to participate in the deliberations of the Council on the item on its agenda, the situation in Namibia. We should also like to express to you our
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. Your wisdom and
competence in the diplomatic sphere, as well as the commitment of your country, Jordan, to the cause of colonial
peoples whose fundamental human rights are being
flouted and whose right to self-determination
is being
denied will assist the Council in achieving the fruitful and
constructive results we all desire.

13. At that time, the Sudan made a number of observations and proposalsdesignedto closecertain gapsin resolution 435 (1978) and to eliminate the ambiguity in its
content. The subsequent negotiations concerning the
implementation of the resolution proved the validity of the
African feeling, characterized at first by vigilance and car1
tion and then by co-operation and flexibility.
14. Between 1978and 1981,certain questionscreated by
South Africa surfaced one after the other. The first was a
demand by South Africa for an increasein the number of
inspection posts in the demilitarized zone and for the stationing of some elementsof its forces at those posts. At
that time we were told that thesewere legitimate demands,
giving South Africa the guarantee that the forces of the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO)
would not infiltrate through neighbouring countries. We
all rememberme difficult decisionthat the front-line States
had to ‘take and its implications for their territorial integrity and sovereignty. Then there emerged the question
of the impartiality of the United Nations. That was followed by a request by South Africa for the participation
of what it called the internal parties in the current
negotiations.

9. We should also like to express our appreciation to Mr.
Noel Sinclair, the representative of Guyana, for his meritorious efforts in the service of the Council during his
presidency last month.
10. The Council is meeting for the second time in five
months, to consider the question of Namibia. At the end
of last May, acting on the recommendation of the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, the Council met to consider developments in Namibia with a view to placing them in their true
perspective in the light of recent statements by South
Africa linking Namibian Xlependence to an extraneous

15. Thanks to the constructive flexibility and spirit of
co-operation of the leadershipof SWAP0 and the front2

line States -and Nigeria, Africa emerged from each round
of negotiations more capable of, and more cautious about,
facing the prevarication and strategems of the Pretoria
authorities in their attempts to undermine resolution 435
(1978).

gave serious and sincere consideration to-everything put
forward by the contact group in its quest for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), hoping that that quest
would lead to the fultilment of the legitimate aspirations of
the people of Namibia to exercise self-determination and
obtain independence. We have in more than one forum
expressed our appreciation of the efforts of the five Western States in this respect. We feel that its mission has been
completed and that it is now for the Council to shoulder
actively its full responsibilities with efficiency and in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. In this
respect, my delegation calls on the Council to take the
following measures: first, to formulate a specific timetable
for the implementation of the peaceful settlement agreed
upon; secondly, to reject any linkage between the independence of Namibia and any elements extraneous to resolution 435 (1978); thirdly, to call on South Africa to inform
the Secretary-General by a certain date of its position on
the electoral system; fourthly, to ask South Africa to
undertake immediately, in accordance with that timetable,
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978); and fifthly, if
South Africa continues to defy the authority of the Council, to meet forthwith in order to apply the mandatory
sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.

16. During 1982 the apartheid authorities started to
speak publicly of what had only been whispered beforethat is, the so-called linkage between the withdrawal of the
Cuban troops in Angola and the implementation of the
United Nations plan. Recently we heard the representative
of the racist regime state in the Council that there is support for its position within the international community
[see 2481st meeting, para. 1491. This in itself not only Constitutes defiance of the will of the international community
but also represents disdain for the position and weight of
the Organization. Representatives of the Non-Aligned
Movement, of the OAU, of the League of Arab States and
of the Socialist countries who have spoken in the Council
have rejected the linkage issue, as a whole and in all its
parts, and have stated that, in addition to being extraneous
to the contents of resolution 435 (1978), the linkage issue is
not negotiable and cannot be considered within the framework of the authority of the Council.
17. In this respect, I wish to refer to the following statement by the Foreign Minister of the Sudan in the General
Assembly on 11 October this year:

20. The Sudan and its people and Government are following the developments in Namibia with grave concern.
The Sudan will continue providing support and assistance
to the struggling people of Namibia, led by SWAPO, its
sole and legitimate representative, until victory. The Sudan
will keep its promise to participate in efforts to ensure
implementation of resolution 435 (1978), in accordance
with what President Gaafar Nimeiri said in 1978 conceming the Sudan’s commitment to be part of UNTAG.

, “following [the] completion [of the Secretary-General’s
mission] we deem it necessary that the Security Council
commence the implementation
of the peace plan
according to an agreed timetable which would be binding on South Africa and .which would not involve
extraneous issues such as linkage of the independence of
Namibia with the presence of Cuban troops in Angola.
Independence is one of Namibia’s basic legitimate rights
and it should not be subject to conditions or compromises. It is a right that calls for urgent international
action to exert pressure on the Government of South
Africa to enable the Namibian people to exercise its
right to self-determination.“’

21. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): ‘Ihe
next speaker is the representative of Peru.. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
22. Mr. ARIAS STELLA (Peru) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me first of all, Mr. President, to congmtulate you most sincerely on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of October. My
delegation is particularly pleased that the representative of
a friendly country and an active member of the NonAligned Movement of your ability, skill and good judgement is guiding these debates.

18. My delegation is pleased that the Secretary-General
has restored the negotiations to their normal course and
that agreement has been reached in regard to some pending issues concerning the setting-up of the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and its mandate,
as well as the electoral system. We welcome what has been
achieved in regard to UNTAG and are gratified at the
statement in the Secretary-General’s report that, as far as
UNTAG is concerned, the prolonged and intensive consultations resulted in resolving virtually all the outstanding
difficulties. As for the electoral system, Sudan supports the
position of SWAP0 and the African front-line States in
regard to the necessity of reaching agreement on the electoral system before starting the implementation of resolu~
tion 435 (1978), bearing in mind that there has already
been agreement that the system would be based on singlemember constituencies or proportional representation.

23. Once again the members of the international community are appearing before the Council to condemn the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and to seek a
solution to the tragedy of a people whose hope of achieving the exercise of their inalienable right to independence
has repeatedly been frustrated.
24. In this context, I wish to state my delegation’s deep
appreciation of the efforts of the Secretary-General in
compliance with the mandate given him in Council resolution 532 (1983) and of the special interest he has shown in
the question of Namibia from the moment he assumed his
responsibilities. His report could not be more eloquent nor
his conclusions of greater concern. Namibia’s indepen-

19. Africa participated effectively and actively in all the
negotiations initiated by the Western contact group. It
3

dence is an indispensable pre-condition to guaranteeing
peace in southern Africa. Opposition to this and persistence in illegal occupation exacerbates the conditions for.
the outbreak of a con&t of incalculable dimensions that
would increasingly endanger international peace.

30. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
nextspeaker is the representatfive of Hungary. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
31. Mr. SOMOGYI (Hungary): First of all, I should like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of October and to
express my confidence that your known diplomatic skill
and wisdom will contribute greatly to the successof the
work of the Council. At the same time, I should like to
place on record our appreciation of the exemplary manner
in which Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana conducted the work
of this august body last month.

25. As has been .rightly stated by the representative of
Nigeria,
“The story of Namibia is a tragedy not only for the
people of Namibia but also for people of conscience
throughout the world. It is the tragic story of a peaceful
but proud people who have been subdued by force and
subjected to institutionalized racism.” [2483rd meeting,
pam. z7.1

32. It is a great honour and privilege for me to express to
you, Mr. President, and, through you, to the other
members of the Council, my delegation’s thanks for the
opportunity accorded to us to participate in the discussion
of this very important item.

This bleak ,history and the justice of the Namibian cause
have reinforced as never before the generally-held conviction that independence for its people must not be further
delayed.
26. Many and difficult are the pitfalls which have been
overcome so far thanks to international support and solidarity. We are now faced with yet another difficulty, to the
solution of which we must apply our best efforts. A few
days ago the representative of South Africa put forward
the argument in this chamber that the so-called linkage “is
acknowledged and has support within the international
community’~ [2481st meeting, para. 1491. However, the
wide-ranging and varied support the Council has given to
the unconditional independence of Namibia allows no
grounds for such an assertion.

33. The question of Namibia has been discussed in the
Council many times. Five years ago, in the course of those
deliberations, a plan for Namibia’s independence was elaborated and accepted. Resolution 435 (1978), which was the
result of extensive, wide-scale consultations among the
interested parties, envisaged ways and means to achieve
Namibia’s independence. It contains concrete steps, starting with a cease-fire and ending with elections to be held
under United Nations supervision.
34. Unfortunately, however, the provisions of that resolution, which have been confirmed and reconfirmed time
and again, have not yet been implemented. Namibia, despite all the United Nations resolutions and .the evergrowing demand of world public opinion, is still prevented
from attaining independence. The illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa is still going on; foreign economic
and political interests are still prevailing; the natural and
human resources of that Territory are still plundered and
abused; the people of Namibia are still deprived of all the
fundamental human rights, of self-determination and of
independence.

27. In this connection, we draw attention to the attitude
of one of the members of the contact group, which has
dissociated itself from this demand-an attitude shared by
other members of the Group of Western States. These
statements lead us to hope that this sensible and realistic
position may win new adherents in the interest of the freedom of the Namibian people and international peace and
security, which affect all the Members of the United
Nations without exception.
28. For those reasons, immediate implementation of the
Council resolutions on Namibian independence is essential. We consider the solution of outstanding problems
concerning UNTAG, achieved during the visit of the
Secretary-General to South Africa, to be a positive step.
Similarly, we are pleased to know of the readiness of
SWAP0 to sign a cease-fire agreement and to continue to
co-operate with the Secretary-General to facilitate the
rapid implementation of resolution 435 (1978).,

35. It is clear to us all that this situation is in sharp
contradiction with all norms of international law, as well
as the letter and spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations. South Africa’s Mandate over that Territory was
terminated as early as 1966 by General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), and, since then, the Assembly and the
Council alike have adopted numerous resolutions to the
same effect. Nevertheless, the situation has not improved,
rather it has further deteriorated in the past years. Evernewer obstacles have been introduced by the racist regime
and its Western supporters in order to hamper the just and
lasting solution of the problem of the much-suffering Namibian people.

29. The international community in general and my
country in particular hope that Namibian independence
will be achieved as soon as possible, with full respect for its
territorial integrity and the will of its people and within the
sole existing legal framework: that is, the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice? and the relevant resolutions of the Council. We trust that, at the conclusion of
its deliberations, the Council will be able to adopt the
measures most appropriate for ensuring that the tragedy of
the Namibian people is brought to an end.

36. My delegation has studied carefully the report of the
Secretary-General [S/15943] in which he gave a correct
account of his consultations with the representatives of
South Africa. In his. report, the Secretary-General concluded that the consultations with the representatives of
4

the Government of South Africa resulted in resolving virtually all of the outstanding issues, as far as UNTAG was
concerned. However, it was also indicated in that report
that “the position of South Africa regarding the issue of
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola as a precondition for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978)
still makes it impossible to launch the United Nations
plan.” [Ibid, .paru. 25.1

44. My delegation believes that the respect and the
authority of the United Nations is at stake if the racist
regime of South Africa is allowed to get away with its
intransigence. It is imperative for all of us to preserve the
respect for this body in order to maintain international
peace and security.
45. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

37. The representative of South Africa has once again
reiterated his Government’s position to the Council
[2481st meeting] and confirmed it as being irrevocable.

46. Mr. KULAWIEC
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
jkom Rursian): Mr. President, may I thank you for the
opportunity given to me to speak in the Council and to
take part in the work of the present important meetings.
May I likewise congratulate you upon your assumption of
the presidency of the Council and to wish you successin
carrying out this important and complicated mission. We
are convinced that your great professional qualities, as well
as your experience spanning many years, are a pledge that
under your direction our work will be effective.

38. Only a very few support the position of South Africa
on this linkage, on the false pretext that the security interests of all the parties have to be addressed. But it should be
emphasized again, in no uncertain terms, that resorting to
prevarication and introducing extraneous factors only
harm the cause and delay the genuine settlement of this
long-standing issue.
39. The purpose of the presence of Cuban troops in
Angola is so clear to everybody that it needs no elaboration. They have been invited by the legitimate Government
of Angola to defend its territory against armed aggression
by South Africa. Their stay or withdrawal is a .matter of
bilateral agreement between the two Governments.

47. We should also like to pay tribute to the work of the
representative of Guyana, Mr. Noel Sinclair, who performed the duties of President of the Council in September
of this year.

40. At the same time it must be obvious to everyone that
no legitimate explanation can be given for the South African presence in Namibia, for the barbarous attacks the
troops of the Pretoria r&ime repeatedly launch against
Angola and the -other front-line States, or for the aggressive political course pursued by Pretoria, one that constitutes unprovoked, premeditated intervention in the
internal affairs of sovereign African States and endangers
the peace and security of that region.

.48. It is the second time this year, and after many other
occasions since the adoption of Council resolution 435
(1978), that this body is required to consider the question
of Namibia. During the last five years-in other words,
since the adoption of the United Nations plan to ensure the
independence of the Namibian people-the question of
Namibia has frequently been discussed in this body and,
each time, an urgent appeal for the implementation of the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
imperative rules of international law has been sounded, as
well as an appeal for the decolonizaticn of Namibia and
the adoption of appropriate measures so that the Namibian people might at last be granted an opportunity to
exercise their right to selfdetermination.

.41. As for the security of South Africa, it is threatened
not by its neighbours but by its oti apartheid system, by
its own policy of colonialism and aggression.
42. South Africa could not have defied the resolutions of
the United Nations and could not have hindered their
implementation without the support of its allies, primarily
the United States. Therefore, we urge the members of the
Western contact group of five-first of all, those which are
members of the Council-to reconsider their position and
exert pressure on South Africa to ensure its compliance
with the resolutions of the United Nations.

49. However, we are forced once again to observe that
these appeals have led to no results whatsoever. The
Government of Pretoria ignores both the legally binding
decision$of the United Nations concerning-termination of
the Mandate- of South Africa in Namibia as well as the
decisions adopted subsequently by the General Assembly
and the Security Council. It refuses to end its unlawful
occupation of the Territory, and is continually building up
its troops there; they now number more than 100,000 men.
It is organising the forcible recruitment of young Namibians whom it uses for the purpose of repression and
murder of their own brothers. It is inflicting cruel, largescale repression upon the civilian population of the country, even using mercenaries for this purpose. It is killing
those who tight for freedom and independence in Namibia
arbitrarily imprisoning a number of political leaders and
supporters of SWAPO. It is torturing imprisoned patriots.
It is mercilessly exploiting the human, natural and material
resources of Namibia. It is constantly making attempts to
cobble together a coalition of collaborators and traitors,

43. My delegation believes that the Council has to act
quickly and resolutely this time, bearing in mind the
dangers in the southern part of Africa stemming from the
intransigence of the racist r&ime. First of all, the Council
has unconditionally to reject the linkage between the independence of Namibia and the presence of internationalist
Cuban troops in Angola. Secondly, a specific timetable
should be decided upon to implement without further
delay resolution 435 (1978). If South Africa fails to abide
by Council resolutions, the Council should consider mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
5

and is trying to perpetuate its domination in Namibia by
means of the forcible introduction of colonial, political
and constitutional schemes. It is continuing to make
efforts to splinter the national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia.

53. Thus it is no accident ‘that the work of decolonization, the exercise of basic human rights and the establishment of peace and security in southern Africa are opposed
by the very forces that are now striving to destabilize the
situation in Europe and throughout the world. These are
the forces that are whipping up the arms race, increasing
the danger of the outbreak of nuclear war and acting
against the vital interests of the peoples of all continents.

50. The territory of Namibia is also used by the Pretoria
regime as a staging area for armed aggression against
neighbouring independent African States. We must here
mention primarily the attacks on Angola and the occupation of part of the territory of that country; the attacks
upon Mozambique, the most recent of which took place a
week ago; and the forays and subversive action against
Zambia, Lesotho and Zimbabwe. South Africa is striving
to bring about the downfall of the progressive, anticolonial and anti-imperialist Governments of the front-line
States. Armed aggression is the instrument for the implementation of its regional policy, aimed at taking over the
whole of southern Africa. As a result of Pretoria’s policy,
the region has been converted into one of the most serious
flash-points of crisis in the world today. It is not only the
source of regional tensions but a threat to peace and security in general.

54. The present Administration of the United States has
been instrumental in putting forward the completely unjustified and totally unacceptable demand to link the granting
of independence to Namibia with the withdrawal of the
internationalist Cuban units from Angola. The units went
to Angola. at the request of the Angolan people and
Government under an inter-State agreement in order to
help protect the country against the armed invasion of
South African troops and against the onslaughts of Preto- I
ria, organized and financed by traitors and mercenaries.
Washington is striving to direct its efforts to achieve an
early solution of the Namibian question against the mvolutionary~Government of Angola and trying to reverse the
progressive, anti-colonialist and anti-imperialist develop
merits in Angola. In Pretoria it has found a diligent proxy
which is seeking any excuse to continue and perpetuate its
colonial domination of Namibia. This is a kind of obstruction which has not the slightest foundation in international
law and is devoid of any logical ties. This is flagrant interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign States.
-

51. However, we are not speaking only of the policy of
South Africa. We are speaking also about the position of
certain Western States. They are the ones blocking the
implementation of the United Nations plan; the racist policy of occupation and aggression adopted by South Africa
is possible only because of the comprehensive support of
the United States, certain other Western Powers and
Israel. Were it not for the diplomatic, political, strategic,
military and economic cooperation of those States, the
Pretoria r&me would be unable to ignore United Nations
decisions, the will of the international community and
world public opinion. The support of the West provides
favourable conditions for all the manifestations of the
internal and external policies of the aparzheid r&ime, manifestations which are worthy of condemnation and which
are condemned, including the flouting of the elementary
rights of the Namibian people. Pretoria is met halfway by
those States which, in the course of the discussion of economic sanctions in the Security Council, repeatedly use
their right of veto, as well as by the International Monetary Fund, which has magnanimously offered it a loan of
over $US 1 billion.

55. Czechoslovakia condemns the continuing occupation
of the Territory of Namibia by the troops of the apartheid
regime, the denial to the people of Namibia of their right
to self-determination and the acts of aggression against
independent African States. We categorically reject any
attempts to link the legitimate demand concerning the ,
granting of independence to Namibia with any questions
that bear no relation to this problem. We also reject any
other obstructions by South Africa and its Western allies.
We stand in total solidarity with the liberation struggle of
the Namibian people under the leadership of SWAPO,
their sole legitimate representative, and support their struggle. We have stated this on a number of occasions, both
from the rostrum of the United Nations and on other
occasions. For instance, in connection with the mission of
the United Nations Council for Namibia to Czechoslovakia in April this year: as well as at the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People
for Independence4 This position of ours has been confirmed also by the highest figure in Czechoslovakia, the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Czechoslovakia Communist Party, the President of Czechoslovakia, Gustav Husak, in the course of a reception for the
President of SWAPO, Sam Nujoma, 14 days ago in
Prague. It is our conviction that the adoption of effective
measures against any further blocking of the granting of
independence to Namibia cannot be further postponed.
Like the majority of speakers before, us, we too are.of the
opinion that it is only through the introduction of compre-hensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter that it will be possible to compel the Pretoria
regime, in fulfilment of the United Nations plan, to grant

52. Pretoria is acquiring, either as direct supplies or
through the granting of licences, the weapons and military
mat&iel needed to sow terror inside the country and to
carry out its policy of occupation and aggression directed
against other States. The aid provided by the West and by
Israel has contributed, and continues to contribute, to the
marked progress in Pretoria’s nuclear potential, which is
arrousing fears not only in the neighbouring States but
among peace-loving mankind as a whole. The economic
monopolies of the Western countries are making a large
contribution to supporting the functioning of the apartheid
machine, and together with South African companies are
participating intensively in the plunder of the potential of
the future Namibian economy.
6

(1978), issues left open by South Africa. Furthermore, and
perhaps more important, he has been able to draw a very
clear picture of the present situation regarding Namibia.
This clear and accurate description of the .situation wi!!
facilitate the steps which need to be taken. We are grateful
to the Secretary-General for his valuable efforts. At the
same time, we have taken note of the constructive attitude
adopted by SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative
of the Namibian people, during those consultations by
declaring its readiness to accept a cease-tire at once. Thus
the pre-implementation diplomatic process could be considered to be completed. Yet the negotiating process this
time faces a South African pre-condition, the so-called
linkage, which lies outside the scope of the peace plan
envisaged by resolution 435 (1978).

independence to Namibia. At the present meetings of the
Council, decisions should be adopted to ensure achievement of the intended goal, namely, the definitive decolonization of Namibia and the exercise of the right to
self-determination by its people, who are enduring unbelievably excruciating suffering.
56. The PRESIDENT
(intmpretufion from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
57. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey): Sir, I wish to thank the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
make this statement. I should also like to express our satisfaction at seeing you, the representative of a country with
which Turkey enjoys brotherly relations, presiding over
the Council this month. My delegation is confident that
you will guide the work of the Council in the best possible
way. I also wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana on his presidency last month.

63. Therefore, it still is not possible to set a date for a
cease-fire and to proceed with the implementation of the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
The further frustration
of the legitimate and rightful
national aspirations of the Namibian people not only places a burden on the conscience of the international community, but also is fraught with dangers for regional, as
well as international, peace and security.

58. The Council is now engaged in the pressing task of
reviewing recent developments concerning the question of
Namibia, with the aim of bringing about the independence
of Namibia without further delay. If the past history of the
Namibian question is of any relevance, this is not an easy
task, but it is a long-overdue one.

64. We believe that, in dealing with this critical problem,
primary attention should be paid to the suffering and injustices which fall on the Namibian people as a result of the
prolongation of the illegal occupation and repression by
South Africa. The time has long since come for the Namibians rightfully to become masters of their own land,
their own resources and their own destiny.
._.
65. I should like to ask what the crucial difference is
between Namibians and other peoples in Africa and elsewhere that, while so many peoples have attained their freedom, Namibians are being relentlessly kept under the most
repressive form of colonialism. The answer-seems to be
that the only difference is the name of the colonial Power,
South Africa.

59. This year, during the last few months, important
events have taken place which have created a certain
momentum in the stalled diplomatic and political process
concerning Namibia. First, the International Conference
in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for
Independence, held in Paris in April, and then the timely
Council meetings have provided an impetus for intemational action. The deliberations of the Council, culminating on 31 May with the adoption of resolution 532 (1983),
have also served to highlight the special responsibility
which the United Nations holds for achieving independence for Namibia-a
sacred trust of the United Nations.

66. Moreover, there are many indications that South
Africa is reviving in Namibia its attempts to create an
internal solution. It is doing so while keeping world public
opinion occupied by appearing to be interested in the
implementation of the internationally recognized plan for
independence. There are signs of South African prevarication, entrenchment and political manipulation in Namibia,
not of a preparedness for a peaceful transition to independence. As a matter of fact, if, again,‘the past history of
Namibia is of any significance, South Africa will be likely
to raise one obstacle after another on the path leading to
the attainment of the fundamental rights of the people of
Namibia.

60. This important resolution, 532 (1983), has reaffirmed
the earlier resolution of the Council, resolution 435 (1978),
by which the Council adopted the plan for the independence of Namibia. South Africa, the illegal occupier of
Namibia, has since then prevented the implementation of
that plan in defiance and mockery of all the efforts of the
international community.
61. It is on this basis that the Secretary-General, carrying
out a most difficult mandate given to him under resolution
532 (1983), has conducted valuable consultations with the
parties concerned with a view to securing the speedy implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

67. Simultaneously, the continuation of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa more than 16 years
after its Mandate was terminated by the United Nations
poses a dangerous and increasing threat to peace and security in southern Africa. The stability and well-being of
independent. African States are being attacked constantly
by the South African regime, which is bent on preserving
its hold over Namibia and subjugating its neighbours to its
unjust policies.

62. We view favourably the concise and pertinent report
prepared by the Secretary-General on the results of his
mission, which included a working trip to southern Africa
[S/159433. He has thus been able to observe the situation
at close quarters and hold direct contacts. In this way he
has, first of all, been able to clear away the .remaining
issues concerning the implementation of resolution 435
7

.

68.

In these circumstances,

every effort needs to be

ensure the attainment of the 1ongdesirg.d independence of
Namibia. The contents of naraaranhs 24 to 29 of his report
[S/Z59431 synthesize the wholeYst&y. I feel they should be
taken as a whole, without any selective quotation.

exerted to persuade South Africa to agree to the expcditious implementation of the plan for the independence of
Namibia. Otherwise the grave consequences of a further
prolongation and aggravation of the existing situation
would necessitate the taking of the urgent and decisive
measures envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations.

75. On a bleak international horizon, the dawn of Namibian independence beckons with a constant ray of hope.
That is the wish long held by the Namibian people, and
also, let us never forget, by the international community as
a whole, irrespective of what one member may conveniently argue to the contrary. Obviously, one more major
effort is still needed after a review of the stage we have now
reached.

69. In concluding, I wish to say that my Government, in
conformity with its firm commitment to the struggle
against all forms of colonialism and racial discrimination,
fully supports and has faith in the just cause of the people
of Namibia and is confident of their final victory. My
Government is committed to all the efforts being expended
by the United Nations to achieve the full sovereign independence and territorial integrity of Namibia. We sincerely
hope that this round of meetings of the Council will lead us
to that objective in the shortest possible time.

76. My delegation has therefore listened carefully to all
the participants in the debate. We are pleased by the evident progress achieved, which has been acknowledged by
all. Since we are so near, even though our final objective
may not yet have been attained, we must not be distracted
from our main approach; nor should we allow any divisive
elements to break the unity of ranks which so commendably has characterized the peaceful approach of the United
Nations, in particular the Council, since the unanimous
adoption of resolution 435 (1978)-five weary years ago,
perhaps, but constantly nourished by hope and by steady
progress.

70. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): I should like first, Sir, to extend
to you my friendliest compliments on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month, and my most
sincere appreciation of the able and dedicated way in
which you have already conducted our work, even into the
early h-ours of one recent morning. Your country and mine
have always enjoyed bilateral relations unmarred by any
controversy and forged stongly over many past centuries. I
am convinced that the same friendly relations will project
into the indefinite future.

77. The main elements that South Africa is now emphasizing, as one more unfortunate pretext for delay, are not
new. They can be easily dismissed, since they were already
present at the -time the Council resolution was unanimously adopted, and yet no reference was made to these
so-called obstacles at that time.

71. I also wish to compliment your predecessor, our
good friend and colleague, Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana,
for so valiantly carrying the burden of the Council presidency during September.

78. If East-West tension has unfortunately increased
since then, it is not only South Africa that is feeling the
consequent pernicious effects. But even so, that is no valid
reason for South Africa-or any other country for that
matter-to renege on its international obligations. On the
contrary, it imposes an even stronger responsibility for
avoidance of situations that might further exacerbate international tension.

72. We are meeting in gravely troubled times, with an
unusually heavy burden of responsibility falling on the
Council. Malta is anxious that no opportunity should be
lost for the Council to reduce tension and to exercise its
proper role in world affairs. We have even made a sincere
effort to provide for this against unexpected contingencies.
73. On this particular issue of Namibia, we have already
stated our position in our statement before the Council on
31 May 1983 [2449zh meeting, paras 37-563. In the interests
of the efficient conduct of our work, we do not wish to
repeat the .main elements as we see them, especially since
many eloquent statements, particularly those of the frontline African States and of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, have already done full justice to the present
phase of our discussions. So has the authentic representative of the Namibian people, the people whose unfettered
future should be the sole focus of our concentrated attention today.

79. I need hardly stress that one certain prescription for
increasing such tension would, in fact, be generated if
South Africa were to deny to the Namibian people the
exercise of their right to independence. This would be detrimental not only to Namibia, but to neighbouring countries, and these of course include South Africa itself. Once
more, therefore, we appeal to the Government of South
Africa not to choose short-term objectives, but finally to
embark on a new chapter in writing the human and political history of the southern part of the African continent by
making its important contribution towards removing the
last vestiges of the colonialist attitude from the region of
southern Africa and promoting good-neighbourly rela-

74. There are therefore only a few additional points I
now feel compelled to make. First and foremost, I should
like to express the gratitude of my delegation to the
‘Secretary-General, not only for so efficiently carrying out
the tasks assigned to him under Council resolution 532
(1983) but also for clearly stating, with commendable brevity and realistic insight, all the compelling reasons which
should prompt us to move forward in our united effort to

tiOIlS.

80. We also call on the influential friends of South Africa
to utilize to the fullest extent possible, and as never before,
all their powerful means of persuasion in the continuing
effort necessary to convince South Africa that it should
allow progress to proceed unhindered, by being more
8

accommodating in the interests ot the “‘sacred trust” to
which it has paid so much lip-service in the past, but
which, unfortunately, it has not yet upheld in practice.

you personally, as well as the members of the Council, for
giving me this opportunity to participate in the Council’s
debates on the question of Namibia. Allow me also to
congratulate you on your assumption of the responsible
office of the President of the Council for the month of
October and to express my conviction that your wealth of
experience and diplomatic skill will contribute to the solution of the important tasks facing the Council.

81. Once more, we wish to commend SWAP0 and the
.front-line States for their cooperative attitude, which
stands in marked contrast to that of South Africa. We
commend in particular the repeated readiness of SWAP0
to negotiate a cease-fire.

89. I should also like to express my appreciation and my
deep esteem for your predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair, the
representative of Guyana, for the exemplary way in which
he discharged hi responsibilities as President of the Council for September.

82. Once more we commend the patience and forbearance of the Namibian people themselves, and renew to
them the assurance of our modest but continued support
in their peaceful quest for independence.

!k. This is the second time this year that the Council has
been asked to consider the question of the continued occupation of Namibia by the racist regime of Pretoria and to
take steps to ensure the immediate implementation of the
resolutions of the United Nations, including those of the
Council itself, on the granting of independence to the
Territory.

83. It is now fairly and squarely South Africa’s iongoverdue turn to show in practical terms its stated commitment to Namibian independence. It cannot deny, as
regards the wishes of the Namibian people themselves, that
these can best be determined by the people concerned, in a
free and secret ballot on the basis of universal suffrage,
rather than by any contrived and unrepresentative system
superimposed by South Africa. We are convinced that any
slurs against the impartiality of United Nations assistance
in the exercise of Namibian self-determination is, unfortunately, but one more figment of South Africa’s anachronistic phobia ,against genuine freedom and equality.

91. World public opinion, through its most competent
international forums, has for years now been categorically
and consistently expressing its solidarity with the people of
Namibia and with their just and legitimate struggle against
colonial occupation and for self-determination, liberation
and national independence. The resolutions of the General
Assembly, as well as all the decisions of the Non-Aligned
Movement and of the OAU, invariably stress that the
racists are in Namibia illegally and that they must withdraw from the Territory immediately. This position is supported by all peace-loving States.

84. As regards our best method of approach, I continue
to believe that another unanimously adopted resolution
would further augment the current political impetus for
tangible progress. We therefore hope that all Memberswithout any single exception-will contribute to that need.
As I said on a previous occasion:

92. During its present meetings, the Council has had
another opportunity to hear statements by a large number
of delegations from all geographical regions and of different shades of political opinion, who have expressed more
forcefully than ever their concern at the deadlock in the
efforts to grant independence to Namibia. The overwhelming majority of delegations that have already spoken in the
Council’s debate have clearly stated that the only path
leading to a peaceful solution to the Namibian problem
remains the prompt implementation of the appropriate
resolutions of the United Nations, including Council resolution 435 (1978) setting forth the United Nations plan for
the granting of independence to Namibia, a plan which
should be implemented without any amendment or subsequent distortion and without the introduction of any
extraneous element that has nothing to do with the plan. It
is quite clear to all, or virtually all, those present in this
hall, as well as to the overwhelming majority of world
public opinion, that the right of the people of Namibia to
self-determination and independence does not depend, and
cannot depend, on any external factors or interests whatsoever. Furthermore, it is also quite clear that foreign
interests-those
of the racists and their imperialist
protectors-are directly responsible for the continued suffering of the Namibian people and the other peoples of
southern Africa. My delegation considers that any reference to the so-called security interests of Pretoria expresses
cynical disdain for the legitimate rights of those peoples

“The invaluable resources of a collective and concentrated international effort, backed by the dedicated
efforts of the Secretary-General and his team, constitute
an irresistible tide for final victory. South Africa should
join, rather than impede, this final sprint.” [2449th
meeting, pra. 55.1.
85. A unanimously adopted resolution at this juncture
would unmistakably confirm to South Africa that it stands
alone, isolated in its obsolete philosophy, decades behind
the real requirements of modem times. The current debate,
and the resolution adopted, should leave South Africa
without even a shadow of a doubt as to the real wishes of
the international community and, in fact, conclusively
demonstrate that South Africa’s self-assumed confidence
of international support is absolutely unfounded.
86. The draft resolution just introduced, which Malta has
been pleased to join in sponsoring, provides the working
basis for a concerted, peaceful and unanimous approach.
87. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
88. Mr. TSVETKOV
(Bulgaria) (interpretation from
fie&z): Mr. President, I should like first of all to thank
9

and constitutes open support for the colonialist and racist
policy of that regime.

tinued efforts of Washington and Pretoria to delay .the
granting of independence to Namibia and strengthen the
illegal racist occupation of the Territory. Furthermore,
these attempts constitute overt and flagrant interference in
the internal affairs of sovereign Angola and are meant to
limit its right to self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, and destabiiize and topple its
legitimate Government. There can be no doubt that the
wide-ranging aggression against and the occupation of
large parts of Angolan territory by South Africa are aimed
at attaining the same objectives - by force of arms.

93. Namibia’s history is one of colonial domination, genocide and racism in its most overt and extreme
manifestations-that
is, the policy of apartheid, repression,
exploitation and plunder, poverty and brutal violations of
fundamental human rights.
94. The people of Namibia have never resigned themselves to this situation. In recent years, the heroic struggle
for self-determination and independence, under the leadership of its vanguard, SWAPO, has become a movement of
national resistance against the occupiers, a struggle whose
legitimacy is expressly recognized by the United Nations
and the OAU. In spite of the categorically expressed will of
the Namibian people to be free, and in deface of United
Nations decisions that for 17 years now have declared the
end of South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory and
called for the immediate cessation of its occupation, South
Africa has continued brazenly to disregard the will of the
world Organization. Namibia has been turned into a veritable military base. The 100,000 racist soldiers occupying
the country are waging an aggressive colonial war against
its people.

98. Bulgaria resolutely condemns and categorically
rejects the policy of Pretoria and Washington to link the
question of the independence of Namibia to the presence
of Cuban troops in Angola and insists that aggression
against that country and interference in its internal affairs I
should cease. We hope that, at this series of meetings, the
Council will condemn and reject that policy. Previous
debates in the Council have confirmed that to be the will of
the international community.
99. The Council must also take decisive measures to
guarantee the implementation of its resolution 435 (1978)
by setting a firm deadline for its implementation and, if
that deadline is not respected, by imposing comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against South Africa as provided for
in Chapter VII of the Charter.

95. All the United Nations resolutions on the subject
demonstrate that the persistent and firm support given to
South Africa by the United States and certain other Westem countries, as well as their co-operation in many fields
with the racist regime, provide the necesary basis for the
continuation of its inhuman policy. Strengthened by that
support, Pretoria is intensively carrying out acts designed
to destabilize the Governments of neighbouring sovereign
African countries. Confident in its impunity, and showing
once again its disdain for world public opinion, South
Africa perpetrated a fresh act of banditry at the very beginning of this series of Council meetings by launching a
piratical attack against the capital of Mozambique. Bulgaria firmly condemns this brutal violation of the rules of
international law, which once again demonstrates just how
far the policy of constructive engagement between
Washington and Pretoria can go.

100. My country’s position was reiterated during the visit
to Bulgaria a few days ago of the President of SWAPO,
Sam Nujoma. On 18 October last, the General Secretary of
the Central Committee of the Bulgarian Communist Party
and President of the Council of State of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, Todor Zhivkov, met with Mr.
Nujoma and. condemned the attempts of the racists and
their Western allies to impose a neocolonial solution to
the Namibian problem and stressed that Bulgaria firmly
supported the position that full authority should be transferred to SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the
Namibian people. He expressed the unfailing militant solidarity of the Bulgarian people with the just and legitimate
struggle of the Namibian people and its vanguard,
SWAPO.

96. Events during the live years following the adoption
of Council resolution 435 (1978) have shown that South
Africa and the United States Administration are pursuing
a co-ordinated policy aimed at perpetuating colonial domination over Namibia, consolidating the apartheid regime,
exercising pressure and destabilizing the Governments of
the front-line States to compel them to adopt a policy to
the liking of the imperialists and the racists. Washington’s
policy is motivated by its ambition for world supremacy,
which is at the root of all its actions everywhere in the
world, the most recent expression of which has been the
events in Grenada.

101. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
102. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
Iran):

(Islamic Republic of

“0 mankind! We created you from a single (pair) of a
male and a female, and made you into nations and
tribes, that ye may know each other (not that ye may
despise each other). Verily the most honoured of you in
the sight of God is (he who is) the most righteous of
you. And God has full knowledge and is well
acquainted .(with all things).“*5

97. The growing aggressiveness of United States policy as
conducted by the present Administration
can be seen
clearly in its persistent attempts to impose arbitrarily a link
between the question of Namibia and the presence of
Cuban troops in Angola. Attempts to link these two questions, which have nothing in common, reflect the con-

* Quoted

10

in Arabic

by the speaker.

Today the Council is deliberating on the problem of Na‘mibia. Namibia is another victim of imperialism and international Zionism,
_ _.~. whose mother base is in the United
Stat& and two of whose major satellite bases are in
Palestine’and South Africa. The problem of Namibia is,
like that of Palestine, a perennial international problem
which apparently cannot be solved by the United
Nations.

problem of the Middle East, including Palestine, the problem of Afghanistan, the problem of South Africa, the
problem of Nicaragua and other similar problems.
107. ‘The problem of South Africa is not basically different from the problems of Zambia, Ghana, Namibia, Tanzania, or the whole of Africa. But when that problem
comes to the United Nations it becomes isolated from the
rest of its body and remains a perennial issue, like that of
Zionism and the Zionist base in the Middle East. These
problems-whether
the Organization’s procedures -and
Charter admit it or not-are slightly bigger than the ballgame of the United Nations, and they must be considered
in a broader context, which goes far beyond the United
Nations and those presuppositions which are axiomatic in
the entire international body.

103. Certain problems which fall within the scope of the
Charter of the United Nations-and
these are very few in
number and very small in size-can be solved on the basis
of the Charter and the usual methods of international parliamentary procedure. These are problems which do not
question the fundamental presuppositions and axioms of
the international body: routine issues of international aviation; international telecommunication matters; matters of
relief assistance to drought-stricken people; relief work in
the event of natural catastrophes such as earthquakes; Red
Cross matters; simple border conflicts; bilateral conflicts of
a certain kind-not
all of them, of course; some of the
issues of the International Monetary Fund-certainly
not
all of them; some minor local or regional economic or
educational problems; these are examples of the kinds of
problems that do not call into question or come into conflict with certain presuppositions of the international body
and which can very happily be solved by the United
Nations.

108. The genius of the founders of the Non-Aligned
Movement was that they real&d full well that certain
problems unquestionally fall beyond the scope of the
United Nations, system and cannot be solved within it. But,
unfortunately, being themselves professional statesmen
and politicians interested in quick solutions, they started
the Movement on a practical basis and were unable to
open a theoretical front to meet the challenge of metaUnited Nations issues. Thus, they failed to realize that
when many more United Nations Members, with their
own preoccupations and propensities, joined the NonAligned Movement in order to make it more universal,
they would metamorphose the entire Movement into a
body like the United Nations, either parallel or similar to
the United Nations, and maybe subservient to it, but anyway always beneath it. That is why in all other intemational bodies, such as the Non-Aligned Movement, the
OAU and the organizations of Latin American countries,
everybody makes sure that nothing goes against the Charter, the rules of procedure or the resolutions of the United
Nations. Even in the Organization of the Islamic
Conference-which is supposed to be Islamic-if
something co6trary to the Charter or the resolutions of the
United Nations comes about, everybody becomes
hysterical.

104. However, there are certain international issues
which both precede and go beyond the Charter and its
presuppositions, not only historically speaking, but also
theoreticaily and structurally. The problem of nationalism,
for instance, is beyond the scope of United Nations
problem-solving machinery, because instead of the United
Nations encompassing it, it encompasses the United
Nations. The United Nations is based on the concept of
nationalism; the nation-State concept of political entities is
axiomatic in the very structure of the United Nations and
its Charter. That Charter, therefore, cannot provide for
that problem and is not equal to it.
105. Other issues are imperialism and international Zionism, which are essentially beyond the scope of the United
Nations problem-solving tradition. The United Nations is
as wretched a victim of imperialism and international
Zionism as is Namibia itself. That is why the problems of
South Africa and Israel remain perennially untouched
issues in the context of United%ations diplomacy; and
whenever they are brought up here, in a sort of innocent,
ndive and emotional manner, they are wrongly introduced
as the problems of Namibia and Palestine. This is because
people, or at least some people, want to sympathize with,
pat, patronize and pacify the victims without touching the
criminals, or because they want to deceive themselves by
dealing with the facade, the surface effect, and not with the
cause.

110. Even the United Nations ritual “At the outset, Mr.
Chairman, I have to congratulate you”, is carefully preserved, and the recital of a verse from the Holy Koran,
which is common practice in all Islamic gatherings, is
sometimes ignorantly forgotten in our Islamic Conference
meetings.

106. The poor United Nations and its miserable
Charter-to which some hypocrites refer as if it were a
divine code-are too small to solve the problems of imperialism, international Zionism, racism, communism and
materialism, and their immediate by-products, such as the

111. We have all of us therefore deprived ourselves of an
arena in which meta-United Nations issues, like that of
Namibia, could be resolved in an entirely different, more
comprehensive and more encompassing context. Whenever we bring those issues to the United Nations, without

109. Thus, in all those international bodies, which are in
fact independent of the United Nations and are supposed
to be forums for consideration of meta-United Nations
issues, we cannot do very much, because all those bodies
have, willy-nilly, become like sub-committees of the
United Nations. They deal with exactly the same issues,
use the same methods and paperwork, and have the same
resolution-type ends and objectives.

11

knowing whether a given issue tilly falls within or without the scope of United Nations diplomacy, we find ourselves in a deadlock. The result can be nothing but
deadlock, because we want to take political actions against
a Member which, according to the Bible of the United
Nations, has every right to veto our decisions. At this stage
let us forget about the bilateral relations that exist among
the holders of the veto power and some of the victim
countries and the impact those i-elations have upon United
Nations diplomacy. I simply mean, let us at this stage
condone and overlook many other things.

copper, oil, precious stones i&d other valuable substances
for which arrogant Powers are killing the local people, in
the first instance, and ultimately themselves, if necessary.
The East seems to have the upper hand in this struggle,
because it begins H;ith some sort of ideology-good
or
bad-which it gives to the people. However, the West has
no ideology to offer. It goes therefore not to the people but
to Governments. And since Governments are usually supposed to represent the people, those who work with the
people and on the people thus have an advantage. If the
American Administration is honest in its belief in democracy, then the people of Angola and elsewhere in Africa
have every right to be friendly with any country they like
and to follow any ideology they like. They have every right
to tolerate or befriend any other country and then to
decide how bad or good a given ideology may be and, like
other people in other parts of the world, to fight against
those ideologies if they wish to do so. But they inust have
the right to choose.

112. Under such circumstances we want to solve the
problem of Namibia here, and that problem inevitably
dissolves into the silly and irrelevant argument that if the
Cubans leave Angola then the United States will smile and
will treat t$e Angolans more kindly by pretending to
oppose some of the apartheid policies of South Africa. We
press-the Council presses-for resolutions and the United
States simply vetoes them. United States imperialism is a
gigantic mountain, and the diplomatic pressures exerted on
it here are like the soft, beautiful spring rainfall. The dipiomats of the United Nations who want to break down United
States imperialism with resolutions seem like soft-hearted,
innocent and primitive people looking forward to the total
erosion of that mountain by the annual spring min. Do you
know how many years you will have to wait? The answer is:
for a complete geological period, through only three of
which we have passed since the creation of the earth-and
we have not yet completed the fourth.

116. However, all the good things in Africa are too
seductive to be easily overlooked by multinational corporations and their Governments. Those Governments therefore resort to very nasty practices through multinational
groups and Zionist agents in South Africa and in Pilestine.
The same multinational companies determine the nature
and Government policies of Western Administrations that
have veto rights here, and have allies and other satellites in
addition to their main and secondary puppets in the
United Nations. Now, we bring up Namibia here, not from
the viewpoint of what the oppressed people of-Namibia
and the apartheid-stricken people of South Africa really
need, but from the viewpoint of instructions from wellknown Governments.

113. Some small, soft hills and hill-tops can be washed
away naturally or manually by water, but some need
dynamite, not United Nations resolutions. We in the
Islamic Republic of Iran have found our forum, its charters and its correct international perspectives in the Holy
Koran. We think that others also need a theoretical or
ideological frame of reference; they too need a charter and
a different cosmological-and
thus intemationai-perspective, armed with which they can seriously challenge
and eradicate imperialism, materialism, Zionism and other
international meta-United Nations complexities. We have
also come to the conclusion that communism and other
leftist trends and pseudo-ideologies are, essentially, as
materialistic as capitalism and that they cannot solve the
problems of mankind. Instead, they themselves add to the
problems that are already in hand.

117. I should therefore like to address all the representatives here, and particularly those from Africa, not as dipiomats but as ordinary, honest people who understand all
the dimensions of the issue. If they have any concern for.
the people of South Africa, I urge then to report the situation back to their Foreign Offices in such a way as to
persuade them not to see the situation as an ordinary international issue but rather as a meta-United Nations issue
that can be resolved only through the united collaboration
of African countries, standing independent of all affitiations and leanings towards either West or East. If those
countries can have an independent OAU, different from
the United Nations and ready to transcend the artificial,
silly, nationalistic identities and boundaries of Africa that
are now ossified and fortified on that continent, then they
can do something for Namibia and for the rest of Africa.
Otherwise they cannot do very much. Thus the solution to
the problem of the people in the southern part of Africa, as
well as in the rest of Africa, inevitably lies in the hands of
those revolutionary groups that are struggling to break
down the existing political structure that is now subjugating them.

114. Our foreign policy of leaning neither to the East nor
to the West is not, therefore, an emotional position taken
in anger towards either the Russians or Americans. Its
basis is not animosity against Westerners or Easterners,
nor does it stem,from such animosity. Rather, for us it is a
new approach to sol.ving many human problems, only
some of them meta-United Nations issues, and we regret
that we have not yet been properly understood.
115. Let us go back to the problem of Namibia. The
problem of Namibia cannot be resolved without an honest
and sincere understanding of its components, namely,
United States imperialism and imperialist interest in
Africa, and the presence of natural resources and some
rare and expensive radioactive metals, such as uranium,

118. As for the arrogant Power-and, particularly, as for
Western arrogance-if
they honestly do not want
bloodshed and human suffering, they have to make
‘concessions-some concessions, at least the minimum rhat
the United Nations resolutions suggest.
12

119. But our ultimate solution in Iran is simply Islamic;
it stems from the verse in the Holy Koran which I quoted
at the beginning of my statement and which means something very simply. It means: Believe in God, surrender to
His will and His commandments as they are in the Holy
Koran. Do not fear anyone but Him. Obey no one save
Him. And there you are all free and equal; the nearest of
you to God is the most righteous of you.
120. I regret that I cannot see the international body as
being anything but very remote from that solution.

Nom
’ Oficial Records of the General Assembly, T?drty-eighl Session,
Plenary Meetings, 28th meeting, para. 51.
2 Legal Consequences for Stares of the Continued Presence of South
Aftica in Namibia (South Wesr Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
’ See Oflciaal Records of the General AssembIy, Thirty-eighth Session,
SuppIement No. 24, part two, chap. II, sect. B.
l Report of the International
Conference in Support of the StruggIe of
the Namibian People’ for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(AKONF.
120113). annex IV, sect. A. 4.
3 XLIX: 13.

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

13

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNDZS
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences d@ositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous 1 : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Genhe.
KAK

l-IOJIYwb

Pf3&4HtDl

OPl-AHti3ALIMFi

OEbE.l@iHEHHbIX

HAm

ki3AmX
Opra~usatmu 06~enmremrbtxHamrtl
MO~HOK~~UT~BKHU~A~~XM~~~~UA~X
H~~HTCTBaXBOBCeXptiOHaXMHpa.
Hanonrrrecnpauxno6 H3AaIiWIXBBauICMKHHXCHOM
Marasmie
sum mmmTe
no a~pecy:
opramisamm
06seAmieHHblX
Hat&t, Cexrmn
iTpoA~eH3AaRuil,
Hbio-fiopx
wm %zieBa.

no

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes de1mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginehra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

904X05-June

1992-2,050
