Reaolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

to the Territories dealt with in the present resolution
is indispensable for securing adequate and first-hand
information in regard to the political economic and
social conditions in the Territories and to the views,
wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the
Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and Caicos
Islands and United States Virgin Islands;21
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the D_eclaration _on the
Granting of Independence to Coloma! Copntnes and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that the questions of territorild s·ize, geographical isolation and limi!ed
resources should in no way delay the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all the necessary steps, without further delay,
to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goa!s
set forth in the Declaration with respect to the Temtories and, in that regard, to establish, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people,
a specific time-table for the free exercise by the l?eo~les
of the Territories of their right to self-determmation
and independence;
5. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America as the administering Power concerned, to
reconsider 'its attitude towards receiving a United
Nations visiting mission in the Territory concerned;
6. Calls upon the administering Powers to take a~I
possible steps to diversify the economies of the Terntories listed above;
1. Urges the administering Powers to safeguard the
inalienable right of the peoples of those Territo_ries to
the enjoyment of their natural resour~es by takmg effective measures which guarantee the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those natural resources and
to establish and maintai~ control of their future development;
8. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in all SPCtors
of the national life of those Territories;
9. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him by the General Assembly in its resolution entitled "Dissemination of informa·
tion on decolonization",2~ to pay particular regard to
the need to intensify widespread dissemination of mformation on the process of decolonization in respect
of the Territories listed above and, in particular, to
XXIII-XXV.
3329 (XXIX).

21 Ibid., chaps.
22 Resolution

101

consider in~ensifying the activities of the information
centres concerned;
I 0. Requests the Special Committ~e to_ conti~ue !O
give full consid:ration to th_is. 9uest11?n,. mcludmg m
particular the dispatch of v1s1tmg m1ss10ns to those
Territories, and to report to the Gene~al Assembly at
its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3290 (XXIX). Question of American Samoa,
Guam, New Hebrides, Pitcaim, St. Helena
and Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Guam, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena and Solomon
Islands,
Having examined the relevant c~apte_rs of !he report
of the Special Committee on the S1tu~t1on with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 23
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Dec~mber
1960, containing the Declaration_ on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countnes and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relating to the Territories listed above, in
particular resolution 3156 (XXVIII) of 14 December
1973,

Taking into account the statements of the administering Powers relating to developments in t_he abovementioned Territories, including those relatmg to the
Solomon Islands and New Hebrides, 24
Noting with deep concern the slow progress in the
full implementation of the Declaration with respect to
those Territories, notwithstanding the encouragmg but
limited political and constitutional development which
has recently taken place in some of the Territories,
Noting with satisfaction the continued active participation of the United States ?f America in t_he ~ork of
the Special Committee relating t<;> _the Te~n.tones concerned and welcoming the pos1t1ve dec1s1on of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northe~ Ireland
to take part in the ~elev~nt work. of th: _Special_ C~mmittee and to p<>rm1t United Nations vmtmg m1ss1ons
access to the Territories under its administration, as
appropriate,
Deploring the continued refusal of the Government
of France, in contravention of the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, to co-:operate with the Special Committee in its examination of
the Territory of the New Hebrides,
Deeplv deploring the policy of those administering
Powers ~hich continue to maintain military bases in
some r the Territories under their administration, in
contravention of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
~3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, S11ppleme11t No. 23 (A/9623/Rev. l ), chaps. Ill, X,
XV, XVII and XXI.
~4 See Al AC.109/SC.3/SR.207-210 and 214, A/ AC.109/
PV.976 and Official Records of the General Ass!mbly, Twent)l·
ni111h Session, Fourth Committee, 2116th meeting.

102

General Anembly-Twenty•nlnth Senion

Concerned that the economies of the Territories
listed abo"e are based mainly on either single cash
products, such as copra or phosphates, or on military
activities,
Deploring also the negative attitude of the administering Powers concerned with respect to the receiving
of United Nations visiting missions in the Territories
under their administration,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
as a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial Territories, including those dispatched by the
Special Committee in l 974 to the Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands and Niue, 25 and
reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of visiting
missions to the Territories dealt with in the present
resolution is indispensable for securing adequate and
first-hand information in regard to the political, economic and social conditions in the Territories and to
the views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein,
Deeply concerned at the testing of nuclear weapons
which continued to take place in 1974 in the South
Pacific, despite the strong opposition to such testing as
evidenced in resolution 3156 (XXVIII) and in the
relevant chapters of the report of the Special Committee, and as expressed by the peoples of the Scuth Pacific, including those of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the region,
Mindful that the Territories listed above require the
continued attention and assistance of the United
Nations in the achievement by their peoples of the
objectives embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and the economic conditions of the Territories,
. 1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the • Situation with reeard to the
ImplPmentation of the Declaration on the ~Grantino of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples"' relating to the Territories of American Samoa, Guam,
New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena and Solomon
Islands;26
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those i:erritories to self~determination and independence m accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3_. ~eaffi_rms its conviction that the questions of
temtonal size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way delay the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all the necessary steps, without further delay,
to ensure. the full and speedy attainment of the goals
set forth m the Declaration with respect to the Territories and, in that regard, to establish, in consultation
with t~e fr~ely elected representatives of the people,
a specific t1me-t'.3-bl: for the !re~ exercise by the peoples of the Temtones of theIT nght to self-determination and independence;
25 Sec

Official Records of the General Assembly Twentyninth Session. Supplemnt No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.l ), ~hap. XX,
annex, chap. XXI, annex I, and chap. XXII, annex I.
2 6 Ibid., chaps._X, XV, XVII and XXI.

5. Strongly deprecates any attempt aimed at the
partial or total disruption of the national unity and
territorial integrity of colonial Territories and the establishment of military bases and installations in those
Territories as being incompatible with the purposes
and principles of tbe Charter of the United Nations
and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
6. Calls upon the Governments of France and the
United States of America, as the administering Powers
concerned, to reconsider their attitude towards receiving United Nations visiting missions and to permit
access by such missions to the Territories under their
administration;
7. Calls upon the Government of France, as an
administering Power, to participate in the relevant proceedings of the Special Committee concerning the Territory of the New Hebrides and, in particular, to report
to the Special Committee on the implementation of the
present resolution;
8. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all possible measures to diversify the economies
of the Territories listed above;
9. Urges the administering Powers to safeguard the
inalienable right of the peoples of those Territories to
the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the rights of the
peoples to own and dispose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
10. Reiterates its deep concern at the testing of
nuclear weapons which continued to take place in
1974 in the South Pacific, despite the stn,ng opposition to such testing as evidenced in General Assembly
resolution 3156 (XXVIII) and in the relevant chapters of the report of the Special Committee, and as
expressed by the peoples of the South Pacific, including those of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the
region;
11. Requests the organizations of the United
Nations system to assist in accelerating progress in all
sectors of the national life of the Territories listed
above;
12. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him by the General Assembly
in its resolution entitled "Dissemination of information on decolonization", 27 to pay particular regard to
the need to intensify widespread dissemination of information on the process of decolonization in respect
of the Territories listed above and, in particular, to
consider intensifying the activities of the information
centres concerned;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give full consideration to this question, including .in
particular the dispatch of visiting missions to the Territories, as appropriate, and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3291 (XXIX). Question of the Comoro Archipelago
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Comoro
Archipelago,
27 Resolution

3329 (XXIX).
