A/RES/73/134

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 December 2018

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 14

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 13 December 2018
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/73/L.50 and A/73/L.50/Add.1)]

73/134.

Education for democracy
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations, including the principles and
purposes contained therein, and recognizing that human rights, the rule of law and
democracy are interlinked and mutually reinforcing and that they belong to the
universal and indivisible core values and principles of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the right of everyone to education, which is enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 3 the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 4 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 5 and other relevant instruments,
Recalling its resolutions 67/18 of 28 November 2012 and 69/268 of 5 March
2015 and the results of the plan of action for the second phase (2010–2014) of the
World Programme for Human Rights Education, 6 recalling also Human Rights
Council resolution 39/3 of 27 September 2018 on the World Programme for Human
Rights Education, 7 and taking note with appreciation of the plan of action for the third
phase (2015–2019) of the World Programme, 8
Taking note of section VII, entitled “Supporting the global citizenship agenda
through education for democracy”, of resolution 1 adopted on 20 November 2013 by

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
4
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II, resolution 15/11.
7
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
8
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1,
A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2), chap. IV, sect. A, resolution 27/12.
1
2

18-21869 (E)

261218

*1821869*

A/RES/73/134

Education for democracy

the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its thirty-seventh session, 9
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, as set out in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 10 are integrated and indivisible and
balance the three dimensions of sustainable development, and acknowledging the
importance of taking measures to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education
and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all, including expanded
opportunities for all children, particularly girls, to access quality education, as well
as the need to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
provide access to justice for all and build effective, a ccountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels,
Stressing the complementarity and mutual reinforcement of human rights
education, training and learning and education for democracy,
Reaffirming that democracy is a universal value based on the freel y expressed
will of people to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems
and their full participation in all aspects of their lives, 11
Recognizing that education for democracy nurtures responsible and active
learners, capable of contributing effectively to peace and prosperity in their societies
and beyond,
Taking note of the Incheon Declaration: Education 2030: Towards inclusive and
equitable quality education and lifelong learning for all, adopted at the World
Education Forum 2015, held in Incheon, Republic of Korea, from 19 to 22 May 2015,
which affirmed the understanding of education as a main driver of development that
is essential for peace, tolerance, human fulfilment and sustainable development, as
well as key to achieving full employment and poverty eradication,
Taking note also of the Global Education Monitoring Reports, which monitor
progress towards the education targets within the Sustainable Development Goals
framework, and affirming that education can encourage constructive and inclusive
political participation,
Recognizing that, while democracies share common features, there is no single
model of democracy and that democracy does not belong to any country or region,
Mindful of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of the World
Conference on Human Rights, 12 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women, 13 the World Plan of Action on
Education for Human Rights and Democracy adopted by the International Congr ess
on Education for Human Rights and Democracy, 14 the World Programme for Human
Rights Education proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 59/113 A of
10 December 2004 and the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Education
and Training, 15

__________________

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General
Conference, Thirty-seventh Session, Paris, 5–20 November 2013, vol. 1 and corrigendum,
Resolutions, sect. IV.
10
Resolution 70/1.
11
Resolution 60/1, para. 135.
12
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
13
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
14
A/CONF.157/PC/42/Add.6.
15
Resolution 66/137, annex.
9

2/4

18-21869

Education for democracy

A/RES/73/134

Recalling the establishment of the United Nations Democracy Fund and the
efforts of the Fund to advance the United Nations democracy agenda, as well as the
operational activities in support of democratizatio n processes carried out by the
United Nations system, including by the Department of Political Affairs of the
Secretariat, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the United Nations Development Programme,
Acknowledging the important role of international, regional and other
intergovernmental organizations, civil society, academia, the private sector and other
stakeholders in support of democracy and education for democracy,
Recognizing that education contributes to the strengthening of democracy, good
governance and the rule of law at all levels, the reduction of economic inequality, the
realization of human rights, gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls, the achievement of all internationally agreed develo pment goals, including the
Sustainable Development Goals, the development of human potential, the eradication
of poverty and the fostering of greater understanding among peoples,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report entitled “Literacy for life:
shaping future agendas and education for democracy”, submitted by the SecretaryGeneral in cooperation with the Director General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization; 16
2.
Reaffirms the fundamental link between democratic governance, peace,
development and the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, which are interdependent and mutually reinforcing;
3.
Recalls the Global Education First initiative, launched by the SecretaryGeneral on 26 September 2012, in particular its third priority area on fostering global
citizenship;
4.
Also recalls the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 10 in which
Member States committed themselves to the Sustainable Development Goals and
targets, including to ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed
to promote sustainable development, including, among others, through education for
sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality,
promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation
of cultural diversity and of culture’s contribution to sustainable development, and
further recalls the importance of measuring progress towards the achievement of the
Goals;
5.
Encourages the Secretary-General, United Nations agencies such as the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women)
and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen their efforts to promote the values of
peace, human rights, democracy, respect for religious and cultural diversity, and
justice and the rule of law through education;
6.
Strongly encourages Member States and national, regional and local
education authorities, as appropriate, to integrate education for democracy, along with
civic education, human rights education and education for sustainable development
into their education standards and to develop and strengthen programmes, curricula
and curricular and extracurricular educational activities aimed at the promotion and
consolidation of democratic values and democratic governance and human rights,
taking into account innovative approaches and best practices in the fi eld, in order to
__________________
16

18-21869

A/73/292.
3/4

A/RES/73/134

Education for democracy

facilitate the empowerment of citizens and their participation in political life and
policymaking at all levels;
7.
Encourages Member States and national, regional and local education
authorities, as appropriate, to further efforts to strengthen, through education, the
connections between democratic governance, peace, sustainable development and the
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
8.
Invites United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, including the
United Nations Democracy Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, to provide appropriate expertise and resources for the development of
relevant educational programmes and materials for democracy;
9.
Encourages international, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, within their respective mandates, to share their best practices and
experiences in the field of education for democracy, including but not limited to civic
education, with each other and with the United Nations system, as appropriate;
10. Decides to continue its consideration of the issue of education for
democracy at its seventy-fifth session, under the agenda item entitled “Integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields ”;
11. Invites Governments, the agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to intensify their
efforts to promote education for democracy, requests the Secretary -General, in
cooperation with the Director General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, within existing reporting obligations, to report to the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the implementation of the present
resolution, and invites the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
right to education, within her existing mandate, to contribute to the report of the
Secretary-General.
52nd plenary meeting
13 December 2018

4/4

18-21869
