L

United Nations

PLENARY
MEETING
565th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
v

Oficiul

Sunday,

4 November
1956,
at 9.45 p.m.

Records
FIRST

I
i

EMERGENCY

SPECIAL

CONTENTS

Agenda item 5 :

Question considered by the Security Council at its 749th
and 750th meetings held on 30 October 1956 (colktimed)
. . ..*............*.......,,,...,..*........
79

;I

President:

Mr. Rudecinda ORTEGA

(Chile).

I
i
AGENDA

ITEM

New York

cease-fire. Without commitments
from the three Governments, which so far have not indicated their acceptance, the time left is scarcely sufficient for the
further contacts necessary if we are to meet the target.
The Assembly may wish to consider this situation.
6. The third report [A/3289]
is my first report in
reply to the request of the Assembly that, within fortyeight hours, the Secretary-General
present a plan for
the establishment of a United Nations force to secure
and supervise the cessation of hostilities. In this report,
I put before the Assembly certain preliminary proposals
which I recommend for its serious consideration. 1
believe that the report is self-explanatory and therefore
I do not wish to take up the time of the Assembly with
any special comments.
7. Mr.., _,,.
S~~~~~~ai~~.,~~~~~~e~,
Socialist Republic (translated
from Rzcssian) : I have
asked for the floor to read an important document received by my delegation. It is an appeal from two
Egyptian associations, the Association of Egyptian Civil
Servants and the Association of Political Sciences and
of Rectors and Teachers of Egyptian Universities. A
similar appeal has also been received by the delegation
of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, which
has asked me to speak on its behalf. I will read out the
document, which, in my view, is very important:
“The Egyptian people is undergoing prolonged
attack and the continuous bombardment of its cities,
homes and public buildings,
including
churches,
schools and hospitals. If these indiscriminate
bombings and criminal acts are not immediately ended,
thousands of innocent civilians will be killed and
public and private property will be destroyed. Can
world public opinion allow such crimes to continue,
and are the countries of the world going to stand by
and look on while a completely innocent and peaceloving people is being destroyeq, while the freedom
it won with such toil is being vlolated ancl while its
means of subsistence are being turned into ruins?
We ask you to refer to the statements made by eyewitnesses, who are telling the truth about the terror
reigning among innocent, peaceful people in cities
and villages, and to expose the malicious FrancoBritish ifabrications to the effect that military objectives alone are being bombed, The areas which
are being subjected to indiscriminate
bombardment
contain water pumping stations, electric power stations, private undertakings, telephone exchanges and
raclio stations ; all these are situated ih densely populated areas, and the bombing must inevitably cause
heavy losses among innocent women and children.
The Egyptian people asks your Government to do
everything possible to ensure the adoption of speedy
and effective measures to put an immediate end to
the criminal and senseless acts which are being committed ,by aggressive politicians, acts which are leading the world to a major war which will destroy all
civilization.

Pap

$

SESSION

5

Question considered by the Security Council at
its 749th and 750th meetings held on 30 Otto=
ber 1956 (continued)
*
1

e 1. Mr. GARIN
(Portugal) : At the 563rd meeting,
qfter the vote on the Canadian draft resolution,
i [A/3276],
I stated that my delegation had abstained
, because it had had no time to refer the matter to the
j Portuguese Government. I added, however, that my
delegation had every reason to believe that the Portuguese Government would favour the principle embodied
in the second paragraph of the draft resolution. I have
* since been in contact with my Government and am now
in a position to state that the Portuguese Government
agrees with the fundamental idea of the resolution for
an emergency international
force to be set up for the
purpose mentioned therein. I would be thankful if this
i statement of mine appeared in the record.
2. The PRESIDENT
(tra&uted
froti Spa&&) :
The Chair will take note of the statement by the Portuguese representative. I call upon the Secretary-General.
3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have put before the Assembly three reports concerning the question
under consideration
at the first emergency special
session.
4. One report [A/3284] is the second report concerning the day-to-day developments, relevant to the decisions covered by the resolution of the Assembly on
2 November 1956, [997 (ES-I) 1. I do not believe that
the Members of the Assembly will find anything in this
report wllich requires immediate consideration.
5. A second report [A/3287] deals with the cease-fire
on which the Assembly urged the parties to agree. The
report presents the state of affairs as at four o’clock
this afternoon, 4 November, and indicates that commuilications
received later will be circuIated as documents. So far, no such communications have been received ,by me. However, at an earlier stage, I was
approached by the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom. <One of the four ‘Governments approached, the Government of Israel, has thus far in
no way reacted to the dEwza&e undertaken by me under
the resolution of the General Assemhly. We are now
less than two hours from the time set for an agreed

n

* Resumed fr.om 563rd meeting.
79

A/PV.565

80

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

“(Signed)
Association of Egyptian Civil Servants,
Association
of Political
Sciences and of Rectors
and Teachers of Egyptian Universities.”
8. I am not going to comment on this appeal; it needs
no comment. I have merely read it in order to give the
General Assemb,ly, which has been convened to consider the question of the aggressive action undertaken
in the Middle East, some picture of the real situation
obtaining in the area.
9. Mr. LO’LTTl?T_-&@J,
(translated from Fresck) :
I”‘lZ~~??speak
today for the sole purpose of
giving the Assembly
some information.
I consider it
completely pointless to repeat what I have already told
the Assembly and to answer once again the arguments
which have been used in an attempt to justify this
aggression. The delegations which have supported Egypt
in condemning it have so well answered the aggressors’
arguments that there is surely no need to go over the
same ground again.
10. In the first resolution
[997 (ES-I)]
adopted in
the night of 1 to 2 November the Assembly urged that
“all parties now involved in hostilities in the area should
agree to an immediate cease-fire and as part thereof,
halt the movement of military forces and arms into the
area;” and urged “the parties to the armistice agreements promptly to withdraw
all forces behind the armistice lines, to desist from raids across the armistice
lines into neighbouring territory
and to observe scrupulously the provisions of the armistice agreements”.
11. In the resolution adopted in the night of 3 to 4
November,
the Assembly
repeated the resolution
of
2 November [PPP (ES-I)]
and again appealed to the
parties to abide by its provisions. These two resolutions
have not been acted upon by the French and United
Kingdom Governments
even though my Government
agreed to abide by them, as is clear from the communication of the Egyptian Foreign Minister addressed
to the Secretary-General,
which I now propose to
read to you :
“With
reference to your communication
dated 4
November 19% and, in light of your explanations
therein, I wish to inform you that the Government
of Egypt:
“1. Accepts the resolution adopted ,by the General
Assembly
at its meeting of 4 November
1956 as
mentioned in your communication.
“2. Is ready to ,bring to a halt all hostile military
actions in the area by 2000 GMT.
“3. Takes note of paragraph 5 of your communication in connexion with operative paragraph 2 of the
resolution of the General Assembly of 2 November
1956 ancl operative paragraph 3 of its resolution of
4 November 1956 relating to the withdrawal
of all
Israeli forces behind the armistice lines.“1
12. Today the forces of the aggressors have continued
to bomb Egyptian towns. Suez, Port Said and Alexandria, in particular, have undergone very heavy bombardment. Egyptian airfields, radio stations, railways,
factories, hospitals and places of worship did not escape
this barbarous onslaught, which has caused considerable
damage and taken a heavy toll of victims. The troops
of the aggressors attempted to land in Egypt today and
were engaged.
13. We had hoped that the General Assembly’s
two
resolutions would be implemented. It must not be forgotten that they were adopted by an overwhelming
1 Text reproduced in document A/3287, annex 6.

Special

Seasion-Plenary

Meetings

majority. The first obtained the apprpval of sixtyz
delegations, .a rare eveyt m the Umted Nations; the
second received fifty-rune votes. We hoped that the
voice of world opinion would be heard and that peace
would be restored.
14, Demonstrations
supporting Egypt and condemning the invaders’ brutal aggression have taken place in
many countries. There have been such demonstrations
even in the United Kingdom. You will certainly have
heard this news from the Press and the radio, In par.
titular, you have heard of the resignation of the united
Kingdom Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Mu,
Nutting, and of the reasons he gave for resigning,
15, Unfortunately,
France and the United Kingdom
have continued to use brutal colonialist methods which
we had hoped were completely outdated since the
United Nations Charter. How can premeditated arm4
attack be justified when the United Nations Charter
exists ?
16. I also wish to draw the Assembly’s attention to
the Secretary-General’s
report of 4 November in which
there is a report concerning the attitude of Israel towards
General Burns and the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
Paragraph 3 reads in part:
“The Secretary-General
was informed by aGenera
E. L. M. Burns,. Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervlslon Organization,
that the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Israel, in a communication of
4 November said ‘Israel representative
stated in the
Assembly last night the ,Government’s position that
the General Armistice
Agreement
had become a
fiction and no longer had validity. The Government
did not intend to return to the General Armistice
Agreement with Egypt. United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
personnel had no function to
perform in Gaza or Beersheba and I was asked to
give orders for their withdrawal’.
In his reply dated
4 November, ‘General Burns referred to the instructions of the Secretary-General
(see paragraph 7 of
A/3267),
and stated that in view of his instructions
he was unable to accede to the demand for withdrawal. IGeneral Burns added that if the Government
of Israel disagreed with his decision, their representative might be instructed to take up the matter
with the Secretary-General.”
[A/3284.]
17. This Israel statement requires no comment. It is
only too cynical. It once again demonstrates the aggressive and expansionist intentions of Israel, which respects neither the armistice agreements nor the decisions of the United Nations, which is responsible for
its existence. But we are no longer astonished at
anything coming out of Israel.
18, Today, in a communication addressed to the President of the General Assembly and to the SecretaryGeneral, and shortly to be distributed to the AssemblY,
the Egyptian Government has stated:
“Egypt is resisting aggression and will continue -“’
to uphold the rule of law and to de$en.d its independence and sovereignty, We are confident in the
outcome of the struggle because we feel strong by
our determination to #fight for the restoration of peack
We are confident that our case will continue to be *
the case of all peace-loving peoples and nations,”
[A/3288.]
The solution of the problem is in your hands. The eY?
of the world are upon you. Yours is a great respons!
bility. The fate of our 0r;ganization is at stake. It Is
for you to uphold its prestige and to ensure that tl!”
principles and purposes of the United Nations prevail*

565th

z
tt
tt
wlc
3mr
2e i
tiOll

hav
par
.lib

MI
;don
rhicl
th
:mb
atte

tlera
tion
&ty
xl 0
n thm
tha
ne ;
men
iStiCL
;IperIll to
zd to
1ated
,trtic-

7 of
withment
cprelatter
It is
grep
:I re5 de
.e for
:d at
‘resi:tsly
:11bly,
time
illClP

FI the
lg by
)eacc
to be
011s.”
eY:s
mmIt is
.t the
evail,

meeting4

I have just received the draft resolution [A/3290]
which has been circulated. Unfortunately I am not at
the moment in a position to give my views on this text.
19. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Spanish) :
I call upon the representative of the United Kingdom
011a point of Order.
,KingdQm,J : As the
Assembly early this
mormng adopted a draft resolution [A/3275] which
had been submitted by nineteen delegations and which
authorized Mr. Hammarskjold immediately to arrange
with the parties concerned for the implementation of
the cease fire: called for under the Assembly’s earlier
resolution [997 (ES-jl)]
dated 2 November 1956. Mr.
Hammarslcjold has also mentioned that, in accordance
with this authority, he addressed messagesto the Governments of the United Kingdom, France, Israel and
Egypt on the subject. These messageshave now been
circulated to us [A/32S7, anlzex 1 to 41.
21. I thought that I shou,l.dinform the Assembly that
I am still awaiting the re ly of Her Majesty’s Government in the United If ingdom to the SecretaryGeneral’s message. Her Majesty’s Government has
throughout the day been giving most careful consideration to that message. I have, in fact, in the course
of the day sent an interim reply to Mr. Hammarskjold
from the United
Kingdom Government [A/3282].
There has, of course, been close consultation with the
Government of France. When the Secretary-General’s
messagewas received, the Foreign Minister of France
decided to Ay to London for consultations with members
of the United Kingdom Government. There are, however, considerable difierences of time and geography
involved, and, owing to those differences,, it has not
been possible for me to receive the reply of Her Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom in time for
the opening of this evening’s meeting. I hope-in fact,
I expect-to
be in a position in the course of tonight
to inform the Assembly of the nature of the reply.
22. Mr. MIR -~~~<~~~Iw”l
KHAN
(Pakistan)
,_,o>*“_
“,,*_b,
.*-.* : On 1 November,
the
met m emergency special sessionunder
a dark cloud. the effects of which on the international
political &n&e were beyond calculation. We adopted
a resolution calling upon the combatants on Egyptian
soil to cease fire and retire from Egyptian territory.
That resolution was adopted with unprecedented speed
and support. It has so far not ‘been heeded, as may be
seen from the reports which Iwe have just heard. This
is also true of the resolution adopted by the Assembly
less than twenty-four
hours ago. It therefore seemsto
me that the cloud which cast its shadow on this
Assembly on Thursday still hangs over us tonight.
Pakistan is against colonialism and imperialism of all
kinds and condemns aggression wherever it takes place.
That must be evident from the vote we cast in the
Assembly earlier this evening.
23. The sequence of events which commenced with
the invasion of Egyptian territory has caused profound
shock and grief to the people of Pakistan. The reaction
in my country cannot be described better than in the
words of my Prime Minister, whom I shall quote:
YlVot only have these events incited and helped
Israel in her aggressive designs on Egyptian territory, but the violation by these two Powers of Egyptian sovereignty and territory by the use of force
in disregard of the appeals of other Members, of the
United Nations has shocked world opinion and placed
the very concept of that world ‘Organization in
jeopardy. So far as Pakistan is concerned, the fact

November

1956

81

that the Moslem country towards which Pakistan has
always entertained fraternal feelings should be the
victim of such aggression has further exercised
public opinion. What is happening in Egypt today
constitutes a threat to the entire Moslem wopld. The
Government of Pakistan unreservedly condemn this
aggressive action. They will continue to endeavour
by every means within their power to bring about
an early peaceful settlement of the conflict.
“With that in view, I personally have been in
almost constant touch with the principal Powers concerned. At our insistence, a meeting of the Prime
Ministers and Foreign Ministers of Turkey, Iran,
Iraq and Pakistan will shortly take place in Teheran,
where this question will further be considered with
a view to appropriate action to bring about a peaceful
solution to the dispute.”
The Prime Minister further said:
‘I* * .
if the efforts we are making should.unfortunately fail, we shall certainly proceed to consider
whatever further measuresmay be possible to bring
about a settlement which would ensure that Egyptian sovereignty and territorial integrity are fully
respected”.
24. My Prime Minister has also arranged a meeting
with the Prime Ministers of the other ColomboPowers
to discussthe situation existing in the Middle East and
any possibleaction that these Powers can take to assist
in ,bringing about a speedy solution,
25’. AS I stand on this rostrum, I do so more in sorrow
than in indignation because the time for indignation
has passed.There was indignation when Israel marched
its troops into Egyptian territory. It was a blow not
only against the Egyptian people and Egyptian sovereignty, b,ut it was also a blow against peace in the
Middle East and possibly in the whole world. That
what the United Nations created by mandate as a small
state should so far forget itself as to strike a blow at
the very basicpurposes and foundations of that Organization was an occasion for indignation, but unfortunately the people of the world were not allowed much
time to remain indignant. There came to the assistance
of Israel two of the world’s big Powers, and they
starting a pounding of Egypt from the air for which
Egypt’s defenceswere no match.
26. To’day, as I stand before this Assembly, I feel in,
my heart black, profound and engulfing sorrow. Sorrow
for the Egyptian people, their dream of progress and
their dream of a better future. Sorrow for the nations
which, by their action, have given a setback to hu?
manity’s efforts to evolve a peaceful method and machinery for solving disputes and disagreements.Above
all, I feel sorrow for the world Organization. If the
disregard for its edicts, of which we have seenevidence
during the last three <days,continues, I am afraid .I
cannot beguile myself about what the future of this
Organization is going to be.
27. The only silver lining which I see in the cloud
of which I spoke at the outset is that the position is
not yet irretrievable. Even now there is time to undo
the wrong that has been done if the invaders. desist
from their plan. Let there be an immediate cease-fire,
and let there be a complete withdrawal of foreign forces
from the soil of Egypt. This, alas, will not bring back
the Egyptian dead, but the parties responsiblefor the
&spr&atioll of Egypt should make amendsby fitting
together the fragments of the dreams of the people of
Egypt. The least they can do, and the least this

82

General

AssemLly-d’i~:st

Emwgency

Assembly can do, is to see that Egypt, apart from the
repair and restoration
of damage, receives all neces’ sary assistance in its long-term
dream and plan for
building a better future for its people.
28. Mr. ENGEN
(NorwayJ
: I wish to address
rnyse~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~e~~s ‘&hi& have been distributed
to the renresentatives
in this Assembly. I refer to the
submitted by the Secretary-General
report [k/3289]
on the Canadian-sponsored
resolution
998 (ES-I)
which the General Assembly adopted this mornmg. I
wish to speak also on the draft resolution [@290],
sponsored by the delegations of Canada, Col~nlb~a and
Norway, which is now before the .General Assembly.
29, On 2 November, this Assembly
adopted a resoidion
[997 (ES-I) ] calling upon the parties t@ cease
hostilities,
This m.o’rning, 4 November,
the General
Assembly,
having seen no result from this appeal,
adopted another resolution [P98 (ES-Z)]
calling Up011
the Secretary-General
to report within forty-eight hours
on a plan for an emergency international United Nations
force to be established for the purpose of securing and
supervising
the cessation of hostilities in accordance
with the terms of the resolution
which the General
Assembly adopted on 2 November. The purpose, furthermore, of that resolution was to facilitate the compliance by the parties with the resolution of 2 November.
30. As I have said, we have before us the first report
I am sure that I express
ol the Secretary-General.
*he feeling of those who voted for the resolution when
I thank the Secretary-General
for the speed with which
he has taken action in response to the request of this
Assembly. I: am not going to say many words about
this report, since the representatives
will know what
is in it.
31. It will be noted that the Secretary-General
suggests certain steps to be taken immediately to facilitate
the cessation of hostilities through the establishment of
the emergency international force which I mentioned a
moment ago. For this purpose, as a first step the
Secretary-General
suggests
the establishment
of a
United Nations Command. This, to my mind, is the
obvious first step in the establishment of such a force.
Secondly, he proposes the appointment of Major General Burns, the Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization,
as chief of this United
Nations ~Command. Furthermore,
in paragraph 4 of the
Secretary-General’s
report will be found his suggestions
for the directives for this chief of the Command.
32. My delegation, together with the delegations of
Canada and Colombia, has thought it appropriate to
draft a resolution (A/3290)
embodying the suggestions
which the Secretary-General
has made in his report.
This draft resolution is before the Assembly, It aims
at laying down clear #directives for the establishment of
such a force which the Assembly decided this morning
should be established. I do not think I need say much
more. Both the draft resolution and the situation speak
for themselves. I commend the draft resolution to the
Assembly for its earnest and prompt consideration.
,33,
: The Secretary-General
has
given us a large numb~er of documents todav, But this
& not just a p;oliferation;
they all record stips of some
importance which he has taken and is trying to take
.in the interests
of the resolutions
adopted ‘by this
Assembly so that lighting may cease in Egypt and the
foreign troops in that country may be withdrawn
to
their own frontiers. Therefore we are extremely grateful
to the Secretary-General
for these documents.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

34. I wish first to draw the attention of the Assembly
to the Secretary-General’s
report [A/3287], This document is in effect a report on the nineteen-Power
resolution which was adopted by fifty-nine positive votes
~
[ 999 (ES-I)],
What is immediately apparent from this,
is the fact recorded in paragraph 5 and annex 6, to
the effect that Egypt has accepted the resolution which
we adopted. Egypt has shown again that it pays
attention to the decisions of this, body.
35. It is a matter of regret that the Secretary-General
has not been able to tell us that he has received equal
acceptance, in fact any acceptance at all, ,by the other 4
three Powers concernecl. We hope that compliance will
soon be forthcoming.
36. In this connexion, may I now turn to the interim
reply received from the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom
[3282]. The delegation of India was very
glad to learn from our colleague of the United Kingdom
that his Government is giving the closest study to the
resolutions of the General Assembly regarding the cease
fire, the withdrawal
of troops and indeed the complete
solution of the situation which has been created for
Egypt by the aggression perpetrated against it. We
were glad to learn of this close study, and we were
moderately heartened by the words used by the Foreigtl
Secretary. We feel we can entertain a modest hope now
that the final reply will hearten us even further.
37. It is with ,consdderable regret that I refer now. to
the second report of the Secretary-General
concernmg
the day-to-day developments [A/3284]. I must say that
I entirely agree with the comments of my colleague
of Egypt. I regret very much to see this most unfortunate and unacceptable attitude of the IGovernment of
Israel toward the resolution of the General Assembly,
ancl I trust that this state of affairs will soon be changed.
38. Then I should like to refer to the most important
document, the first report [n/3289]
of the SecretaryGeneral on the plan for an emergency international
United Nations force. May I join the representative of
Norway in congratulating and thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his remarkable
expedition in producmg
a report in less than twenty-four
hours of the adoption
of our resolution 999 (ES-I)
which takes us as far as
this document does, As the result of this report, we are
able now to take some steps to set up a machinery
which will make available forces in Egypt to supplant
the aggressors who have entered the country, and which
will restore peace and the status qtio ante, the least
that can be done for Egypt as an immediate measure.
At this stage we have some slight reservations regarding paragraph 6. The Secretary-Genera1
has helped us
considerably, however, by changing the word “directly”
in the second line of this paragraph to “immediately”0
Nevertheless
we feel that we cannot express our views
on this paragraph until we see the final report which
the Secretary-General
has promised to us.
39. I come now to the draft resolution
[A/3290]
sponsored #by the delegations of Canada, Colombia and
and which follows
from the SecretaryNorway,
General’s report. Here again we are grateful for the
inolusion of the word “all” in paragraph
1 of the
operative part, so that it now reads, “in accordance
with all the terms of the resolution of the General
Assembly of 2 November 1956”. It is a very significant
word, which really introduces the thought that what
we are ,dealing with now are all the provisions of the
resolution 997 (ES-I)
of 2 November 1956--that the
words “cessation of hostilities”
are not a cease fire. I
need not say anything more about this because this was

565th

meeting4

the interpretation
which the representative of Canada
gave to his own draft resolution [A/.3276] ,when he
introduced it. He told us that he was putting in this
word r’aIlr’ so that it should be clear beyond doubt that
what it referred to was. in fact the full implementation
of the resolution of 2 November 1956. It is on that
basis that we can accept this’ paragraph of the draft
resolution before LIS now, Indeed, it is on this basis that
the delegation of India will be able to support this
draft resolution. We trust that it will be passed very
early tonight so that we can complete the first step of
our endeavour, which we set in motion two and oaehalf days ago-one is losing count of the time-so
as
to turn back the bblack tide which has swept over Egypt
in the last week or so.
40.
: The General Assembly has
before it new documents, two of which I should like to
refer to by way of preliminary observation. I have in
mind the first report of the Secretary-General [A/3289]
concerning the proposal for the establishment of an
international
force and the draft resolution [A/3290]
submitted by the delegations of ‘Canada, Colombia and
Norway. The subject of this report and of this draft
resolution closely affects the interests of Middle Eastern
States, including Israel.
41. My Government and delegation have not so far
been amongst those cons,ulted in the preparation of the
report or in the drafting of the resolution. We are convinced that this is because of the shortness of time that
has elapsed and that there will be opportunities for the
detailed observations of the Israel Government to be
taken into account prior to any definitive action.
42. In the light of this observation, what I shall now
say should (be regarded as a preliminary comment on
some of the problems raised by the report and the draft
resolution. The first and crucial legal problem which
arises is that of the sovereignty of States in the context
of the consent required for the implementation
of this
project. The consent required is not merely or primarily the consent of the States invited to participate
in the force, but ohiefly the consent of those States upon
the territory
of which it is proposed to station these
forces. It would seem to my delegation to be axiomatic

of the draft resolution would clarify this most important point of law. If this question of sovereign
consent were not clarified, then a precedent would be
created whereb’y a majority of the ,General Assembly
could decide to station forces in the territory of any
State irrespective of its prior consent. While convinced
that this is not the intention of the report or of the
draft resolution, it is, I think, one of the matters which
does require clarification.
43. A second matter refers to the duties which it is
proposed to bestow upon the Chief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision ,Organization and
officers now under his jurisdiction. It must be pointed
out ,that the functions of the Chairman of the United
Natrons Truce Supervision Qrgan,ization and of hu
officers are those defined in the IGeneral Armistice
Agreements concluded bilaterally between Israel and
each of its four contiguous neighbours. Thus a change

November

1956

83

in their capacity would affect the existing capacity
under which they now work in Israel and in the surrounding States. Thus, the proposed allocation of new
functions to these officers would have legal and other
effects not only in respect of the Israel-Egyptian General Armistice Agreement, but also of other agreements.
T,his again is a complex juridical problem which arises
in the context of this proposal. My delegation would
similarly like to reserve its position pending further
consideration on the powers which paragraph 3 of the
joint ,draft resolution would seek to bestow upon one
of the permanent principal
organs of the United
Nations.
44. The question of whether the capacity of military
recruitment is within the spirit of the Charter, one of
the functions of that principal organ, deserves further
clarification and consideration. This does not exhaust
everything that there is to be said on the very complex
issues which arise in this context and which certainly
demand mature consideration at governmental level.
45. The delegation of Israel wil.1 consult with its
Government and reserve the opportunity of addressing
the General Assembly in detail again on all the problems here involved. In the meantime, of course, it must
reserve its position both on the draft resolution itself
and on the question of its implementation.
46. The PRES.IDENT
(translation
from .S’padz) :
The Secretary-General
has asked to speak on a point
of order and I call upon him.
47. The S&GUUm&EE&EW:
I should like
to tai~~~~opportunity to give two clarifications which
may be useful for the Memb,ers of the Assembly. As a
matter of course, the report issued as document A/3289
is based on the legal fact created by the vote taken
this, very morning by the Assembly. As to the question
of the conflict of the functions of the Chief of Staff,
it is a matter of course that if the Assembly were to
give this new assignment to the Chief of Staff he would
leave his present post. He would change his functions,
and other arrangements would #bemade with the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization. Secondly, the
recruitment of officers for the proposed group corresponds to the functions which the Chief of Staff
already possesses in relation to the ‘Observer Corps of
the Truce Supervision 0rp;anization.
48. Mr. D’E- GUIRINGAUD
_I/France)
-m”‘yw.--~,
L. (translated
egation 1s m the same
f
position as the United Kingdom delegation with regard
to the point raised by Sir Pierson Dixon a moment ago.
At about 11.30 this morning, New York time, the
French Government receive,d the Secretary-General’s
telegram [R/3287, annex Z] informing it of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly yesterday. When it
is 11.30 a.m. in New York, it is 5.30 p.m. in Paris, The
Secretary-General’s note must of course be studied at
the highest levels, of the French Government and in
consultation with the Government of the United Kingdom. Moreover, Mr. Pineau, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, was in London and may still be there at this
moment. I hope nevertheless that we shall be able to
inform the Secretary-General
of the French Government’s reply with the minimum of delay.
: M delegation has just
the ii ecretanr-General this
evening and the other documents c&la&l
to the
members. Aware of the short time Mr. Hammarskjold
had available to fulfil his mandate under the nineteenPower resolution [PPP (ES-I)]
of 9 November, we
feel very grateful that he executed his task in a very

--r

84

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

prompt manneT, which deserves our commendation.
With the little time available to us to study the VZL~~OUS
reports, we can only bring to the attention of the delegations a few observations.
50. According
to one report
[A/3287]
Israel for
the second time ‘did not respond positively to the terms
of the resolution
adopted by this Assembly
on 4
reaffirming
the Assembly’s
November,
999 (ES-I),
previous resolution 997 (ES-I),
Egypt, in contrast,
.accepted the appeal of the overwhelming
majority of
this Assembly for an immediate cease fire, as stated in
Annex 6 of the Secretary-General’s
report.
51. Israel, according to another report of the Secretary-General
[fl/3284],
has committed two defiances :
one to the Secretary-General’s
mandate to obtain compliance for the withdrawal
of the Israel forces behind
the armistice lines, and the second to the Chief of Staff
of the Truce Supervision
Organization
by preventing
his personnel from performing
their duties in Gaza
and Beersheba. More serious still among the Israel
defiances is the fact that Israel has denounced the
General Armistice Agreement with Egypt as a fiction
and stated that it was no longer valid.
52. In view of this drastic development on the part
of Israel, my delegation’s clear understanding
will be
that the new draft resolution submitted today [A/3290]
should give particular importance to the prompt withdrawal of all the Israel forces behind the armistice lines.
My delegation is concerned about this, particular point
and would appreciate ,hearing from the sponsors of the
draft resolution their explanation of operative paragraph 1.
53.
l&@nes) .: 3efore proceeding t
on”%; various documents
now before the Assembly, may I be permitted to extend
the appreciation of my delegation for the magnificent
work performed
by the Secretary-General
under the
mandates of the two resolutions adopted on 2 and 4
November
and under the Canadian resolution, providing for the establishment of an international police
force.
54. An examination of these documents reveals the
following
facts. As regards
+he cease-fire resolution
which was adopted on 2 November
and reaffirmed in
another resolution of 4 November,
it appeared from
the communications
first received by the SecretaryGeneral from the Governments
of France [A/3268]
and the United Kingdom [A/3269]
that they in effect
rejected the cease-fire. If I correctly recall those communications, they maintained that their action undertaken in Egypt was a police action and, notwithstanding the resolution of the General Assemblly, they felt
obliged in the circumstances
to continue it. They stated
that they would agree-I
suppose the effect of the communication
was that it would be sometime in the
future-to
the withdrawal
of their forces when the
United Nations would he in a position to establish a
force of its own to maintain stability in the area, Tjherefore, as regards the immediate problem of the cease-fire
as provided in the two resolutions
of the General
Assembly from the standpoint of the Governments
of
the United Kingdom
and France, the proposa.1 was
rejected.
55. We now have in our possess.ion the communication addressed to the Secretary-General
by Mr.
Selwyn Lloyd [&l/3282],
which refers not only to the
Canadian proposal for the establishment of an international police force but also to the nineteen-Power
resolution, which affirmed the first resolution. To the extent

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

that the communication
of Mr. Selwyn Lloyd speaks
of these two resolutions as being under study-1
do not
know whether my interpretation
is correct-there
is
the hope that the rejection by the United Kingdom of
the cease-fire may yet be modified. On the other hand,
the Government of Egypt accepted the cease-fire resolution subject, of course, to the condition that the Governments of the United Kingdom, France and Israel
should ,desist from further military action.
56. That appears to be the position as disclosed by the
report of the Secretary-General
in the documents now
before this Assembly. But there is more than meets
the eye in the pres,ent difficulties confronting
us. I
should like to call the attention of the Assembly to the
communication [A/3283] of the Director-General of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees, dated 4 November 1956. Although
this is not ‘clearly within the purview of our present
work, it is, however, inextricabely intertwined with the
difficulties involved in our task. It is a problem of great
urgency ‘becauseit is of a humanitarian character. The
Secretary-General ‘has also reported on the difficulties
of implementing the two I-esolutions in view of the
time limit that has been set.
57. In the light of the conclusions which we have
gathered from the reports of the Secretary-Genera!, I
consider the following matters ‘deserving of immediate
action by this *body. First, it would seemto be advisable
and necessary that in view of the twelve-hour time limit
in the nineteen-Power resolution which will expire at
midnight tonight, we should consider ,a modification
of the resolution by authorizing the Secretary-General
to extend the hour of the cease-fire, subject to his
discretion, but in no case beyond thirty-six hours after
the approval of the amendatory resolution which this
body may approve along that line. This is design&
to enable the Secretary-General to extend the period
without seeking prior authority from this body and to
allow US to meet the realities of the situation.
58. I therefore recommend that a resolution be
adopted by this Assembly authorizing the SecretaryGeneral to extend the period of tihe cease-fire, which
he had fixed in his communication [A/3287, asnnnex
51
to the four Governments concerned, to a time which
he may deem proper in the circumstances but, in no
case, beyond thirty-six hours after the approval of such
new resolution.
59. Secondly, it appears irom the aide-&moire
[A/3279] of the Israel representative of 3 November
that his Government agrees to an immediate cease-fire
and ‘(feels that the only answer to the situation is the
estabIishment of peace between Israel and Egy t by
direct negotiations between the parties”. It actor aingly
notifies the Assembly that it would welcome the immediate opening of negotiations towards that end,
60. It appears, therefore, that as of 3 November, the
Government of Israel would be agreeable to a cease-fire.
This, however, should be taken in the context of the
communication which was sent to the Secretary-General
by General Burns, to the effect that according to Israel
the “Armistice Agreement had become a fiction and
no longer had validity”. As it will no longer observe
the Armistice Agreement, it has made an announcement that, with respect to the Gaza area, the observers
of the United Nations would not be permitted to make
an entry there. In the light of this situation, this
Assembly would perhaps,feel obliged to the representative of Israel if he could give some clarification of his
Government’s position. This clarification would enable

565th

meeting4

the Secretary-General
to #be guided more clearly in
the implementation
of the two resolutions which I have
mentioned-the
*resolution of 2 November and the resolution of 4 November
affirming the previous one.
61. Finally, I would refer to the cable received from
the Director-General
of the (United Nations Relief and
Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees, from which
I quote:
“In calling the attention of the General Assembly
to the fact that the continuation of unrest and hostilities in the area will inevitably affect adversely the
carrying out of the Agency’s mandate as given by the
General AssembJy, I wish to stress urgently that the
majority of the refugees have no means of subsistence
other than those provided for them by the United
Nations.”
[A/3283.]
62. In view of this report, it becomes absolutely necessary to find some way by which an appeal may be
addressed to the ,Governments
concerned to the effect
that, notwithstanding
the continuance of the hostilities,
and pending their cessation, they should offer no obstruction
whatsoever
to the work
of the Agency,
wherever
it may be performing
its functions in the
interests
of humanity.
This is absolutely essential in
order that the humanitarian
work of that body may
be carried out, even during the progress of the hostilities and in the areas covered by such hostilities.
Whether
this Assembly
should pass a resolution to
this effect, or whether the Secretary-General
may simply
be asked to take the necessary steps in the premises
is a matter upon which I am not now prepared to
express my view.
63. These are my recommendations
in the light of the
Secretary-General’s
reports. With respect to the threePower draft resolution now before us [A/3290]
seeking the establishment
of a United Nations Command
for an emergency
international
force, my delegation
will find no difficulty in supporting it after we have had
some clarification
from the representative
of Israel on
the points I have raised.
, I
64zz
i-.$&&J&=
publics)
(tmnsEnted front Russian) : Despite the resolution [PPP (ES-T)]
adopted at the first emergency
special session of the General Assembly, the situation
in the M,iddle East remains threatening. The Govemments of the United Kingdom and France, which are
engaged in aggression against the Egyptian State, are
still ,delaying their reply to the General Ass.embly’s
recommendation
of 2 November for a cease-fire. [Resolutio?a 9.97 (ES-I).]
They are even disregarding
the
General Assembly
resolution
of 4 November
[999
(ES-J)]
in which the overwhelming
majority of the
Members
of tshe United Nations again asked them to
halt military action.
65. In defiance of the wishes of all the peoples of tihe
world, the Governments
of the United Kingdom and
France are continuing their military operations. AngloFrench air forces are systematically ,raiding cities and
populated points, sowing death and destruction. Reports
reaching us from Egypt indicate the barbarous nature
of the Anglo-French
air action. Heavy bombers have
been used against Egypt’s civilian population.
66. On 3 November
a report from the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Organization
was circulated [A/3267],
quoting a communication from representatives
of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization,
which draws attention- to the danger
that this action may cause terrific loss of life among

November

1956

85

the civilian population. The Soviet delegation has received telegrams from social, scientific and cultural
organizations
in Egypt, indicating the extent of the
casualties and destruction
‘caused by the barbarous
raids carried out by the Anglo-French
air forces.
67. Let me cite just a few facts. The Association of
Egyptian Civil Servants and the Association of Professors and Teachers of Egyptian Universities
report that
homes, publlic buildings, churches, schools and hospitals
are being subjected to continuous heavy bombardment.
The telegram says :
“The areas which are being subjected to indiscriminate bombardment
contain water pumping stations, electric power stations, private undertakings,
telephone exchanges and radio stations ; all these are
situated in densely populated areas, and the bombing
must inevitably caus,e heavy losses among innocent
women and children.”
A telegram dated 4 November from the Egyptian Society of International
Law states : “This morning alone
Cairo has been raided six times by the Anglo-French
air forces.” Similar facts are reported in a telegram
from the Egyptian Federation of Trade Unions.
68. These facts demonstrate that the United Kingdom
and France are engaged in the relentless destruction
of Egypt’s civilian population. The General Assembly
cannot bold aloof in the face of such action by the
Anglo-French
air forces. It must take immediate steps
to end such criminal activities. In view of the refusal
by the United Kingdom, France and IsraeI to comply
with the General Assembly’s
recommendation for an
immediate cessation of aggressive action against Egypt,
the United Nations must make a new effort and call
upon the Governments
of the United Kingdom and
France, as a first step, to comply with the General
Assembly resolutions
of 2 and 4 November, to halt
immediately the bombardment
of Egyptian territory
and other military operations.
69. The Soviet delegation makes that proposal. The
implementation
of such a decision wou18d not require
any supervision machinery or any United Nations command. The whole world will be able to see at once
whether or not the decision is being complied with.
General for ihe speedy manner in which he has co&
plied with the request made of him by this emergency
session of the General Assembly to enforce the implementation of its resolution.
71. It is a matter of deep concern and regret, however,
that this action by the Secretary-General,
as. requested
by the General Assembly
resolution, was not readily
heeded by the parties, excepting Egypt, as may be seen
from one report of the Secretary-General
[A/3287].
The other report of the Secretary-General
[d/3284]
is even more ominous where it reports that the Government of Israel now views the General Armistice
Agreement as only a fiction and no longer valid. The
further explanation of the representative
of Israel this
evening was only a further
violation of the United
Nations Armistice
Agreement,
This absurd position
can certainly not be accepted and should be dealt with
determinedly by the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization
and later by the emergency United
Nations force to carry out the task envisaged in the
resolution of this morning, 4 November.
72. It seems now more than clear that the attacking
parties are ,determined to achieve their objectives by

86

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

brutal force in contempt of all the efforts made by this
special session to stop the aggression and to end the
war speedily. This will go down in history and will not
be forgotten. The condemnation
that was expressed
overwhelmingly
against their actions in this special
session will equally stand in history, from which they
will not escape.
73. The immediate need at this moment is still, of
course, to try to save the situation. We still believe
that this aggression should not only be stopped but
als,o that such aggression should not be allowed to
achieve any gains. Whatever the outcome of this war,
we should see to it that the suffering it has caused to
the Egyptian people will not have been in vain. The
United Nations forces which will be despatched to the
area should ,be given a task within the framework
of
our endeavours, which should not only be to create
favourable conditions for ending the war and the withdrawal of forces according
to the resolution
of 2
November, but aIso to restore the integrity and the
security of Egypt as a Member State of the United
Nations.
74. I am grateful to the Secretary-General
for his
report [A/3289]
on the question of the formation of
this international
United Nations force, the ideas in
which find further expression in the draft resolution
[fl/3290]
submitted by Canada, Colombia and Norway.
In general, the outlines to be found there s.eem to my
delegation helpful to facilitate and speed up the formation of the United Nations supervision force.
75. It is the earnest hope of my delegation, in this
still grave hour, that the parties concerned, in the light
of this present endeavour, will see the senselessness, of
their actions and will stop further
military actions
speedily in accordance with the call of the Assembly’s
resolutions. Should the war be stopped soon, the problem lying behind this conflict should then allow itself
to be solved by peaceful negotiations,
in which the
United Nations as such will still have a great responsibility. If we seek the solution of the present situation
in this frame of mind, then my delegation believes that
the achievement of a constructive
and peaceful settlement does not <belong in the realm of the impossible
as regards our future endeavours. Those who have now
violated the United Nations Charter and spirit witll,
I hope, realize that only through the United Nations
can they achieve a lasting peace and a settlement of all
the problems involved.
: This evening, two reports
were made Dublic bv the
Secretary-General.Both are addres,sed* to the’ first
emergency special session of the General Assembly.
77. In the one, the Secretary-General
makes the
fol,lowing statement : “The Secretary-General
was informed by General E, L. M. Burns, .Chief of Staff of
the United Nations Truce Supervlslon
.OTganization,
that the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Israel, in a
communication of 4 November said ‘Israel representative stated in the Assembly last night the Government’s
position that the General Armistice
Agreement
had
become a fiction and no longer had validity, The Government did not intend to ‘return to the General Armistice Agreement
with Egypt. United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization
personnel had no function to
penform in Gaza or Beersheba and I was asked to give
orders for their withdrawal’.,’
[A/3284, para. 3.1
78. In another report the Secretary-General
informs
u.s that he has addressed communications
directly to
the four Governments
cdncerned-the
United King-

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

dom, France, Israel and Egypt-pursuant
to the resolution [PPP (ES-I)]
which this Assembsly adopted in
the early hours of this morning and by which it authorized the Secretary-General
“immediately to arrange
with the parties concerned for the implementation of
the cease-fire and the halting of the movement of military forces and arms, into the area”, as requested in
its resolution
of 2 November
[PPT (ES-I)],
The
Secretary-General
further reports
that, of the four
Governments
contacted,
only Egypt
had replied
[A/3287, para. 61. These two reports by the SecretaryGeneral are of the utmost significance and reveal the
extent of the lawlessness of which the aggressor States
of France, Israel and the United Kingdom are guilty.
They reveal clearly the magnitude of their defiancenay, their open rebellion-against
international law,
against this world Organizatioa which was set up to
end war for all time, against the will and wish of the
civilized world.
79. The reluctance of the Governments of France and
the United Kingdom-and
we hope that it is only
reluctance, and not outright refusal-to
comply with
the request addressed to them by the overwhelming
majority of mankind to put an end to bloodshed and
destruction
is indicative of how far these two States
are bent on aggression and how little consideration and
respect they have for world public opinion, for the
advice of their own allies and friendly governments,
and for the over.whelming majority of the human race,
which wants to live in peace,
80. It is indeed an encouraging sign that there are
large numbers of peace-loving people in Britain itself
who deplore and condemn the colonial war launched
by their Government, an unprovoked war which their
Government
is ,wagmg against the people of Egypt,
bringing death and destruction
to that hapless land.
Press despatches from London today carry reports
about the riots which have jbeen raging in London
against the British Government, calling for its resignation. It is heartening to witness a peo’ple which has
suffered so much in two world wars standing up against
a policy which, if pursued further, risks plunging the
world into a holocaust of unprecedented magnitude and
unforeseen consequences to humariity as a whole.
from which the repre81. As to the report [A/3284]
sentative of Egypt has just read excerpts, this report
unfolds the sad story of the crumbling of the forces
of law and order and of the utter disregard
which
Israel has for the United Nations, to which it owes
its very existence, and for the combined efforts of mankind to restore the rule of law which the brutal
aggression of France, Israel and the United Kingdom
has banished from international
relations.
82. This defiant attitude which Israel adopts toward
the United Natio s and the world has been made possible only by the b9 essings and complicity of the United
Kingdom and France in Israel’s invasion of Egypt.
For how else could one explain Israel’s impudent rebuff
to this Organization’s
representative,
General Burns?
Unilaterally
and against the advice of General Burns,
Israel ,decrees that the General Armistice
Agreement
with Egypt has become a fiction. This General Armistice Agreement has not become and should not be
allowed to become a fiction. Israel’s impudent assertion
that the Agreement has become a fiction can have but
one explanation, namely, that Israel considers that her
armed invasion and conquest of the Gaza Strip and
parts 6f \he Sinai Peninsula give her a title to those
t&-rit’dr&$
&fid that the Gelieral Armistice Agreetnent,

565th

meeting-4

which was to maintain peace and security on the armistice ‘lines, is no longer a reality and must therefore
be scrapped. This is as, patent an example as I have
ever seen of the manner in which Israel, by her aggression against neighbouring
territories, has conironted
the world with the fait a.ccompZi-and, alas, got away
with it. Finally, Israel’s unilateral repudiation of the
General Armistice Agreement brings yet another proof,
if that be needed, of Israel’s determined policy to
torpedo the Armistice Agreements, by her armed attacks
against her neighbours and to force peace on them at
the point of the gun.
83. Another fact which struck my delegation on reading this report was that Israel, far from complying
with the request of this Assembly immediately to cease
fire and withdraw its forces to the armistice lines-this
Israel which has ,been branded an aggressor-is today
ordering the withdrawal of the United Nations Truce
Supervisors-yes,
of the United Nations Truce Supervisors-whose
mandate she considers terminated by
her invasion of the territory in which these supervisors
operated. This defiance, this itipudent
rebuff of the
United Nations authority, on the part of a small State
can be explained only by the conviction which that
State must have acquired that law and order in international relations have broken down and that the opportunity is unique for invasion, conquest and rapine.
84. In contrast to this open rebellion on the part of
Israel against the United Nations, in contrast to United
Kingdom and French reluctance to accept the immediate cease-fire requested of them by this Assembly,
the world stands in admiration before Egypt, the victim
of aggression, and her prompt response to the plea of
humanity to put an end to hostilities.
85. With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
on the plan for an emergency international
United
Nations force [fl/3289],
the delegation of Lebanon
wishes to join those other delegations which have commended the Secretary-General
for the rapidity with
&ich
he has set out to implement the Assembly’s
resolution.
86. Finally, with regard to the draft resolution submitted by Canada, Colombia and Norway [A/329U],
my delegation has not yet had time to study it carefully.
However, our initial reaction to it is not unfavourable
and we may not be opposed to it after we have had
some time in which to clarify certain points with its
sponsors.
tibns be;ause I believe t&t we must make no mistake
as to what powers the Assembly has at this time and
what intentions we can entertain. The Charter of the
United Nations is very clear. It establishes two distinct procedures. One is the pacific settlement of disputes, the conciliation procedure provided for under
Chapter VI, and the other is, collective action, which
is dealt with in Chapter VII, and is a function of the
Security Council. If such action should fail because
of a veto in the Security Council, then, under the resolution 377 (V), “Uniting for Peace”, the matter passes
to the General Assembly ,but is there subject to the
conciliation
procedure provided for in Chapter VI.
Thus in such case we may authorize the use of force
but only, as we stated at a previous meeting, in cases
of individual
or collective self-defence. Apart from
those cases in which we can as a mere authorization
permit a State to defend itself, we cannot take any
decision or order any collective measure because under

November

1956

Chapter VII of the Charter to do so is a function of
the Security Council.
8s. Having given this clarification with regard to the
powers of the General Assembly, I wish to make an
observation concerning the decision that we can take at
this time if ,we wish to settle the conflict within the
procedure provided for in Chapter VI ol the Charter,
that is, the procedure of conciliation.
89. In the first place, we have been asked for a clarification concerning paragraph 1 of the operative part of
our draft resolution [A/3290].
It is quite obvious that
reference is made to all the terms of the resolution
997 (ES-I),
to the part where we urged the parties
to agree to an immediate cease-fire and as part thereof
halt the movement of military forces and arms into
the area and to the part where we also urged that all
forces should promptly be withdrawn behind the Armistice lines. In short, we refer to the entire resolution.
It is quite clear that where the draft resolution under
discussion states “in accordance with all the terms”,
the reference is to, all the terms of the resolution without exception as will be obvious from a reading of that
resolution.
90. I should now like to make an observation in connexion with what has been said here by the representative o,f Israel, He told us that in his opinion o,ur
draft resolution required clarification because under the
Charter the co’nsent of a State is necessary for the
presence of United Nations troops in territory under
its jurisdiction. On this point we are in complete agreement, shut we shall no longer be in agreement when it
comes to deciding what constitutes territory under
jurisdiction.
In our opinion, territory under jurisdiction is territory under lawful jurisdiction. We cannot
admit that force creates rights, and all the Latin American States, for example, expressly condemn the acquisition of territory by force. Thus, if we really want to
settle this conflict and .b,ring about a conciliation, we
must understand that we are prepared to attempt a
conciliation, but we must also appeal to the State of
Israel to take account of the General Assembly’s view,
which is perfectly clear. We have been among the first
to realize that this, as we stated at the 563rd meeting,
is a broad problem and that we must face this problem.
91. We believe that in order to re-examine this problem, to find a new approach to it and to arrive at a
comprehensive solution, the first requirement is the
restoration of peace ; there can be no kind of conciliation
and no kind of settlement while there is war. As means
of restoring peace we have suggested two basic principles. The first is that we offer Israel a guarantee, the
guarantee of an international force which will be able to
forestall real or illusory dangers and at all events the
dangers which according to Israel existed along its
borders. Secondly, in return for this guarantee, we ask
Israel that when the United Nations forces arrive it
should withdraw its forces to the territory where it has
lawful jurisdiction
o.r, in other words, ,from territories
which are outside Israel’s jurisdiction and have, for
one reason or another, been occupied by Israel’s forces.
92. In giving this clarification I wish to point out that
I am not, of ,course, in any way speaking on behalf of
the other sponsors of this draft resolution. This is
merely the perso’nal view of my delegation, but I
thought that it was urgent at least to make clear
exactly what we had in mind in proposing the draft
resolution.
;tlj,), : I shall be very brief.
93.
st report [A/3289] of the
We

88

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

Secretary-General
on the plan for an emergency international United Nations force, and a draft resolution
[RJ3ZPO] the sponsorship of which my delegation has
the honour to share with the delegations of Colombia
amd Norway-a
draft resolution which is designed to
implement the ,first stage od this task of ours to bring
about a cessation of hostilities. That, of course, is of
primary and immediate importance, but as we consider
it I think we should remind ourselves, as I ventured
to say the other night, that we have an even greater
collective responsibility
than the responsibility
to bring
about a cease-fire. That is the responsibility
to bring
about a peace settlement, and we have failed up to the
present in that-all
of us at the United Nations-over
the years. To find a way out of our present tragic
dilemma-that
is our immediate responsibility
and our
immediate task ; but to seek a lasting settlement is our
next and greater task.
94. So, as the Secretary-General
has shown us how
to proceed with energy and dispatch by producing a
report within twenty-four
hours of the passing of the
resolution 998 (ES-I),
I ahope that we shall be able to
proceed with equaL energy and dispatch in our consideration of the draft resolutions that deal with the
larger question and which have been submitted by the
United States delegation.
95. In conclusion, may I just say that the Prime
Minister of my country announced a few hours ago in
Canada that the Canadian Government was ready to
recommend Canadian participation
in such a United
Nations force as is visualized in this draft resolution
if that force is to be established and if it is thought that
Canada could play a useful role in it.

AssemblyV issued a clear call to the States engaged in
hostilities in the Near East to agree on an immediate
cease-fire and to withdraw
their forces forthwith behind
the armistice lines. That resolution of the Assembly
was
adopted by the vote of an overwhelming
majority
of Members oE the United Nations. I regret to say that
the General Assembly had to take note last night of the
fact that there had not yet been compliance with the
terms of its resolution.
Some of the parties to the
hostilities addressed communications
to the SecretaryGeneral concerning their attitude towards a cease-fire
and stating conditions upon which they were willing
to heed the General Assembly’s
call, but the parties had
not taken any effective steps to carry out the General
Assembly recommendations.
97. Knowing
full we11 the urgency of the situation
in the face of human suffering
and casualties, and
realizing the need for international
assistance to the
parties in arranging for a cease-fire, the General Assembly resolved by its resolution 999 (ES-I)
adopted
on the proposal of nineteen Powers, that the SecretsryGeneral should try to bring about the carrying out of
the ceas,e-fire by the parties, and the halting of the
movement of military forces and arms into that part of
the world. The Assembly asked the Secretary-General
to report to it within twelve hours on the co,mpliance
achieved.
98. At the same time, the General Assembly adopted
a resolution
[998 (ES-l)]
which had Been submitted
by the delegation o,f Canada and which requested the
Secretary-General
to. try to arrange for the withdrawal
of forces behind the armistice lines and to submit to
the General Assembly within forty-eight
hours a plan

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

for the setting up of an emergency international United
Nations force to supervise the cessation of hostilities.
99. We have now heard the report requested of the
Secretary-General
on compliance by the parties with the
United Nations call for a cease-fire. It is most discouraging that the parties have not yet agreed upon a
cessation of hostilities, and that they have not yet given
orders to their armed forces accordingly, The Secretary-General is to be greatly commended for his selfless
and unflagging efforts, and we earnestly hope that
within a short time he will be able to report compliance.
100. The Assembly’s call for a cease-fire was unconditional. The States concerned-and,
above all, those
engaged in attack-must
stop their military operations.
There must be an immediate and unconditional cessation of the fighting. This was true when the Assembly
first met in emergency special session: it is true now.
Silencing of the guns is the necessary prelude to the
solution of any -1 repeat : any-of
the problems which
beset the Middle East. We appeal to the States engaged
in hostilities-and
particularly
to Israel! France and
the United Kingdom-to
honour their obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations, and as loyal Members of the IOrganization, to heed the General Assembly’s call to stop the fighting.
has been asked to present
101. The Secretary-General
to us by early Tuesday his full plan for setting up an
emergency international force, as called for in the draft
resolution which was submitted by Canada. We should
do well to suspend our debate on this matter for the
present and to adopt the draft resolution
[A/3290]
introduced by Canada, Colombia and Norway,
which
would establish a United Nations command, in accordance with resolution 998 (ES-I)
adopted by the Assembly. We should take this step immediately to permit
the Secretary-General
and the Government with which
he is consulting to proceed at full speed in making plans
for the emergency international force.
102. The United States earnestly hopes that the Government of Israel will agree without delay to the prompt
withdrawal
of its armed forces behind the armistice
lines and will co-operate fully in carrying out the plan
now being negotiated by the Secretary-General,
We
hope that France and the United Kingdom will accept
the plan envisaged in the Canadian proposal. We trust
that the Government of Egypt, for its part, will be
prepared to accept the temporary stationing within its
territory of elements of the United Nations emergency
international force in order to preserve peace in that
part of the world. It is most important that this plan
should be speedily carried out. To facilitate the success
of its operation, the United States is prepared to helpand help in an important way-as
regards airlifts, shipping, transport and supplies.
103. We very much fear that time is getting short,
We therefore move that the debate should be closed, in
order that we may proceed to an immediate vote on the
draft resolution submitted by Canada, Colombia and
Norway.
104. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the United Kingdom representative on a point of order,
105.
think
ago-namely,
that the reply of Her Majesty’s
GOVernment in the United Kingdom to the SecretaryGeneral’s letter is awaited. This reply, as might be
imagined, is likely to have a considerable bearing on
this conception of an international force. Spokesmen

565th

meeting4

for Her Majesty’s
‘Government,
both in London and
here in the United Nations, have shown their interest
in this conception. The draft resolution [A/3290]
now
before us, which has been submitted
by Canada,
Colombia and Norway and on which it is now proposed
to proceed to an immediate vote, deals with one aspect
of this idea : the setting up of Command arrangements.
I have taken steps to bring this new draft resolution
immediately to the notice of my Government, which is
considering it. It was only submitted in what in Europe
is the middle of the night. I, myself, have no instructions on it, and I dare say a number of other representatives may be, in the same position. I am bound
to say, frankly, that it would seem to me to be incorrect
to decide to put the draft resolution
to the vote
immediately.

deceived the prench G&ernment’s
instructions
on the
question put to it this morning. I said that the French
Government
had not received the Secretary-General’s
telegram until about 5.30 p.m. I would add that the
joint resolution sponsored by the ,Canadian, Colombian
and Norwegian
delegation [A/3290]
was placed on our
desk at 9.30 p.m. I believe, in fact, that it was distributed at 10 p.m. Neither this draft resolution nor the
Secretary-General’s
report [A/3289]
has yet reached
the French Government.
107. While
acknowledging
the importance
of the
serious questions under discussion this evening, I am
astounded at the desire to force so hasty a vote, m such
an unaccustomed manner on proposals which have only
just been submitted. These proposals raise important
constitutional
problems. I am wondering
why, in this
Assembly tonight, such a hasty vote is being urged. I
take ‘due note of the fact. I therefore cannot approve
the draft resolution proposed by the delegations of
Canada, Colombia and Norway,
but more particularly
I consider it improper to press for a vote at this stage.
108. The PRESIDENT
(trunslat~~ from Spanish) :
As there is a motion for closure of the debate and two
speakers have already participated in the discussion,
the motion should be immediately put to the vote, in
accordance with rule 77 of the rules of procedure. I
therefore put to the vote the United States proposal
that the debate should be closed forthwith.
The proposal was adopted by 50 votes to 6, m’th 16
abstentions.
109. The PRESIDENT
(transZa*tedfrom Spanish) :
We shall now vote on the draft resolution proposed by
the delegations od Canada, Colombia and Norway
[A/3290].
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Luxembourg, having been drawn by lot by the Pres&
dent, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Luxembourg, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sweden,
Syria, Thailand, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen,, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argen-

Printed in U.S.A.

November

1956

89

tina, Austria, Belgium, Bo,livia, Brazil, Burma, Cambodla, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, $Cub’a,Denmark, D,ommican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, Greece, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya.

Against : None,
Abstaining: New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Albania, Australia, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia,
Egypt France, Hungary, Israel, Laos.
.a ,bw
..,ii&”
The draft resoltitiolz was adopted by 57 votes to
none, with 19 absterttions.
110. Sir Leslie MUNRO
(New Zealand) : I wish to
explain to the Assembly why on behalf of my Government I abstained on the draft resolution which has
just been carried. I abstained with regret because,as
the members of the Assembly know, my Government
has already offered to contribute to the international
force which has been proposed and, subject to satisfactory conditions, it is still prepared to do so. But I
must say that I am concerned that in a matter of such
moment as this, the debate should be concluded SD
quickly. I realize the urgency of the matter, but obviously there is need for delegations representing Govermnents at a great distance, as mine is, to get instructions. At least, that is what I would have thought.
My Government is a responsible government. There
are important matters in this resolution which require
some time to examine and which it would be entirely
proper for the Government of New Zealand to discuss
with other Governments.
111. Under those circumstances, while thoroughly
approving in principle the proposal for an international
force, and having shown in practice that my Government is ready to contribute to that force, I found to
my regret that it was necessary for me to abstain in
the vote.
112. Mr. DE LA COLINA
(Mexico) (&an&ted
from Spanish) : In voting in rfavour of the draft resolution proposed by the delegations of Canada, Colombia
and Norway, my delegation acted without spec%c instructions from its Government, since it was impossible
to receive instructions in the very short time available.
Since in effect it merely provides the basisupon which
we can begin to put the plan approved on 2 November
into effect, my delegation reserves its right to express
the views of its ‘Government on the detailed programme
which is to be drawn up.
113. Before concluding I should like to express my
delegation’s gratitude to our esteemed SecretaryGeneral for the prompt attention he gave to the difficult
mandate which the General Assembly entrusted to him
less than forty-eight hours ago.
The meeting rose on Monday, 5 November 1956,
at 12.25 a.m.

31331-December

19%-2,500
