S/PV.8859

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8859th meeting

Wednesday, 15 September 2021, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Flynn. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2021/784)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-25321 (E)
*21XXXXX*

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a commitment to increasing the number of women in
leadership positions.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2021/784)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan; Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director
for Operations and Advocacy in the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
and Ms. Merekaje Lorna Nanjia, civil society activist.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/784, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
brief the Council today on the situation in South Sudan.
On 12 September, South Sudan marked the
three-year anniversary of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. That agreement provides the only broadly
agreed framework through which long-term stability
and durable peace can be achieved in South Sudan.
I am pleased to report some positive developments
registered since my latest briefing in June (see
S/PV.8801). On 30 August, we saw the inauguration of
the reconstituted Parliament, members of which were
sworn in on 2 August. South Sudan made the historic
appointment of the country’s first woman Speaker of the
Transitional National Legislative Assembly and woman
Deputy Speaker of the Council of States, indicating
2/19

15/09/2021

Those positive steps must now be complemented by
the reconstitution of the subnational State legislatures.
That development paves the way for a much-delayed
charge on the legislative programme envisaged by the
peace agreement. The legislative agenda is extensive. It
includes the passage of priority bills already prepared
by the National Constitution Amendment Committee on
the reform of security, financial, judicial, constitutional
and electoral institutions.
Certainly, the reconstitution of the national
Parliament presents an opportunity to inject urgency
into the implementation of the peace process. A
ministerial task force has now presented a bill on the
constitution-making process to the Minister of Justice
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). The constitution-making process is an
important peace process benchmark, as well as being a
critical step forward in its own right. It should signify
a social contract between all South Sudanese on the
arrangements by which they can live together in peace
and harmony. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations country team
are working with local organizations to ensure that
constitutional consultations are inclusive and voices
outside the political elites, particularly at grassroots
levels, are heard.
As provided by the peace agreement, electoral
preparations should be conducted in parallel with the
constitution-making process. The recommendations
outlined in the report of the needs assessment mission
offer an opportunity for UNMISS to provide technical
support that will enhance the likelihood of a free and
fair electoral process that will be acceptable to all.
President Kiir has himself recently acknowledged that
an open and fair election is critical for South Sudan to
proceed with its transition. He has emphasized that its
preparation needs an early start.
There is no consensus on the exact timelines.
Relying on the two extensions to the transitional period,
the most generous interpretation would see elections
in early 2023. That would require the completion of
a voters roll by mid- to late 2022. Unless there are
adequate technical and political preparations, the event
could be catastrophic instead of a national turning
point. For those reasons, we believe the Council should
issue every encouragement to those involved, including
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8859

the international community, to focus their attention on
that task.

to compromise in the interest of achieving that vital
benchmark without further delay.

The launch of the consultative process for the
commission for truth, reconciliation and healing is
another important development. It will allow for public
acknowledgement of past human rights violations and
lay the basis for support to the victims of conflict. That
is a central element to healing and subsequent stability.

An unfortunate result of the slow pace in
the implementation of the transitional security
arrangements are the fractures within the official
opposition, namely the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO). The desertions by
forces led by Generals Simon Gatwech Dual, Johnson
Olony and Thomas Mabor Dhul and the conflicts
between those groups and the forces loyal to Riek
Machar will undermine the peace process. At the
political level, that has exacerbated the imbalance
between the main parties — the main pillars — to the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan.

In my most recent briefing, I informed the Council
of the establishment of a high-level coordination
committee composed of senior representatives from
the Government and UNMISS. That arrangement
has improved the freedom of movement of UNMISS
patrols. Consequently, our support for the delivery of
humanitarian goods and services, our ability to move
freely to hotspots and the resupply of our temporary
operating bases have improved.
We acknowledge the unity Government’s progress
on the implementation of chapter four of the agreement.
The contemplated economic reforms are intended to
improve macroeconomic stability and the transparency
of public finances. One of the first tasks of the new
Parliament will be to pass the budget. Efforts in public
finance management, with the support of the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the United
Nations Development Programme, have enabled South
Sudan to address salary arrears and harmonize exchange
rates. It is critical to encourage the Government to
sustain those efforts, ensuring that economic benefits
filter down to all South Sudanese people.
While we commend those positive developments,
we are mindful of the significant challenges that still
face the peace process.
The realization of the transitional security
arrangements is pivotal to almost every aspect of the
agreement. For example, the electoral process can
only be guaranteed by an impartial, unified security
apparatus. The lack of progress in the implementation
of the transitional security arrangements is now a
major challenge. We commend the efforts of IGAD
and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission to encourage the parties to reach consensus
on the unified command and control structures of the
new national security institutions. President Kiir has
himself assured that that will be agreed imminently, as
will the graduation of uniformed personnel currently
stationed in training centres. We encourage the parties

It is imperative that the parties put aside adversarial
politics to work as a unity Government in support of
peace. For that reason, I joined the IGAD Council of
Ministers and the South Sudan presidency in calling
on both factions to resolve their differences peacefully
and politically. UNMISS will, in any event, be closely
monitoring the evolution of the divisions within the
SPLM-IO, given that they could ignite violence within
internally displaced persons (IDP) camps.
Monitoring bodies report a decline in fighting
between parties to the agreement. While that is positive,
the increase in subnational violence, as seen in Greater
Tonj, Tambura and elsewhere, is of great concern.
The situation is aggravated by the proliferation of
small arms and, outside Juba, underresourced State
governance and security structures. There have been
efforts to address some of that violence, including by
UNMISS. While reiterating the Government’s overall
and primary responsibility to do more to protect
civilians, we are increasing our grassroots engagements
to promote community harmony and making available
alternative rule-of-law institutions.
The redesignation of all protection of civilians
sites as IDP camps has been largely successful, save
for Malakal, which remains a protection of civilians
site. One of the positive results of that process has been
greater flexibility on how we utilize our peacekeepers.
Increasing the number of temporary operation bases
and long-range patrols has allowed our peacekeeping
force to provide a security presence and create space
for political reconciliation in hotspots such as Tambura,
Tonj and Koch. We are also extending our reach, our
transport technologies and the periods that we are

21-253213/19

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

present in areas of intercommunal conflict during the
rainy season so as to extend our peacekeeping force
from a six-month to a full twelve-month operation
each year.
Both the Government and South Sudan Opposition
Movements Alliance (SSOMA) have blamed each other
for insecurity on the Juba-Nimule road, the arterial route
linking South Sudan to its southern neighbours. The
Government has recently paused its participation in the
Community of Sant’Egidio-led talks, accusing SSOMA
of responsibility for the attacks on civilians on this road
and, accordingly, of engaging in talks in bad faith. For
our part, we are committed to supporting the work of
the Community of Sant’Egidio in bringing the holdout
parties within the framework of the peace agreement.
We are concerned about the increasingly restricted
civic space, the detention of journalists and leaders of
civil society groups and the shutting down of Internet
service providers following the calls for non-violent
protests by the People’s Coalition for Civic Action. We
urge all participants in the peace process to continue to
work together in a respectful and inclusive manner so
as to expand civic and political space for an intra-South
Sudanese dialogue. Concomitantly, the restriction
of this space is not auspicious for the creation of an
environment in which elections can take place.
I have text here on the dire humanitarian situation,
but in view of the imminent briefing by Ms. Reena
Ghelani, it is only necessary to say that we witness
these developments with considerable trepidation.
We are particularly concerned following the recent
announcement by the World Food Programme that they
have exhausted their resources for the current year and
will not be distributing rations and food to a number of
IDP and protection of civilians camps until 2022. For as
many as 100,000 people, this will push those dependent
on such food aid into famine, as well as exacerbate
tension between IDPs and humanitarian agencies.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that UNMISS is committed to continuously examine
and improve the impact of our interventions and,
more broadly, to support the South Sudanese people
in their search for a sustainable and overdue peace. I
thank the members of the Council for the support we
have received.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ghelani.
4/19

15/09/2021

Ms. Ghelani: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. In December
2020, the Council was briefed on the worsening food
insecurity situation. This followed a warning to the
Council that famine was looming in several countries,
including South Sudan, in September of 2020 (see
S/PV.8761) — one year ago.
Today, I will update the Council on the current
humanitarian situation, the impact of the humanitarian
response, the ongoing drivers of food insecurity and
humanitarian needs and what is needed to prevent
reaching the brink of famine again next year.
People in South Sudan currently face the highest
levels of food insecurity recorded since independence.
As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
said, over 60 per cent of the population are severely
food insecure. The combined effects of conflict, climate
shocks, displacement, the socioeconomic impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the lack
of investment in infrastructure and basic services have
driven them deeper into need. More than 8.3 million
people currently need humanitarian assistance,
including 1.4 million children.
The United Nations estimated in December 2020
that 2.4 million people faced emergency levels of acute
food insecurity — corresponding to the Integrated
Phase Classification 4 or above — between April
and July 2021. Further, some 108,000 people faced
catastrophic levels of acute food insecurity — Integrated
Phase Classification 5 — at the height of the lean
season. People projected to be in Phase 5 were in the
counties of Akobo, Aweil South, Pibor, Tonj East, Tonj
North and Tonj South. In five of these six locations,
conflict was the major driver fuelling displacement and
leading to the loss of lives, assets and livelihoods and
disproportionally impacting women and girls.
How has the humanitarian response progressed, and
have we been able to stave off famine? Humanitarian
agencies scaled up the multisectoral response in the at
risk counties and showed extraordinary commitment to
leave no one behind and pre-empt a further deterioration
of the crisis. They reached over half a million people
between January and June. This substantive response
has been essential to averting famine. Humanitarians
have prevented children from dying from chronic
diseases as a result of undernourishment, and they have
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

managed to give hundreds of thousands of people a
lifeline out of starvation.
This response, of course, has been part of a larger
aid operation in South Sudan, where aid agencies
assisted some 4.4 million people across the country
between January and June with food, medical and
nutritional care, water and sanitation, protection
support and shelter.
Notwithstanding these gains, there has been limited
change in the behaviour by non-State armed groups and
certain youth groups that continue to hamper access.
Since the beginning of this year, four aid workers have
lost their lives in the line of duty and more than 170
aid workers had to relocate due to security threats.
The destruction and looting of humanitarian facilities
has continued, including the looting of over 1,000
metric tons of food, valued at more than $1 million. In
addition, frequent attacks on civilians and humanitarian
convoys and roadside ambushes, in particular along the
key supply routes, including the major pipeline in the
south that the Special Representative mentioned, have
disrupted operations and resulted in increased prices of
essential goods for an already vulnerable population.
An alarming development this year has been
interference of aid activities by armed youth.
Humanitarians appreciate the Government’s support
and engagement on that issue and its promotion of the
engagement of joint high-level missions with youth
groups in parts of the country. The Government’s
leadership in that regard is greatly appreciated.
Humanitarians also appreciate the support provided
by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan through
long-range patrols and the setting up of temporary
operating bases in several locations, which have
supported access for humanitarians.
This challenging situation has been further
compounded by new emerging needs as a result of
the sub-national violence referred to by the Special
Representative. For example, the further deterioration
in the security situation in Western Equatoria, has
led to the displacement of 80,000 people and the
interruption of assistance to thousands. Armed conflict
in Central Equatoria, mainly with non-signatory parties
to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, b and other
armed factions, has also displaced more than 120,000
people since the beginning of the year.

S/PV. 8859

The humanitarian needs have been further
exacerbated by exceptional flooding for a third
consecutive year, so far affecting nearly 420,000 people.
With more heavy rains expected in the coming months,
thousands of people will be forced to move from their
places and homes and will require assistance and
livelihood support. As South Sudan emerges from the
lean season with hopes for the harvest season, there is
a risk that flooding may lessen any food security gains,
which could contribute to extreme food insecurity
recurring next year.
The South Sudan humanitarian response plan of
$1.7 billion is the largest ever for South Sudan, but
is only 56 per cent funded. The Central Emergency
Response Fund and the South Sudan Humanitarian
Fund have been critical tools in our response. Together,
these tools have provided almost $100 million to support
food insecurity education and protection.
I thank the donors who have supported humanitarian
operations in South Sudan for their generosity. The
generous help that Member States have provided has
helped to avert famine. As the Special Representative
indicated, despite the resources allocated so far,
funding challenges forced the World Food Programme
(WFP) to reduce the scale of food rations in all refugee,
protection of civilian and internally displaced persons
(IDP) camps since April, affecting 700,000 people.
As mentioned, In October they will be forced to stop
support in other IDP camps due to supplies being
reallocated or reprioritized to counties where people
were at the brink of famine. Should resources become
available, WFP would resume assistance to the 106,000
people affected in these camps.
South Sudan is also currently on alert for a
resurgence of COVID-19, driven by the Delta variant.
Measures adopted to mitigate and prevent the spread
of the virus in South Sudan have had limited impact
owing to the challenges in the ability of the health
system to carry out vaccinations and low uptake of
the vaccination.
Although we prevented a catastrophe this year,
with all the challenges faced, we will have to remain
ever vigilant to ensure that we do not come to the brink
of a famine again in South Sudan next year.
Looking ahead, what do we need to support the
humanitarian response into 2022?

21-253215/19

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First and foremost, all actors with influence must
work to de-escalate the violence. What most civilians
want is durable peace. While the peace process has had a
real impact in parts of South Sudan, its implementation
has progressed, as Council members have heard, at a
slow pace and violence continues to erupt.
Secondly, humanitarians need continued support
from the Government of South Sudan for safe and
unhindered access to reach people who desperately
need help.
And thirdly, while we need resources now for the
humanitarian response plan to sustain the response, we
also urge donors to give funding at scale early in 2022
so that we can get ahead of needs, which are anticipated
to rise.
The President: I thank Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.
I give the floor to Ms. Lorna.
Ms. Lorna: I am deeply honoured and humbled
by the invitation to brief the Security Council during
this meeting dedicated to discussing the situation in my
beloved country. Today, I address the Council, not as
the Secretary General of the South Sudan Democratic
Engagement, Monitoring and Observation Programme,
but as a citizen of South Sudan and an activist.
With Council members’ permission, I should like
to add my voice in emphasizing the importance of this
meeting, especially at a time when the people of South
Sudan are faced with many uncertainties and dilemmas
regarding the immediate future of our country.
While we appreciate that steps have been taken
towards the implementation of the 2018 Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, they have mostly been
minimal, inconsistent, intermittent and taken at a
slow pace. The parties do not seem committed to the
full implementation of the peace agreement, thereby
prolonging the transitional period and delaying critical
governance reforms stipulated therein. Many citizens
feel that the delayed implementation serves only the
interest of the political elite, but prolongs the suffering
of the masses. Hence, there is a need to exert more
pressure and call for expeditious implementation of the
peace agreement in letter and spirit.
The unhealed wounds and continued violence
have left the country deeply fragmented and bleeding.
Following the signing of the revitalized agreement,
6/19

15/09/2021

there has been a reduction in violence associated with
the national-level political conflict. Paradoxically,
since 2018 there has been a systematic increase in
the scale and intensity of so-called intercommunal
conflicts in virtually every region of the country,
resulting in higher civilian casualties. Women and
girls in particular have been affected by conflictrelated sexual violence and sexual and gender-based
violence. That has resulted in massive and continued
displacement, which many citizens are starting to
think is by design. Examples of that are the violence
and killings in Tambura/Yambio and Kitgwang and the
killing of Catholic nuns and others on the Nimule road,
just to mention a few. Almost everyone in the country is
living in fear of armed robbery, sexual violence and all
forms of violence, including the possible resumption of
full-fledged violent conflict involving the key political
actors in the country.
The citizens do not know who to trust any more.
It is therefore prudent for the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity to expedite the
unification of the forces and implement comprehensive
security sector reform and transformation and a
responsive nationwide disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, without discrimination
or favour.
While there are steps being taken to establish
mechanisms of transitional justice, such as the
Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing,
to initiate the constitution-making process and to
advance the ongoing public finance management and
reform processes, the tendency to postpone critical
issues — such as managing diversity and ethnicity,
healing and reconciliation, accountability, reform
and transformation — seems evident. The leadership
seems hesitant to address those issues in an inclusive
and decisive manner. In that connection, I advise that
such important processes be led by independent and
reputable South Sudanese personalities who have not
participated in the immediately previous transitional
governance arrangements and involve internationally
reputable personalities to support the process.
Human right violations in South Sudan occur
in different forms, ranging from keeping soldiers in
cantonment areas and training camps for over a year
now with minimal access to food, water, shelter,
sanitary facilities and sanitary materials for women to
the intimidating operating environment for civil society,
women’s groups, media and now the private sector, as
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

well as immense restriction on freedom of association,
whereby holding workshops and public gatherings
always require permission from State security, just to
mention a few.
On 30 August, the Government rolled out heavy
military hardware and deployed soldiers on the streets
of Juba to deter a proposed protest. Traders who
chose to keep their shops closed on 30 August owing
to fear were fined. That further intimidated citizens
and exacerbated the trauma. The big question is: Why
would the State terrorize its own citizens?
It may be hard to believe, but since independence
until today, not a single primary or secondary school
has been constructed through national budget
allocation. Education, health, water and roads do not
seem to be national priorities. Youth unemployment is
high and women remain largely excluded from national
processes. Salaries for public servants, including the
security sector, are paid sporadically, leading to the
accumulation of unpaid salaries for over 6, 10 or even
15 months. Though there are reform initiatives, such
as the public finance management reform process, to
realize accountability, there is a need for adequate
political will from the top leadership of the country and
an independent judiciary and legislature to support the
call for accountability and enable key institutions, such
as the Anti-corruption Commission and the National
Audit Chamber, to effectively operate.
Based on my engagement with the South Sudanese
from all works of life in an effort to develop scenarios
for South Sudan in 2025, the people of South Sudan
continue to ask the following questions. First, when
will the country mark an end to interim and transitional
governance? Secondly, how can an inclusive,
participatory and people-driven constitution-making
process be realized in an environment where citizens
need to obtain permission to hold any workshop or
public gathering? Thirdly, how can we open up space
for inclusivity and wider participation in national
affairs, including the participation of women, youth
and marginalized communities in national affairs?
Having said all this, I wish to advise and recommend
the following.
First, in the spirit of resolution 2567 (2021) adopted
in March, the Security Council should authorize the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
support the implementation of key legislative reforms
and an inclusive and participatory constitution-making

S/PV. 8859

process and facilitate the conduct of free, fair and
peaceful elections in South Sudan. That would help us.
Secondly, the Council should authorize UNMISS,
in line with subparagraph 3 (a) (vii) of resolution 2567
(2021), to include provision of capacity-building,
support and facilitation to the Government of South
Sudan, not only in the rule of law and justice sector, but
also in the governance and accountability sector.
Thirdly, the Council should authorize UNMISS to
facilitate periodic engagement with the South Sudanese
Government and civil society or citizens groups to
build confidence and support implementation of the
2018 revitalized peace agreement.
I wish to mention that the struggle and sacrifice
of the people of South Sudan for independence was
in search of emancipation and a quest for establishing
a State where every person enjoys justice, liberty
and prosperity. However, the contrary is true: as we
speak, only a chosen few enjoy the proceeds of our
independence. In a real sense, the State is detached
from the people. Investment in service delivery is
minimal with no major State development projects in
the country. Basic service delivery has been relegated
to humanitarian agencies, and we truly thank them for
their support. South Sudan could have done better and
can do better if only the leadership were committed to
peace and stability in the country.
The President: I thank Ms. Lorna for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Haysom, as always, for his
dedication to South Sudan and today for a very timely
briefing. I commend Ms. Ghelani, as always, for her
work in coordinating the humanitarian response in
South Sudan. I offer special thanks to Ms. Nanjia for
her helpful and frank remarks, as well as her valuable
recommendations to the Council. They were heard.
Let me begin by saying the United States reiterates
its support for the people of South Sudan, and we
reaffirm our strong commitment to supporting the
sovereignty, independence and the territorial integrity
of South Sudan.
Over the past two months, the Government of
South Sudan has reconstituted the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly and sworn in its members.

21-253217/19

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We certainly welcome this as a step forward in the
peace process, but continue to urge South Sudanese
leaders to follow through on their commitments and
expedite the implementation of the 2018 Revitalized
Peace Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in South Sudan through the completion of graduation
and deployment of unified security forces, through
the initiation of a permanent constitution-making
process, the operationalization of the hybrid court and
other transitional justice mechanisms and, of course,
preparation for free and fair elections.
The United States takes note of the 15 July report of
the Secretary-General (S/2021/661) presented pursuant
to resolution 2567 (2021), which provided an assessment
of security, procedural and logistical requirements
needed to prepare for elections in South Sudan. Pursuing
free and fair elections that are inclusive and peaceful and
that reflect the will of the South Sudanese people will
be critical for a transition towards a stable, democratic
and self-reliant State. However, credible elections that
reflect the will of the people must be preceded by an
inclusive, transparent constitution-drafting process
carried out in an environment that permits freedom of
expression and provides space for political dissent.
Having heard from Ms. Nanjia, we certainly
share the Special Representative’s concerns about
the Government’s continued efforts to limit political
opposition, including the recent arrest of local civil
society members and the stifling of free speech and
the freedom of association. The United States is also
increasingly concerned at the prolonged violence at
the subnational level throughout South Sudan, often
involving large and well-equipped armed groups.
Within the past month alone, as we have heard, tens
of thousands of civilians in the town of Tambura in
Western Equatoria were afflicted with violence between
rival militias. The deteriorating security situation
in Tambura has led to more than 40,000 internally
displaced persons, disrupted humanitarian assistance
for approximately 25,000 beneficiaries, and resulted in
at least 26 deaths, the majority of whom were women
and children.
Meanwhile, violence continues in parts of Central
Equatoria. On 22 August, hundreds of unidentified
men attacked the Nuer refugee camp in Yei County,
during which a non-governmental organization-run
health facility was looted and vandalized. There were
reports of health workers assaulted and harassed, and,
tragically, multiple women were raped. Countless
8/19

15/09/2021

South Sudanese have lost their lives in attacks, and, as
Ms. Nanjia mentioned, that includes two Catholic nuns
killed by gunmen on 16 August.
The safety and well-being of children is also a
deep concern, as the conflict in Tambura could lead
to an increase in gender-based violence, including
sexual violence, particularly against girls, and to
forced recruitment and use of child soldiers by armed
groups and the denial of human humanitarian access to
children in need.
We deplore the pervasive violence plaguing parts
of Western Equatoria, Central Equatoria and elsewhere
in South Sudan. The United States calls on South
Sudanese leaders to take immediate and effective
measures to protect civilians, humanitarian workers,
internally displaced persons and women and children.
We also urge the Government to hold accountable those
responsible for abuse against civilians.
As we heard from Ms. Ghelani, the humanitarian
assistance situation remains desolate. More than
$1 million worth of humanitarian supplies, badly
needed by the South Sudanese people, have been
looted or burned. The continuous looting, threats
and violent attacks against humanitarian actors have
led to the suspension of operations by numerous
humanitarian agencies and a reduction of life-saving
assistance to vulnerable citizens. We note that those
attacking humanitarian personnel may be subject to
sanction measures.
Let me end by saying the United States remains
committed to the people of South Sudan and to working
closely with the Revitalized Transitional Government,
our fellow members of the Council and all stakeholders
to enable peace and prosperity for South Sudan and
the region.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico): Let me
first thank the President for his very kind words of
welcome for the work of the Council.
My delegation thanks Special Representative
Haysom, Ms. Ghelani and Ms. Nanjia for their extremely
useful briefings.
On 12 September, we marked three years since
the signing of the Revitalized Peace Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. Although
significant challenges remain, such progress as the
reconstitution of the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly and the initiation of the consultation
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

process for the establishment of the Commission for
Truth, Reconciliation and Healing demonstrate the
Government’s commitment to the peace process. In this
regard, Mexico calls for an accelerated implementation
of the provisions of the Revitalized Peace Agreement,
particularly those related to security issues.
We follow with concern the impact on the civilian
population of the violent divisions within the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition. In
this regard, we urge the factions to resolve their
differences peacefully, respect the ceasefire and
ensure the protection of civilians at all times. We echo
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
stressing that the Revitalized Peace Agreement is the
only framework for peace.
In recent weeks, Tambura has been the scene of
serious clashes. Accordingly, we urge national and
Western Equatoria leaders to opt only for the negotiated
path and to work with the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to build confidence among the
communities affected by the violence.
We hope that the recent graduation of the Necessary
Unified Forces will lead to the reduction of levels of
violence throughout the country, in strict compliance
with the norms of international human rights law. We
acknowledge that the deployment of strategic UNMISS
temporary operating bases in the area has been crucial
in creating the necessary conditions for humanitarian
workers to provide assistance to the more than 58,000
people who have been displaced since June.
The high number of incidents of sexual violence,
extrajudicial killings, abductions and arbitrary
detentions is disproportionately affecting women and
girls. Therefore, mechanisms like the Government’s
action plan for the armed forces on addressing conflictrelated sexual violence are vital, but much more needs
to be done to ensure accountability and address rule of
law deficits.
As Ms. Ghelani mentioned earlier, more than
8 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance
as a result of the violence, floods, food insecurity and
the health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease.
The indicators point to a tragic situation, with more
than 4 million displaced persons, 1.4 million children
suffering from severe malnutrition and 380,000 people
undergoing the impact of the rainy season. Moreover,
conditions for humanitarian workers are precarious and
becoming increasingly dangerous. We therefore call on

S/PV. 8859

the Government to urgently take the necessary measures
to ensure safe and unrestricted humanitarian access.
The democratic and inclusive spirit of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan must be felt
in all aspects of South Sudan’s political life. In that
regard, I acknowledge that the appointment of a woman
as Speaker of the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly is a decisive step in the right direction.
More concrete steps are needed, however, to achieve
the 35 per quota for women’s participation envisaged
in the agreement. The creation of spaces, such as the
South Sudan Women’s Leadership Forum, is critical
to including women’s voices in all political processes.
Their full, equal and meaningful participation is
non-negotiable. The future of the country depends on
the inclusion of all South Sudanese men and women.
In conclusion, I urge South Sudan, on the tenth
anniversary of its independence, to redouble its efforts
to consolidate the transitional process and ensure the
holding of truly democratic elections. On his recent
visit to South Sudan, Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix conveyed a message of commitment to
and support for the peace process. My country supports
that message and reiterates its full support for the very
important work of UNMISS.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let me
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the recent
developments in South Sudan. I also thank Ms. Reena
Ghelani, from the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Lorna
Nanjia, civil society activist, for their useful updates
and insights.
The developments in South Sudan during the
past three months have provided the impetus for the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. Political violence has decreased and the parties
have been, by and large, faithful to the revitalized
agreement. The peaceful cohabitation of various
political parties is reassuring and provides hope for
peace and stability.
The presidency and leadership of the Republic
of South Sudan have taken noteworthy steps. The
appointment of new members to the Council of

21-253219/19

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

States, with a large representation of women, their
swearing into office in August, the reconstitution
of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly,
the appointment of the first woman Speaker and new
political appointments are indeed all positive signs. We
encourage the Legislative Assembly and the Council of
State to focus on the much-needed legislative work to
meet the benchmarks set in the revitalized agreement.
Nevertheless, the recent suspension of the Rome
initiative, in the wake of killings on the Juba-Nimule
road, is a matter of concern. It is important to resume talks
on a priority basis to revive the reconciliation process
between the Revitalized Transitional Government
of National Unity and the South Sudan Opposition
Movements Alliance. We also note the launching of
the consultative process for the establishment of the
Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing. We
hope that the South Sudan leadership and parties will
work towards consolidating those positive developments
in the coming months.
It is encouraging that economic reforms have
continued to improve the macroeconomic stability and
public finances in the country and have helped mitigate
the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
On the security front, it is again encouraging that
the ceasefire has continued to hold, although localized
violence has increased. The defections, internal
disputes and fighting within Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-Army in Opposition has unfortunately
resulted in fatalities. We commend the mediating role
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in addressing the situation.
The continuing violence calls for the early
establishment of the unified command of the military
and the graduation of the Necessary Unified Forces,
which is a critical aspect of the agreement. In that
regard, we support the call made by the presidency
of South Sudan for the cessation of hostilities among
the rival factions and the observance of a reasonable
distance to prevent further violence.
We appreciate the continuing cooperation between
the Transitional Government and UNMISS in providing
protection to internally displaced persons in camps for
the internally displaced, which are currently under
the control of the Government. We urge UNMISS
to continue to move forward on the transition of the
Malakal protection-of-civilians site as conditions permit
and in line with its mandate. The humanitarian needs
10/19

15/09/2021

of the population are increasing, and the international
community needs to step in to bridge the funding gap
in the budget.
We remain concerned about violations under
the status-of-forces agreement. That needs to be
addressed in a proactive manner by the Transitional
Government, working together with UNMISS
authorities. We condemn the targeting of and attacks
against humanitarian workers and assets, including the
looting of humanitarian supplies in conflict-affected
areas, which have had a significant negative impact
on operations.
India has been one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to UNMISS since its establishment a decade
ago. Last month, India contributed to and partnered
with the United Nations in rolling out the UNITE
Aware platform, initially in four United Nations
peacekeeping missions, possibly including UNMISS.
We firmly believe that contemporary peacekeeping
must be anchored in a strong ecosystem of technology
and innovation that can facilitate United Nations
peacekeeping operations in implementing their
mandates in complex environments.
The Indian contingent in UNMISS is also
contributing to the sustainable development and welfare
of the people of South Sudan. Computer training and
veterinary assistance camps have been organized by
the Indian battalion during this month. It is a matter
of immense pride that 135 of my fellow countrymen,
serving as part of UNMISS, have recently been
awarded United Nations medals for their outstanding
performance in Jonglei state and the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area. I take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Indian peacekeepers Corporal Yuvraj Singh
and Mr. Ivan Michael Picardo, who were posthumously
awarded the prestigious Dag Hammarskjöld Medal this
year for their courage and sacrifice in the line of duty.
In conclusion, 10 years ago, India joined other
Council members in welcoming South Sudan into the
comity of nations on 9 July 2011. India congratulates the
Government and the people of South Sudan on their tenth
anniversary as an independent and sovereign State. We
believe that, in this transformative phase, South Sudan
requires the wholehearted support of the international
community, including from IGAD, the African Union
and the United Nations. For its part, India will continue
to support South Sudan and its people.
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and
Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(A3+1).
We take note of the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report (S/2021/784) and thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom, Ms. Reena Ghelani, of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Lorna
Nanjia for their briefings. We acknowledge and welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan, our colleague Ambassador Akuei
Bona Malwal.
Three days ago, South Sudan marked three years
since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan . That will be in the backdrop of the celebrations
of the country’s tenth anniversary of independence.
The A3+1 wishes to congratulate the people of South
Sudan on those momentous occasions, which present
an opportunity for national introspection that we hope
will mark a turning point for decisive actions to end the
armed conflicts.
The A3+1 commends the South Sudanese parties
for the recent progress in the implementation of the
revitalized peace agreement. The inauguration of
the reconstituted Transitional National Legislative
Assembly and the Council of States, the unveiling of
the task force to oversee and coordinate transitional
justice and judicial reforms, the launch of the permanent
constitution-making process, as well as the consultative
process for the establishment of the commission of
truth, reconciliation and healing, are commendable and
positive steps.
It is our expectation that the new Parliament will
expeditiously enact the necessary legislation to further
accelerate the implementation of the revitalized peace
agreement, as well as augment the ongoing efforts to
improve governance, provide the much-needed public
services and meaningfully deal with insecurity.
The A3+1 also welcomes the efforts made by the
parties towards the achievement of the agreed gender
representation in governance institutions. We applaud
the historic appointment of the first female Speaker of
South Sudan’s Parliament and encourage the parties
to remain committed to the principle of inclusivity,
through the implementation of the agreed minimum

S/PV. 8859

35 per cent quota for women’s participation, as well as
youth representation.
Despite the achievements, the A3+1 remains
deeply concerned about the reported incidents of
continued armed violence in parts of South Sudan. The
increasing number of inter-ethnic conflicts, the fighting
among factions of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-Army in Opposition, as well as activities
of non-signatory parties, constitute a violation of the
cessation of hostilities and the permanent ceasefire. We
find that to be unacceptable and reiterate our call on all
parties to immediately end the violence and recommit
to the cessation of hostilities and adherence to the
permanent ceasefire.
The A3+1 notes with appreciation the swift
action taken by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in response to the security
situation in South Sudan. We welcome the outcomes
of the seventy-second and seventy-third extraordinary
meetings of the IGAD Council of Ministers, held in
June and August, as well as the follow-up visit to Juba
by the Prime Minister of the Sudan and Chairperson
of IGAD, His Excellency Mr. Abdallah Hamdok. We
urge the Government and all parties to expeditiously
implement the recommendations and decisions of
IGAD without delay.
We also reiterate our call to the parties to put
more effort into accelerating the implementation of
the agreed transitional security arrangements so as to
minimize the opportunities for violence. That includes
the deployment of the Necessary Unified Forces, the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process and the finalization of the
strategic defence and security review.
Our role as the Security Council and friends of
South Sudan should be to encourage progress by
extending the much-needed diplomatic, technical and
financial support towards the implementation of the
revitalized peace agreement.
The reported dire humanitarian situation in South
Sudan is concerning. Nonetheless, it is also encouraging
that the Government continues to provide the required
protection for the internally displaced and the
increasing number of returnees. We extend appreciation
to all humanitarian agencies working in South Sudan
for their assistance and urge international partners
to continue to extend the much-needed humanitarian
support to address existing shortfalls. Furthermore, we

21-2532111/19

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

urge the Government to take the appropriate measures
to ensure the safety, protection and security of all
humanitarian workers and agencies and provide the
necessary facilitation for the safe and efficient delivery
of humanitarian assistance to all those in need.
Finally, the A3+1 commends the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for continuing
to support the people of South Sudan in their efforts
to achieve peace and stability in their country. We
note from the Secretary-General’s report that the
Mission continues to play its rightful role of providing
critical protection, as well as technical assistance
and capacity-building, to support the implementation
of the revitalized peace agreement. We call upon the
leadership of UNMISS to fully utilize the provisions
of resolution 2567 (2021) to expand that noble work.
We are also encouraged by the measures taken by the
Government and UNMISS to improve coordination and
communication. Such measures have led to a significant
reduction of incidents of infringement of the status-offorces agreement.
In conclusion, the Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines and Kenya reiterate their appreciation
for the continued efforts of all United Nations agencies,
the African Union, IGAD and all international partners
in supporting the people of South Sudan on their
journey to sustainable peace, stability and prosperity.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Ms. Reena
Ghelani and Ms. Nanjia for their briefings. I would like
to focus on three points.
As others have done, France acknowledges the
progress made in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, in particular the establishment
of the reconstituted Transitional National Legislative
Assembly and the steps to set up the commission
for truth, reconciliation and healing. The country’s
authorities have also made an effort to facilitate
movement for the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) within South Sudan, in accordance
with the status-of-forces agreement.
France stands ready to assist the Security Council
in providing support to South Sudan, provided that the
Government achieves the objectives set by the Security
Council. UNMISS is there to assist in that regard. While
several commitments have recently been reaffirmed,
the majority of the measures are pending, in particular
12/19

15/09/2021

with regard to security sector reform, as well as the
operationalization of transitional justice bodies.
The Security Council outlined its strategy in the
UNMISS mandate, which is guided by the holding of
elections, scheduled for the end of the transition. France
takes note of the Secretary-General’s recommendations
for preparing for those elections. We encourage
UNMISS to set up an electoral assistance team. We call
on the authorities to start developing from now the legal
framework for elections, to operationalize the national
electoral commission and to allocate the necessary
resources for the holding of elections.
To that end, we call on all parties to prioritize unity.
The fragmentation of some of the signatory parties to
revitalized peace agreement constitutes a threat to
adherence to the ceasefire. We therefore welcome the
efforts of the chairmanship of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to ease tensions.
Furthermore, France calls on all parties to
fully uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In that regard, we are concerned about measures to
quash calls to protest, the arrest and intimidation of
people involved and widespread Internet blackouts,
which are all unacceptable. We also call on authorities
to guarantee the freedom of expression and the right to
peaceful protest.
We are also concerned about extrajudicial killings
committed in the Warrap and Lakes states. We call
on authorities to ensure respect for human rights
and to combat impunity for the perpetrators of those
violations, including those committed against women
and children, which the briefers addressed in detail.
In addition, we condemn the attacks on
humanitarian and medical personnel. As we are well
aware, South Sudan is one of the most dangerous
countries in the world for humanitarian workers. It
is therefore important that the perpetrators of violent
acts against them be brought to justice and sanctioned
by the Council. As detailed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, humanitarian
needs are immense and the risk of famine is increasing.
In that context, it is vital that humanitarian and medical
personnel be able to move about freely in order to
deliver assistance to the population without hindrance
or fear of being targeted.
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
Haysom and Ms. Ghelani for the information they
provided on the developments in the situation in South
Sudan. We also listened closely to Ms. Nanjia’s remarks
and welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan at this meeting. We
would like to congratulate him and the South Sudanese
people on the tenth anniversary of the country’s
independence on 9 July.
Russia stands ready, as a permanent member of
the Security Council, to support Juba’s efforts on
the path towards peace and stability. We believe that
the formation of the South Sudanese Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
conclusion of the pre-transitional period creates the
necessary conditions for moving the country towards
political stability and reconciliation.
We welcome the beginning of the work of
the Revitalized Transitional National Legislative
Assembly and the Council of States. Concluding the
formation of the Parliament constitutes one of the
most important political provisions of the transitional
period, as stipulated in the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The successful implementation of that task
will mean the conclusion of the implementation of the
political part of the peace agreement. In that connection,
we note the political will of the South Sudanese side,
and we hope for work to continue on implementing the
remaining provisions of the peace agreement.
We also trust that work will continue on the
establishment of the unified forces of South Sudan,
which is complicated by an acute lack of the necessary
material and technical resources and financing. We
call on those that have not yet signed the revitalized
agreement to join the State-building process.
In that connection, we note the initiative of the
Community of Sant’Egidio, and we trust that talks will
continue between Government representatives and the
non-signatories. We pay tribute to the mediation efforts
of the African Union and the States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to provide support in the implementation of specific
provisions of the peace agreement. In particular, thanks
to mediation by IGAD representatives, a truce was
established between the factions of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement in Opposition, led by the First

S/PV. 8859

Vice-President of South Sudan, Riek Machar, and
General Simon Gatwech.
We are of course concerned by the sporadic
intercommunal armed clashes in several areas of the
country, as well as the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situations. Humanitarian assistance needs to reach
those who are in acute need of it. According to United
Nations statistics, from April to June, more than
7 million people found themselves in a situation of
food insecurity, while nearly 1.5 million children are
undernourished. We firmly condemn any breaches of
the ceasefire agreement or acts of violence against the
civilian population, including against humanitarian
personnel operating in South Sudan.
We are convinced that, as the situation in South
Sudan returns to normal, there will need to be a review
of the sanctions regime that exists with respect to the
country. We trust that, with a view to easing the arms
embargo, the South Sudanese authorities will manage
to make significant progress in meeting the benchmarks
established in resolution 2577 (2021).
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Special
Representative Haysom and Ms. Ghelani for their
comprehensive briefings, and Ms. Nanjia for her
statement. I welcome the Permanent Representative of
South Sudan to this meeting.
We are encouraged by the continued progress
achieved in the peace process in South Sudan as the
young nation marks its tenth anniversary. We warmly
congratulate the Government and the people of South
Sudan on that important occasion and achievement.
We commend the reconstitution of the Transitional
Legislative National Assembly of South Sudan and the
recent decision to unify command of the forces and
graduate the Necessary Unified Forces. While various
challenges remain, the progress achieved so far should
be fully recognized and built upon, and the South
Sudanese parties should be further encouraged.
In that connection, I wish to highlight the following.
First, we call on the Government of South Sudan
and the relevant parties to step up the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in order
to sustain a peaceful transitional period culminating
in national elections. We take note of the reports on
internal issues among different parties in South
Sudan. We call on the relevant parties to resolve their

21-2532113/19

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

differences and avoid any possible adverse impact on
the peace process.
We also call on the Government to further facilitate
women’s participation and leadership to reach the 35 per
cent goal, in line with the peace agreement. We commend
and call for the continued efforts of the United Nations,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and other international partners to
promote peace and development in the country.
Secondly, it is critical to continue to uphold the
permanent ceasefire. We urge the Government of
South Sudan to put in stronger efforts to effectively
and sustainably address intercommunal violence and
ensure the safety of humanitarian workers and facilities.
Dialogue and confidence-building measures should be
enhanced to promote trust and reconciliation in order to
tackle the root causes of intercommunal violence.
We commend and reiterate our strong support
for the work of UNMISS, particularly in terms of
the protection of civilians. Viet Nam will continue to
actively contribute to the work of UNMISS and further
promote the participation of our women peacekeepers
in the Mission. We also commend the continued efforts
of the United Nations Mine Action Service in mine
clearance and risk education activities in the country.
Thirdly, it is critical to tackle the increasing
economic and humanitarian challenges in the
country. It is concerning that the high level of food
insecurity continues to affect more than 7.2 million
South Sudanese, which is over half of the country’s
population, with Integrated Phase Classifications of 4
and 5 — “Emergency” and “Catastrophe”, respectively.
We call on the international community to strengthen
its humanitarian assistance and financial support to
South Sudan, as well as to provide further assistance to
the country in averting the threat of famine, combating
the coronavirus disease pandemic and accelerating the
vaccination process.
Fourthly, regarding the issue of sanctions, it is
important to constantly review the implementation
of the benchmarks established in resolution 2577
(2021) with a view to lifting measures in the light
of the progress achieved. As Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, Viet Nam will
continue to foster cooperation among South Sudan,
States in the region and other relevant parties in order
14/19

15/09/2021

to ensure the full implementation of related Security
Council resolutions, including by promoting field visits
of the Committee in that regard.
To conclude, Viet Nam reiterates its strong support
for the pursuit of peace, stability and development in
South Sudan for its people.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank
Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan, for his briefing. The United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the
international community clearly remain committed to
supporting South Sudan, while the Government has the
primary responsibility for the welfare of its people. I
would also like to thank Ms. Ghelani, from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ms. Lorna Nanjia, representing women peacebuilders
and women human rights defenders, who will continue
to play an important role in South Sudan. The full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in politics,
decision-making and peacebuilding is undoubtedly
essential to the development of a future peaceful and
democratic South Sudan.
Norway is deeply concerned about the security
situation in South Sudan. The level of violence has
increased and remains unacceptably high. We are
particularly worried about fighting taking place along
ethnic lines in Tambura in Western Equatoria. The
slow implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan is a significant driver of conflict. It creates
discontent and provides incentives for destabilizing
defections. The split of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-Army in Opposition in Upper Nile is a case
in point. Norway commends the rapid response of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
including calling a meeting of the IGAD Council of
Ministers and dispatching a high-level delegation
to Juba. A collapse of the peace agreement will have
dire consequences for the entire region. That level of
engagement from South Sudan’s neighbours has created
welcome new momentum.
We stress the need now to focus on the
implementation of chapter II of the Revitalized
Agreement, on security arrangements, and urge the
parties — in close cooperation with IGAD — to expedite
that process. Norway welcomes the presidency’s
decision to immediately graduate the Necessary
Unified Forces and to unify the command structure.
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Revitalized Peace Agreement mandates that
the transitional period end in free and fair elections. The
Government and the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly should build on the workshop held in May and
provide the legal basis for a constitutional conference
as soon as possible. It is crucial that that process be led
and owned by the people of South Sudan.
The freedoms of expression, association and
assembly are prerequisites for free and meaningful
elections. Norway is therefore deeply concerned about
the recent arrests, detentions and silencing of civil
society activists and media. We stress the importance
of the rule of law and the fight against corruption and
impunity, and we commend the capacity-building
efforts of UNMISS in those areas.
We continue to be deeply alarmed about the high
level of food insecurity and increased humanitarian
needs in South Sudan, which have been driven by
intensified conflict, flooding, the coronavirus disease
pandemic, disease outbreaks and displacement.
Accessing areas of need with humanitarian assistance
is challenging due to the rainy season and flooding, but
also due to conflict and insecurity. We urge all parties
to ensure safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
workers. In that context, we want to note the marked
improvement in access for peacekeepers.
Conflict is the most significant driver of
humanitarian need, but we also know that climate change
acts as a crisis amplifier and multiplier. In that respect,
we are pleased to learn about the work currently being
carried out by UNMISS to establish a working group
on climate change and security. We hope that work will
contribute to integrating climate-related security risks
into the Organization’s analysis, planning, conflict
resolution efforts and responses.
The mandate of UNMISS is to assist the
Government, which the international community
remains committed to supporting. We therefore hope
that the next phase will be marked by cooperation
and common purpose for the benefit of the people of
South Sudan.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, and Director
Ghelani, from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings. I welcome
Ambassador Malwal, Permanent Representative of South

S/PV. 8859

Sudan, to our meeting today. I also listened attentively
to the statement delivered by Ms. Lorna Nanjia.
In connection with the Secretary-General’s latest
report on South Sudan (S/2021/784), I would like to
emphasize several points.
In the three years since the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, the political process in South
Sudan has made remarkable progress. Recently, South
Sudan’s leaders reaffirmed their commitments and
reconstituted the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly, with the appointment of the Speaker of the
Assembly and other key positions. China welcomes
those developments. The Revitalized Agreement
provides the only policy framework for peace in South
Sudan. All factions in South Sudan should maintain the
current positive momentum and continue to advance
preparations for the general elections and the building
of the Necessary Unified Forces, among other tasks,
so as to steadily promote the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement.
The talks in Rome between the Government
of South Sudan and the opposition have seen some
difficulties. All parties should maintain a constructive
attitude and sign the peace agreement as soon as
possible. The international community should respect
the leadership of South Sudan handling its own national
affairs and support regional organizations, such as
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and play an active role. The
Security Council should heed the AU’s call to lift the
sanctions against South Sudan as soon as possible in
order to effectively improve the environment for peace
and development in South Sudan.
At present, peace and stability have been generally
maintained in South Sudan, and the ceasefire is
holding. However, intercommunal conflict and armed
violence still occur from time to time. Recent divisions
within the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-Army
in Opposition have added uncertainty to the security
situation. Peace is hard-won. All parties concerned
must therefore keep the overarching goal in mind,
resolve differences through dialogue and consultation
and work together in order to advance the peace process.
Promoting intercommunal reconciliation is
a key link in the security and stability in South
Sudan. Resolving intercommunal conflict cannot be
accomplished overnight. Multiple means — combining

21-2532115/19

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

mediation, good offices and development — need to
be adopted to eliminate root causes of conflict. The
Government of South Sudan has made many efforts
to that end, but has faced many difficulties. The
international community should provide financial and
technical support to help the Government of South
Sudan to improve its capacity to protect civilians.
Although economic reform in South Sudan has
achieved some results, many difficulties and challenges
remain, including prominent food security issues, a
severe coronavirus disease pandemic and a large gap
in its humanitarian needs. We call on the international
community to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance and economic support to South Sudan in
order to resolve its food security issues. The focus
should be on increasing investment in agriculture,
energy infrastructure, education and health care,
among other fields, in order to help the people of South
Sudan rebuild their homeland and stimulate their selfgenerated development momentum.
China is concerned about the difficulties faced by
humanitarian organizations in South Sudan and hopes
that the parties concerned will provide favourable
conditions for authorized humanitarian relief
operations. China will continue to provide assistance
within its capacity to South Sudan.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has strengthened communication and
coordination with the Government of South Sudan, with
the Mission’s freedom of movement improved and its
capability to implement its mandate enhanced. China
is one of the major troop-contributing countries to
UNMISS and supports the Mission in playing a greater
role in protecting civilians, promoting intercommunal
reconciliation and assisting in the implementation of
the peace agreement.
Over the past decade, parties in South Sudan have
worked hard to overcome various difficulties and
challenges and have taken important steps to rebuild
the country. The international community and the
parties in South Sudan must draw lessons from history,
look towards the future and work together to propel
South Sudan forward on the path of lasting peace and
sustainable development, and thereby contribute to the
prosperity and development of the region.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I wish to thank
Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the Secretary16/19

15/09/2021

General for South Sudan, Ms. Ghelani and Ms. Lorna
Nanjia for their briefings.
I would like to start by commending the
Government of South Sudan on several positive and
successful actions.
First, we welcome the advancement of the
transitional justice agenda.
Secondly, the inauguration of the Parliament on
30 August was an important step towards democratic
institution-building and accountability and, ultimately,
the upcoming elections. It is crucial that they be well
prepared. We hope that the Government of South
Sudan will continue to implement the reforms set out
in the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Otherwise,
the upcoming elections cannot be seen as transparent,
credible and inclusive. One thing is to have the changes
on paper, but we also want to see the Parliament working
as it should.
Estonia is very concerned about the suppression
of civic space. The arbitrary arrests, detention and
harassment of human rights activists and the shutdown
of major Internet service providers is unacceptable. We
call for the immediate release of all individuals arrested
during the planned protests. Civil society must be able
to operate freely in South Sudan; it is in the interests
of a peaceful future for the country. That is especially
relevant bearing in mind the upcoming elections.
The recent internal disputes in the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition are
worrisome. Those disputes can break the already fragile
peace, and we call on the opposing factions to refrain
from fuelling the animosity. In that regard, we also
welcome the swift intervention of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to find a solution between
the opposing factions.
We remain concerned about the extrajudicial
executions carried out in Warrap and Lakes states. It
is disheartening to read that those executions had the
approval of State officials. We call on the Government
to investigate those killings, and we call on it to do
so in compliance with its international obligations
under international human rights law. The cycle
of violence cannot stop if the Government will not
bring the perpetrators to justice. That is necessary to
end impunity and enhance accountability. We need
to see improvements to the human rights situation in
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the country, especially concerning conflict-related
sexual violence.
The humanitarian situation continues to be very
dire, affected by the tensions and conflicts in the
region and exacerbated by extreme floods and the
socioeconomic impact of the coronavirus disease. The
numbers outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/784) make for grim reading, with about 60 per
cent of the population likely to face acute food insecurity
and about 108,000 people already facing catastrophic
hunger. Already four humanitarian workers have been
killed this year. It is the Government’s task to ensure a
safe and secure environment for humanitarian partners
to work in.
In conclusion, I want to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan for their
valuable work in South Sudan.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom, Ms. Ghelani and Ms. Nanjia for their insightful
contributions. I would like to make three key points in
response to what we have heard today.
First, the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan still falls far short of what
is needed. That is fostering increased instability and
exacerbating political divisions.
The United Kingdom welcomes recent areas of
progress, including the inauguration of Parliament,
exchange rate reforms and public financial management
reforms. But three years on, delays in turning core
commitments into action are compounding grievances
and contributing to ongoing suffering and instability.
We share the concerns expressed by many today
regarding recent splits in the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) and the
destabilizing impacts of political manoeuvring. We
welcome the role of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and of Prime Minister Hamdok as Chair
in seeking to resolve those divisions. We echo their
call for all parties to refrain from violence and to focus
on achieving peace and stability through compromise,
trust and unity.
We also continue to call on all actors to work
towards an improved security situation and for the longoverdue graduation of the Necessary Unified Forces.

S/PV. 8859

But improved security alone will not be sufficient to
strengthen trust between the South Sudanese State and
its people. That will also depend on more people having
a genuine stake in the country’s governance.
That brings me to my second point. The United
Kingdom is deeply concerned by the restrictions on
the freedom of expression imposed by South Sudan’s
Government in response to public calls for peaceful
protests. I think that Ms. Nanjia’s briefing reinforced
that message. Intimidation, threats and pre-emptive
detentions of civil society actors are unacceptable.
As we draw closer to the first national elections, we
urge South Sudan’s Government to respect the freedoms
of speech, association and expression guaranteed in the
transitional constitution. Those freedoms are vital to
enable much-needed debate on the country’s future. We
encourage South Sudan’s leaders to take concrete steps
now to ensure that the path to elections will be open,
inclusive and fair, starting with inclusive consultations
on the constitution-making process.
Thirdly, we cannot ignore the fact that insecurity
and political tensions are contributing directly to the
suffering of millions of ordinary South Sudanese. We
know that 7.2 million people — 60 per cent of the
population — are likely to face acute food insecurity in
the coming months. Increased violence has displaced
tens of thousands and interrupted humanitarian
delivery. Moreover, humanitarian workers and their
assets continue to be targeted. That is deplorable and
must end.
Let me to conclude by reiterating our call for South
Sudan’s leaders to focus on the bigger picture and on
earning the trust of their people. South Sudan’s future
stability and prosperity depend on putting fundamental
building blocks in place now, including an end to
violence, respect for human rights and humanitarian
access, and a path to inclusive and credible elections.
The international community, including our United
Nations family at this meeting, should united behind
that effort.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
First, I want to thank our briefers, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom
and Ms. Ghelani. Their interventions were extremely
useful, but also worrisome. I want to thank Ms. Nanjia
in particular for her participation today, as well as for

21-2532117/19

S/PV.8859

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

her eloquence and candour in outlining the challenges
faced in South Sudan and the suggestions she made.
We have heard today concerning accounts of
subnational violence, regressive political posturing,
sexual and gender-based violence and a growing
humanitarian crisis. As Ms. Ghelani outlined in her
briefing, the appalling prospect of famine now once
again threatens South Sudan. We should not forget
that conflict is the single-greatest driver of hunger.
We are also deeply alarmed at the increased violence
and displacement around Tambura, where some 70 per
cent of those killed recently are believed to have been
women and children.
It is just over three years since the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan was signed, but we have not seen
the progress hoped for. As mentioned in our previous
meeting (see S/PV.8801), while the present ceasefire
is not something we can take for granted, equally the
country cannot move forward or contemplate elections
if it represents the only noteworthy achievement to
date. A ceasefire alone does not guarantee peace. It
should become the foundation for peacebuilding and a
broad-based political process, with the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and the inclusion of
youth. While there has been good progress, we call on
the South Sudanese authorities to ensure that the 35 per
cent quota for women is met.
The obstacles facing South Sudan are many, from
shrinking civil society space and widespread food
insecurity, to extrajudicial killings and increasingly
disaffected youth; however, they are not insurmountable.
A renewed commitment by South Sudan’s leaders, allied
with the determination of the South Sudanese people
and supported by the international and humanitarian
communities, can overcome those challenges. In that
regard, we welcome the launch of the joint action plan
for the armed forces on addressing conflict-related
sexual violence and look forward to its implementation.
A recommitment and renewed political impetus can
pave the way for the State to provide opportunities that
citizens should legitimately expect: to protest in safety,
to go to school, to work, to thrive — put simply, to have
their human rights respected, protected and fulfilled.
The protection of civilians is rightly at the heart
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan’s
mission, and we welcome its efforts alongside
South Sudanese forces to deliver a safe and secure
18/19

15/09/2021

environment, including through monitoring conditions
at redesignated internally displaced persons camps. It
is crucial that site transitions take place with the human
rights of those affected being put to the fore.
Finally, I welcome and deeply appreciate the
presence of the Permanent Representative of South
Sudan, who is with us in the Chamber today. He was
present in June when we stated unequivocally that
Ireland believes in South Sudan (see S/PV.8801). We still
do. We stand ready to assist him and his Government,
and we look forward to continued engagement outside
this Chamber.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, allow
me to congratulate you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. Our delegation is ready to
cooperate with the Irish delegation during its term at
the helm of the Council.
I also would like to thank all colleagues, members
of the Council, who welcomed me today. I appreciate
their concern. We listened to their statements. We
hope for the best all the time. I would also like to
welcome the briefers in the Chamber today: Special
Representative Haysom, Ms. Reena Ghelani and, my
sister, Ms. Nanjia. We thank them for their service to
the people of South Sudan.
I would also like to pay tribute to and express my
condolences for the Indian force personnel and the
humanitarian personnel who lost their lives in the line
of duty in South Sudan. We are sympathetic, and we
appreciate their sacrifices for the people of my country.
Our delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/784). We thank him for
highlighting some of the achievements recorded in the
implementation of the Revitalized Peace Agreement
in the period covered by the report. We also recognize
that many challenges remain, and the parties to the
Agreement intend to overcome these challenges.
However, we know that these challenges would be
overcome faster and sooner with the encouragement of
the international community.
We are hopeful that the international community
will redouble its efforts and commitment to the people
21-25321

15/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of South Sudan to overcome these challenges. We
appreciate the commitment shown, the efforts made
and the assistance given to the people of my country,
especially by the African Union and our partner, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Still, much remains to be done, and we need the
assistance of the Security Council in overcoming the
challenges and sustaining the peace process. In this
regard, we are reliably informed that the International
Monetary Fund and the South Sudanese financial
authorities have agreed and developed a mechanism to
stabilize the dollar rate in the market. The results so far
are positive and encouraging for the improvement of
South Sudan’s overall economy.
The Security Council has been seized with the
plight of women in South Sudan for a very long time.
The delegation of Ireland is presiding over the Security
Council in the month that the General Assembly is
holding its high-level week, and traditionally the
majority of delegations have been led by men. South
Sudan was no exception: for the last nine year we have
been attending the General Assembly with a delegation
led by a man.

S/PV. 8859

But this year, I am proud to report to the Security
Council, our delegation will be led by the Vice-President
the Republic of South Sudan, the Honourable Madam
Rebecca Nyandeng Garang de Mabior. Moreover,
she is leading a high-level delegation that includes
five female Ministers who are serving in the current
Cabinet. This is a source of pride, for we have always
assured the Council that the pledge of 35 per cent
gender representation is a serious pledge and that, as we
solidify the peace process and unite our communities,
this percentage will increase over time.
In conclusion, I encourage the delegations of the
members of the Security Council to bilaterally meet,
if time and rules around coronavirus disease allow it,
with the members of the South Sudanese delegation to
hear more about the general situation in South Sudan.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the Council
can continue its discussion in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-2532119/19
