United Nations

S/PV.4965

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4965

th meeting
Monday, 10 May 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Akram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Pakistan)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Lucas
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Arias
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (S/2004/333)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-34306 (E)

*0434306*

S/PV.4965

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Expression of condolences
The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the Security Council, to
express our outrage at the terrorist attack that occurred on
Sunday in Grozny, the capital of Chechnya in the Russian
Federation, which killed President Akhmad Kadyrov
and others and wounded many more. The Council
condemns that act of terrorism in the strongest possible
terms. The members of the Council express their
sympathy and condolences to the victims and their
families and to the Government of the Russian
Federation. On behalf of the Council, I should like to
request the representative of the Russian Federation to
convey those sentiments to his Government and people.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(S/2004/333)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Singapore and Timor-Leste in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Pessoa
Pinto (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Ms. Ana Pessoa Pinto,
Senior Minister and Minister in the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Timor-Leste and Head of Mission.
If there is no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Kamalesh Sharma to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/333, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste and Head of Mission.
Before giving him the floor, I wish to welcome
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sharma, to the Security Council, where, as we all
know, he has many friends.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Sharma has effectively overseen and managed a
complex operation that has adjusted and adapted
responsively to the changing situations on the ground
and has successfully launched important peacekeeping
innovations such as the United Nations executive role
in policing and the provision of civilian advisers to the
Government. Here in New York, the Security Council
has benefited from an excellent flow of information
and analyses from his office that has allowed us to
follow closely developments within Timor-Leste and to
make decisions as required.
It is a pleasure to receive Mr. Kamalesh Sharma
within this Chamber, which is tempered only by our
regret that, as we understand, this will be our last
opportunity to welcome him in this capacity.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I wish
to take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, for his contributions and to wish him every
success in future.

S/PV.4965

I give the floor to Mr. Sharma.
Mr. Sharma: I wish to thank you, Sir, for your
very kind words. I appreciate them very much. It is a
pleasure for me that our consideration of this item is
taking place under your presidency.
I have the honour, as you have said, Sir, to
present my final statement as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste before the
Security Council. I would like at the outset to thank
members of the Council, who have been throughout
appreciative and encouraging of our efforts towards
assisting in the stability and self-reliance of TimorLeste. This has been a great support for the entire team
of the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor
(UNMISET),
whose
contribution
and
commitment in implementing the Council’s mandate I
would also like to acknowledge here with deep
appreciation. The contribution of some of them will
carry on in the additional year of the consolidation
phase, which proposal is before the Council, before the
exceptional association of the United Nations with the
newly independent State of Timor-Leste in the form of
peacekeeping missions draws to a close. I am confident
that, should the Council endorse the proposal, the team
will show the necessary dedication during that phase
and will give to my successor the support I have
received.
It is the plain truth that a United Nations mission
cannot show consistently positive results unless there
is close, constructive and continuous consultation and
exchange based on trust with the leadership of the
country. My experience has been notable and
heartening in this respect, and I would like to place on
record my grateful appreciation to the Government of
Timor-Leste for the cooperative and forward-looking
orientation and the spirit of joint striving which
characterized our efforts. They constitute, I believe, a
model of collaboration. Most importantly, of course,
my gratitude goes to President Xanana Gusmão, Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri, and President of the National
Parliament Francisco Guterres “Lu-Olo” and Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta. Over two years, I maintained a
pattern of weekly meetings with the Prime Minister
and had very frequent meetings with the other leaders.
They were at all times ready to receive me and offer
their full cooperation and advice in furthering the
mandate charged to us by the Council. In a complex
and ambitious mandate, it is inevitable that there would
be rough passages as well as smooth ones. We brought

understanding to each other’s tasks in negotiating the
way ahead.
It is particularly appropriate that, as an
exceptional gesture, we have Senior Minister Ana
Pessoa participating in this meeting of the Council,
which will be the last one under the current mandate. I
have no doubt that the Council will profit greatly from
the personal presence of Minister Ana Pessoa, and I
would also like to thank her for the effort she has
undertaken to participate in the meeting today.
I would like to acknowledge with satisfaction the
fact that the engagement of peacekeeping missions in
Timor-Leste is widely described as having been a
successful one. I myself characterize the outcomes and
result as encouraging. That is not because I have any
reservations on the success of our engagement, but
because we know from the experience of the last half
century that for success to be embedded and durable,
unremitting effort and belief in the highest values of
democratic and participative governance have to be
demonstrated over a long period. All too often, what
had appeared a success story has turned sour. Success
is a retrospective judgement that — when we look back
after decades and take satisfaction at the fact of a
foundation so solidly laid, and a positive and
enlightened direction of policy based on the rule of law
and principles of transparency and accountability so
firmly adhered to — the national accomplishment can
be regarded as irreversible and as a lasting
achievement by the political class and the people.
To ensure that outcome, which can be obtained
only after much tenacity and effort, the primary
imperative in a new nation is the dedication of the
leadership to building and respecting institutions that
reflect those values. In the formative years of an
independent nation, it is essential that the leadership
pursue a vision — and advocate and advance principles
in its political and administrative conduct and
practices — which will bear the judgement of history
and succeeding generations. The scrutiny and
evaluation of the direction and example given by the
first leaders of any nation never slackens, as their
example has to stand the test of time.
The quality of governance and of the institutions
of the State can be progressively built upon only if the
foundations are strong. That is a responsibility of truly
historic proportions which the first leaders carry on
their shoulders, and it is appropriate that they should

3

S/PV.4965

already see their actions and contributions in that
historical perspective and not be guided only by
fleeting or convenient considerations of the moment.
That entails care to safeguard the means of policy and
not only the ends. I believe this is a test which the first
leadership of Timor-Leste is equipped to discharge to
the lasting benefit of present and succeeding
generations.
While enlightened leadership is the leading
ingredient in the social and political success of a State,
it is equally true that — particularly in the context of a
progressively interdependent world and the explosive
rise in the expectations of all peoples — the quality as
well as the empathy of the engagement of the outside
world, as development partners, particularly by
countries of the neighbourhood and the economically
better-endowed partners, are equally crucial. We have
to ensure the strength of supportive partnerships. It is
hoped that the nascent State of Timor-Leste, burdened
by the trauma of history and among the States with the
highest levels of poverty and the most depressed social
indicators in the world, will benefit from the
understanding and supportiveness of the outside world,
which will assist it on the path to stability, increasing
prosperity and the enhancement of the quality of life
and choices for its people. This is a challenge which
we cannot fail to meet. No lasting political or social
gain can accrue without economic growth and social
development.
The main developments of interest in the
preceding half year have been reflected in report before
the Council (S/2004/333), and I can therefore — no
doubt to everyone’s relief — compress what I have to
say on the various elements of the mandate pertaining
to external and internal security and support for public
administration.
The national police — the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) — now bears responsibility for
policing in all 13 districts and for a vast majority of
headquarter functions. As stated in the report, we are
confident about transferring executive responsibility
for policing to Timor-Leste at a minute past midnight
on 19 May. The contribution of Police Commissioner
Sandra Peisley has been my strength in the
performance of the mandated task of maintaining law
and order and developing the PNTL as an effective
force. While the Council should be reasonably satisfied
with the development of PNTL capacities so far, the
creation of a professional, apolitical, accountable and

4

responsive police service, with well-established
traditions of integrity and a mindset of service to the
community, will take longer. The recent approval by
the Council of Ministers of an Organic Law on the
PNTL, the Organic Law on the Ministry of Interior and
a disciplinary code for the PNTL are the essential first
steps in that direction. I remain convinced that the
Government of Timor-Leste will ensure effective
utilization of the mentoring capacities to be provided
by the 157 police officers proposed during the
consolidation phase of UNMISET, in conjunction with
other long-term bilateral and multilateral programmes
for police development.
The military component of UNMISET has
continued to be downsized according to the revised
schedule that was approved in Security Council
resolution 1473 (2003). Its presence over the past two
years of UNMISET has been a factor promoting
stability and the consolidation of a still fragile peace.
On this occasion, I would like to place on record my
appreciation of the three Force Commanders, General
Winai Phattiyakul, General Tan Huck Gim and General
Khairuddin Mat Yusof. Their dedication to their task,
their ability to motivate the UNMISET military
component and their advice and support to me have
also been a great strength.
At this time, I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to the very useful and necessary work that the
engineers in UNMISET’s military component have
been doing in maintaining the major arteries of the
road system in Timor-Leste, which I have previously
acknowledged. Without continued international support
for that task, the capacity for rapid response to postUNMISET security challenges would be rapidly
degraded all over the country. It would also pose a host
of challenges for continued economic development and
would threaten fragmentation of essential social
functions. Bilateral and multilateral assistance will
play a crucial role in meeting that challenge.
The efforts of both Indonesia and Timor-Leste to
find a solution to the transitional issues, particularly
those related to refugees and the demarcation of the
land border, have been detailed in the report before the
Council. I would like to place on record my deep
appreciation of the accessibility and the encouragement
from the leadership of Indonesia which I have enjoyed
in the pursuit of the task of assisting on those
transitional issues, which are part of UNMISET’s
mandate. It is to be expected that not all aspects of a

S/PV.4965

developing bilateral relationship would be amenable to
speedy resolution within a couple of years of the
emergence of Timor-Leste as an independent State.
However, I believe that considerable advances have
been made in many directions, that structures of
constructive cooperation have been created and
employed and that the political signals at the highest
levels from both States have been conducive to
constructing a relationship of friendship, goodwill and
cooperation, unburdened by history. We can look
forward with high expectations to the future course of
the relationship.
Reports — though unconfirmed — of criminal
elements, many of them armed, both inside and outside
Timor-Leste, continue to be received. However,
Indonesia’s commitment to controlling such elements
is encouraging, as are the continuing efforts of TimorLeste to develop the capabilities of its security
agencies to deal with such criminal elements, including
through the establishment of a Rapid Deployment
Service of the PNTL, which will operate in rural
border areas. UNMISET would continue to cooperate
with the Government of Timor-Leste in building the
capacities of the specialized units of the PNTL,
including the training of the rapid deployment service
during the consolidation phase.
Through its institution- and capacity-building
activities, UNMISET has contributed significantly to
the viability and political stability of the State
institutions of Timor-Leste, including through
mentoring and coaching Timorese counterparts,
assistance in the preparation of legal frameworks,
formalizing related rules and regulations and
institutionalization of operational procedures.
The innovative and pioneering experiment
sanctioned by Security Council resolution 1410 (2002)
revealed that the requirements for human and
institutional capacity development were far more
demanding than originally envisaged, requiring the
presence of most critically important advisor positions
beyond May 2004. A robust exit strategy to ensure
sustainability will be the major challenge during the
consolidation phase of the mission. Likewise, the
assistance provided through the serious crimes
programme of UNMISET offers crucial reinforcement
to the Council’s commitment that perpetrators of such
crimes shall be brought to justice. It also helps to
strengthen Timorese capacities in the justice sector.

A healthy and functioning justice sector in TimorLeste is crucial for the overall functioning of the
democratic institutions and thus is fundamental in
ensuring good governance. The recruitment of
international judges to fill the current gaps would
therefore be accorded priority attention. However, the
sustainability of the justice sector can be achieved only
through the direct support of bilateral and multilateral
development partners. This must be not only an
immediate priority, but also a much needed long-term
strategy.
Social peace, security and stability are, of course,
a prerequisite for sustainable gains in areas of
governance and economic development. Enhanced
transparency and accountability in governance provide
a healthy tone to the political culture and also
contribute to better and more effective utilization of
external assistance. Through the Provedor, or
ombudsman, Act and workshops in this area, in
addition to the office of the Inspector General, the
Government has signalled its commitment to these
principles. Similarly, enhanced cooperation between
the wider United Nations system of agencies, funds
and
programmes
and
international
financial
institutions, as well as bilateral actors and civil society,
in support of national programmes would contribute
towards a holistic approach. In that regard, I would like
once again to acknowledge the sterling support given
to me by Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Resident Coordinator Sukehiro
Hasegawa.
Being acutely conscious of the need for a smooth
downsizing of the Mission, we had established a
committee in good time to ensure that all elements for
a proper handover to the Government, or other
applicable means of disposal of assets, were in place.
Since I last addressed the Council in October 2003,
considerable progress has been made in the orderly
downsizing of the Mission. Planning for what would
have been the final repatriation of the peacekeeping
force (PKF), the United Nations police and the
substantive elements of the civilian staff had reached
an advanced stage before it was overtaken by the
planning for the much smaller follow-on mission now
proposed. Much of the earlier work, however, remains
relevant. The permanent PKF presences in Suai and
Oecussi were withdrawn, and United Nations and
contingent-owned equipment assets in those locations

5

S/PV.4965

were largely recovered or donated to the Government
of Timor-Leste.
In keeping with our policy of handing back to the
Government fully functional facilities where this is
possible, two United Nations-owned facilities in
Suai — the former Sector West Headquarters and the
PKF Forward Surgical Team hospital, complete with
medical equipment — were donated to the Government
in December 2003. The Government has to meet the
challenge of meeting the operational requirements.
During liquidation, environmental considerations have
been respected.
The drawdown of United Nations police and the
progressive handover of policing responsibility to the
PNTL have been accompanied by the donation of
United Nations-owned equipment in police stations.
UNMISET continues to provide essential telephone
services down to substation level, where Timor
Telecom cannot provide this service, and provisionally
full operation of the police VHF radio network. It
appears that without some significant development in
local capability, UNMISET will have little choice but
to continue this support well into the period of the
proposed follow-on mission.
I am pleased to report that the downsizing of the
national staff has not caused us any appreciable
difficulty, largely due to the efforts of the Division of
Administration, particularly its Director, Philip Cooper,
to improve their job skills and to accord recognition
through certificates of the experience gained by them
while employed by the United Nations. Training
courses have been run in software programmes —
Word, Excel, Access, Power Point — computer
hardware, web design, language training in English and
Portuguese, office administration, small business
development, proposal writing, formal documentation
and the establishment of cooperatives and
microfinance.
These initiatives have been appreciated by the
national staff. The return of the national staff’s pension
contributions within one month of the end of their
contracts by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund has also contributed positively to the morale of
those staff. Expanding and new missions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations have absorbed
most of the international staff who have sought
continued employment with the United Nations.

6

Before I conclude, let me express my deep thanks
to the Secretariat, particularly Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Hédi Annabi, Julian Harston and the efficient desk
officers assisting us in our work in the field, as well as
their colleagues in other specialized units of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
departments of the Secretariat. Their availability,
guidance and unfailing support have left an indelible
impression on me.
The President: Before opening the floor, I would
like to say that, in accordance with the understanding
reached among Council members, I would like to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than five minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
longer statements are kindly requested to circulate a
full text in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when addressing the Council in this Chamber.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to you, Sir, for expressing
solidarity with Russia on behalf of the Security
Council in connection with the terrorist attack on my
country. I shall convey your words of sympathy to the
Russian Federation and all the victims of the tragedy.
Our Organization was established immediately
after a most cruel and devastating war that brought
mankind untold grief. Millions upon millions died and
my own country suffered enormous loss of life.
Yesterday was 9 May, a day sacred to the citizens of
Russia and all peoples of the Soviet Union. On the very
anniversary of victory in the great war for the
fatherland, when countries in the anti-Hitler coalition
and all people of good will commemorated the end of
the Second World War, a monstrous terrorist act was
committed in the Chechen Republic of the Russian
Federation. In Grozny, during the celebrations
commemorating the crushing of fascism, a terrorist
explosion killed the legally elected President of
Chechnya, Akhmad Kadyrov. Others died and many,
including children, were wounded.
This crime was committed at a time when the
Chechen Republic was gradually intensifying its efforts
to restore a peaceful way of life. Refugees were
returning home, the economy was recovering and
political activity was increasing. It was precisely
that — the normalization of the situation in the
Republic — that drew the fury of terrorists who are
blinded by hatred for all mankind and who are doomed

S/PV.4965

to oblivion. Today, in every mosque in Chechnya, they
are praying for the victims of this act of terrorism and
cursing the murderers.
The bloody trail of terrorism can be seen
throughout the world: Russia, the United States,
Indonesia, Spain, Saudi Arabia and the Middle East.
International terrorism, the black plague of the twentyfirst century, can be countered only if we work together
and form the united front of an international antiterrorist coalition. Russia will participate in that
struggle. Victory will be ours.
My delegation has prepared a draft presidential
statement in connection with the terrorist attack in
Grozny. May I ask you, Sir, to convene consultations
following this meeting in order to consider it?
I now turn to the item on the Security Council’s
agenda today. We are grateful for the SecretaryGeneral’s report on Timor-Leste, containing detailed
information on developments in that country. We
believe that it accurately reflects both the achievements
of and the main problems facing Timor-Leste. We
agree with the report’s conclusion concerning the need
to extend the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) beyond 20 May for an
additional 12-month consolidation phase, in a reduced
size and with a modified mandate. We support the
Secretary-General’s suggestions for the parameters of
an extended UNMISET, including the new
recommendation for the establishment of an
international response unit of 125 gendarmerie.
We are grateful to Brazil for having prepared a
draft resolution on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and we are prepared to participate
constructively towards its adoption.
We welcome the further stabilization in TimorLeste and commend the Timor authorities on their
success in developing the basic State institutions. We
note the progress achieved in legislation with a view to
the adoption of several important laws and regulations
governing the activities of individual public bodies,
determining procedures for local elections and
regulating various aspects of social and political life in
the country. We expect that Timor-Leste will soon
adopt key laws on the national police and defence,
which are essential to establishing a truly independent
force to provide internal and external security for the
country.

We welcome the establishment of the National
Electoral Commission, the first test of which will be
the preparation of local elections in the last quarter of
this year. We share the view that external assistance
will be necessary to the successful holding of the
elections and we urge the donor community to provide
Timor-Leste with the support it needs for the
preparation and convening of those elections.
We welcome the ongoing development of
Timorese-Indonesian relations. The two countries have
expressed their desire to establish genuine goodneighbourly and mutually beneficial relations, which
provides grounds for hope that there will soon be a
settlement of pending matters, including the important
issue of demarcating and monitoring the common
border. Timor-Leste’s economic development will also
benefit from positive movement in bilateral talks with
Australia on developing and allocating underwater
petroleum resources.
In conclusion, we thank Mr. Kamalesh Sharma,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor, and the entire UNMISET staff for their
real contribution to a settlement on the island.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, I want to
convey the condolences of the Angolan delegation to
the Russian Government and to the families of the
victims of yesterday’s terrorist bomb attack in Grozny,
Chechnya.
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting
on the situation in Timor-Leste. We welcome and thank
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for presenting the report on the
activities of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET).
We welcome the participation in this meeting of
the Security Council of Mrs. Ana Pessoa Pinto,
Minister of State and Minister in the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers of Timor-Leste. We also express
our agreement with the statement that the
representative of Brazil will deliver on behalf of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries.
We are gratified by the contents of the report
portraying remarkable achievements by the Timorese
people in building their country in such a short period
of time. It is our belief that those achievements lay
solid grounds for the further involvement and
cooperation of the international community with

7

S/PV.4965

Timor-Leste. My delegation reiterates Angola’s
commitment to the objectives set by the Timorese
people and by the international community of
establishing a truly self-sufficient State based on the
rule of law, on respect for human rights and on
democratic values.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
mentions
important steps recently taken by the Timorese
Government towards the consolidation of the Timorese
State. Taking into account their structural impact, we
deem of great importance the steps taken in preparation
for the first elections and the legislative reforms
associated with it; the adoption of legislation for key
public institutions, such as the Superior Council of
Defence and Security, the Interior Ministry and the
national police; the addressing of serious crimes
committed in 1999; and the continued strengthening of
the institutions of political and public administration.
We are encouraged by the very positive nation-building
developments in Timor-Leste at a moment when the
country has reached a dramatic threshold and when,
with every passing day, the Timorese are assuming
further responsibilities in the conduct of their own
affairs.
The political and institutional progress achieved
by Timor-Leste over the past two years is impressive; it
shows the great wisdom of the Timorese people and of
its leadership. We note with appreciation the increased
stability in the security situation in Timor-Leste. We
fully share the Government’s assessment of its limited
ability to cope with internal and external security
challenges. We further share the Secretary-General’s
conclusion, highlighted in his report (S/2004/333), that
Timor needs more assistance from the international
community in order to guarantee the consolidation and
long-term sustainability of its administrative institutions,
the rule of law and its territorial sovereignty.
The emerging institutions — principally the
public administration, the justice sector and the
national police — are still fragile. We think that TimorLeste will need the continued support of the United
Nations and of the international community at large.
The continued presence of UNMISET gives confidence
to the Timorese people and contributes to the
maintenance of security and stability.
My delegation acknowledges that this is a crucial
moment in the history of Timor, and that the
international community should be prepared to sustain

8

the efforts it has been deploying in favour of TimorLeste for quite some time, and in so doing to ensure the
best possible conditions for the sustainability of the
peace-building process in Timor-Leste.
My delegation supports the recommendations set
out in the report of the Secretary-General on the role,
size and format of UNMISET and on key national
support programmes. It is our belief that the revised
multifunctional mandate of UNMISET, when fully
implemented, will result in better functioning of
national institutions, ensure the development of the
rule of law, promote better security and stability and
ensure a self-sustainable Timor-Leste. My delegation
supports the extension of UNMISET’s mandate for a
further one-year consolidation phase and believes that
decisions on the future presence of a United Nations
mission should be taken in due time and in accordance
with circumstances on the ground.
The relations between Timor-Leste and its
neighbours — particularly Indonesia and Australia —
are an important factor in the situation in the country.
We praise the commitment made by those two key
countries to the future of Timor-Leste, the constructive
dialogue they are undertaking on issues of mutual
interest, in particular those concerning the demarcation
and management of the common border. My delegation
encourages bilateral donors to continue to provide
timely and appropriate assistance for the consolidation
of peace and the development of Timor-Leste.
In conclusion, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, and UNMISET for the
role they have played, and we reiterate our confidence
that the Timorese will build a stable, prosperous and
democratic society.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I too
want to thank Mr. Kamalesh Sharma for his briefing;
we are sorry that he is leaving his post.
The Permanent Representative of Ireland will be
making a statement on behalf of the European Union,
with which my delegation fully associates itself.
Mr. President, you requested that we be as brief
as possible, so I shall not repeat previous speakers’
analysis, which reflected the fact that significant
progress has been achieved in Timor-Leste and that
that progress needs to be consolidated. Here, let me
note that, in our view, very careful consideration must

S/PV.4965

be given to combating impunity for serious crimes
committed in 1999.
We draw two conclusions from the analyses.
First, France supports a one-year extension of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), with a modified mandate and reductions
in personnel. Secondly, in our view it is now very
important that an UNMISET exit strategy succeed; we
should try to define that exit strategy well in advance.
It is important that the next resolution include a
number of elements: setting a deadline for the
withdrawal of the force; refocusing the mandate on
assistance to the Timorese authorities to enable them to
carry out reforms; a system for reviewing personnel
levels at the end of the year; and strengthened
coordination of the international community’s action so
as to ensure a smooth handover to transition and
development partners, such as the relevant United
Nations agencies, international financial institutions
and bilateral partners.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): At the outset, I
should like to associate my delegation with the sadness
that others have expressed at the loss of life in Grozny.
Turning to the item on our agenda, I would like
particularly to welcome the presence here of Senior
Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto. We look forward to hearing
her views. I take the effort she has made to be here
today not only as a gesture to acknowledge the new
phase that the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) is entering, but also as an
acknowledgement of all that Kamalesh Sharma has
achieved over his two years of close work with the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste. We thank
him for what he has done.
I would like also to associate my delegation with
the statement to be made by Ireland on behalf of the
European Union later in this debate.
We believe that the Secretary-General has made a
compelling case for the extension of UNMISET’s
mandate for a further one-year consolidation phase. It
is important to ensure that the investments of the
international community and the achievements of the
Timorese people and Government are not undermined.
We look forward to engaging in negotiations this week
on a draft resolution to extend UNMISET in a reduced
form and with a modified mandate that reflects a
coherent exit strategy. We welcome the fact that
differences over the makeup of the security component

of the follow-on mission appear now to have been
resolved to the satisfaction of all concerned. We thank
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for its
efforts in that regard.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2004/333) sets
out clearly the areas where progress has been achieved
and those where continued international support is
required. I will not dwell on them, but it is clearly the
case that a smooth buildup in the governance capacity
of East Timor is necessary for a smooth UNMISET
drawdown. We welcome the strengthening of key
public institutions, in particular through the passage of
the Civil Service Act and the Organic Law on the
Office of the Presidency, and we commend the positive
steps that have been made in preparation for elections
later this year, including the establishment of the National
Electoral Commission and the finalizing of the legal
framework under which the elections can take place.
Areas where the United Kingdom is particularly
keen to see further progress include the establishment
of necessary legal and institutional frameworks such as
a defence act and prison legislation, clarification of the
roles and responsibilities of the Timorese police and
armed forces, and improvement in the administration
of justice.
Finally, we welcome the continued constructive
cooperation between Indonesia and Timor-Leste. We
hope that that will facilitate the early resolution of
outstanding issues, including agreement on a land
border and the provision of justice for those
responsible for serious crimes in 1999. With respect to
the latter point, it is important that the work of the
Serious Crimes Unit should continue.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to express my sincere condolences
and sympathy to the Russian delegation following the
horrible terrorist attack that claimed the lives of the
President of the Chechen Republic of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Akhmad Kadyrov, and others.
Next, I would like to thank Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma for his excellent briefing on the
situation in Timor-Leste and to congratulate him on the
work that he and his team have accomplished in that
country. Finally, I wish to welcome the presence of Ms.
Ana Pessoa Pinto.
We have noted that, in recent months, TimorLeste has made significant progress in the areas of

9

S/PV.4965

security and economic and social development, thanks
to the efforts of the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste, but also to the valuable assistance of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). However, a number of challenges remain
to be met to better ensure stability, democracy and
justice and to strengthen internal and external security
and border control. Those are major challenges to the
peace-building process in the young republic of TimorLeste, but we are confident that they will be met with
success.
From that perspective, the elections to be
organized in villages — the first elections in TimorLeste — are a major test for the young republic.
Important measures taken in preparation for those
elections are timely and appropriate in that they will
enable us to lay the groundwork for the electoral
process in the country and will establish conditions for
success for the first national elections. My delegation
can only welcome that.
The development of Timor-Leste’s relations with
all its neighbours will benefit the young republic
economically, but also from a political and security
standpoint. In that regard, we welcome the continued
improvement of the relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, which has been made possible by the farsightedness of their leaders. We hope that the two
parties will soon reach agreement on the demarcation
of their land borders, given the importance of that issue
for the security of both countries. The willingness of
both parties to establish good-neighbourly relations
enables us to hope that they will swiftly resolve
pending issues, because we believe that an
improvement in bilateral relations will contribute
greatly to the consolidation of the stability and security
of Timor-Leste.
Along the same lines, we hope that the
negotiations between Timor-Leste and Australia on the
question of the maritime border will move forward and
that an agreement will soon be concluded, in view of
that issue’s importance for the exploitation of mineral
resources in the Timor Sea, which will undoubtedly
benefit the economy of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste.
As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/333) indicates, there have been delays with
regard to the administration of justice and the training
of the police. While responsibility for policing should

10

be transferred to the national police of Timor-Leste on
19 May — and we welcome that — we believe that
continued support for the training of the national police
is necessary, since the establishment of public
administration and the strengthening of internal and
external security capacities are fundamental elements
for Timor-Leste’s viability and political stability.
UNMISET’s work in training the Timorese police has
had very positive results; we therefore believe that it
should continue during the consolidation phase.
The maintenance of external security also
requires UNMISET’s presence to follow up on
developments in the security situation and to support
demarcation activities. We feel that the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations in that area are reasonable
and deserve support.
Timor-Leste will continue to need financial
support from the international community for some
time. The support of United Nations funds and
programmes, of international financial institutions and
of multilateral and bilateral donors must be sustained
and generous so that the country can attain the
objectives of its national development plan.
Finally, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations concerning the extension of
UNMISET’s mandate for a one-year consolidation
period.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Let me first address the
Russian delegation in condemning the terrorist bomb
attack in Grozny and in expressing our sympathy and
our condolences to the Government of the Russian
Federation and to the victims and the bereaved
families.
My delegation is grateful for the comprehensive
briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Timor-Leste, Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma, and for the report of the Secretary-General of
29 April on the situation in Timor-Leste (S/2004/333).
In that connection, I would like to welcome the
presence of Senior Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto as she
participates in this Council meeting. I would also like
to say that Germany aligns itself with the statement to
be made later in this discussion by the representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union.
Germany commends the tremendous progress
achieved by the people and the Government of TimorLeste and by the United Nations Mission of Support in

S/PV.4965

East Timor (UNMISET). The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Kamalesh Sharma, deserves our
special tribute. We also welcome the excellent
communication and goodwill that have characterized
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. TimorLeste can rightly be described as a success story and as
a true model for nation-building. Over the past five
years, significant progress has been continuously
achieved in all relevant areas.
Whereas the security situation has generally been
calm and peaceful, certain deficits remain. The Timorese
police unit — the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste —
continues to suffer from a number of institutional
weaknesses. Reports of the presence of armed groups
are still a matter of concern. Unfortunately, we must
acknowledge that the development of indigenous
Timorese security capabilities remains at an early
stage. We must also acknowledge the concern of the
Timorese Government that an early withdrawal of the
international security presence could lead to a
deterioration of the situation. It is important that,
during the consolidation phase, UNMISET retain some
residual security-related elements to support TimorLeste’s ability to maintain its security and stability. We
must make sure that the progress achieved so far will not
be lost. Germany therefore supports the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNMISET, including its military component.
The development of relations between TimorLeste and Indonesia continues to benefit from the
commitment to cooperation at the highest political
level. However, as the report of the Secretary-General
points out, some problems remain. We therefore call
upon both parties to finalize the agreement on the
border line, to conclude an arrangement for
management of the border — including in the areas of
cooperation and security and the regulation of
economic activity — and to solve other outstanding
issues, such as bringing to justice those responsible for
serious crimes committed in 1999 and the return of
refugees. Despite considerable efforts, 300 unresolved
cases of Timorese children separated from their
families in 1999 still demand attention. Progress in
those areas will be crucial for the internal and external
security of Timor-Leste.
National reconciliation is a key factor in
successful nation-building. We therefore commend the
work of UNMISET also with regard to the other two
areas of its mandate: first, support for the public

administration and justice system, and for justice in the
area of serious crimes; and, secondly, support for the
development of law enforcement.
We support the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to continue this Mission. The envisaged
configuration of 58 civilian advisers could help TimorLeste cross a critical threshold of self-sufficiency in
terms of developing key skills and capabilities while
helping to ensure that essential tasks are discharged.
The international community’s peacekeeping
activities in Timor-Leste have provided a window of
opportunity
for
progress.
The
extraordinary
achievements that have been made offer an occasion
for pride for the Timorese people and for the
international community. We call on the Governments
of Timor-Leste and of Indonesia to take the
opportunity to resolve the outstanding issues before the
final termination of UNMISET. We highly support and
recommend the assistance of UNMISET in this
endeavour upon request from both parties.
There is good reason to believe that further joint
efforts will enable the Timorese people to achieve the
objective of a truly self-sufficient State, which they
have pursued with such determination. The
international community should stay committed to
achieving that goal.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We would like to express our strongest condemnation
of the terrorist attack that took place on 9 May in
Grozny, Chechnya, in the Russian Federation. We
convey our condolences to the bereaved families of the
victims and express our sympathy to the wounded.
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). I wish also to welcome the
supplementary briefing by Mr. Sharma.
In a few days, the people of East Timor will be
celebrating the second anniversary of their
independence. We are pleased to see that, with the
support of the international community, the people of
East Timor, through their creativity and hard work,
have achieved considerable progress in all areas in the
process of nation-building. The Government of East
Timor has been effectively fulfilling its national
administrative functions, and the social and economic
development of East Timor has taken an encouraging
first step. Its relationship with its neighbours is

11

S/PV.4965

continuing to improve and develop. Indeed, the people
of East Timor can justly be proud of their remarkable
achievements.

Senior Minister and Minister in the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers of Timor-Leste, Ms. Ana Pessoa
Pinto.

At this stage, the Government of East Timor is
actively preparing for local elections throughout the
country and will further develop its civil service,
judicial and law-enforcement systems. We believe that
those measures will have a positive impact on the
future development of East Timor.

Chile supports the Secretary-General’s proposal
to extend the present United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for an additional
12 months in a consolidation phase, and we believe
that the proposed mandate is appropriate.

As a nascent State, East Timor continues to face a
host of challenges in its quest for national stability and
for economic and social development. The functions of
the Government of East Timor need to be further
strengthened. Indeed, the building of its infrastructure,
as well as electoral preparations, are being hampered
by financial difficulties. The administrative and
judicial capacity of regions beyond Dili remains weak.
In order fully to achieve social stability and sustainable
economic development, the Government and the
people of East Timor must make even greater efforts,
and the continued support of the international
community remains indispensable.
We appreciate the active role played by
UNMISET in the development and construction of East
Timor.
We
endorse
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend UNMISET and to adjust its
size and mandate appropriately. We hope that the
Security Council will adopt the relevant draft
resolution as soon as possible.
We appeal to the international community to
continue to provide assistance for the development of
East Timor. China will, as always, support and
participate in the economic reconstruction of East
Timor. We are confident that the people of East Timor
will achieve even greater accomplishments in future in
the building of their nation.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
first join in the condolences expressed with regard to
the terrorist attack in Grozny which took the life of
President of the Chechen Republic of the Russian
Federation, Akhmad Kadyrov, and a number of other
victims. We are prepared to work on a presidential
statement to be made by the Council.
We welcome the briefing on Timor-Leste and the
outstanding work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, and
his team. We welcome also the presence here of the

12

Regarding the first element referred to in the
report, we fully agree that the provision of assistance
with respect to the justice system and administrative
structures is essential for political viability and
stability. We are concerned by the extensive delays in
the area of the administration of justice and by the
shortcomings noted in the area of human rights and
related proceedings, and we agree that there is a need
to promote capacity in that area.
As to the second aspect, namely strengthening
law enforcement in the country, in particular through
police training, we agree that there is a need for
UNMISET and the international community to
continue contributing to and supporting the training
process for the national police of Timor-Leste. We
welcome in particular the fact that its 3,021 staff
members are already carrying out their tasks in all
districts of the country. We reiterate the vital function
of the Rapid Intervention Unit, and we welcome the
fact that an adequate level of capability has been
achieved. We deem it crucial also to continue to
provide training for the Border Patrol Unit. Despite the
progress achieved, we believe that the national police
must continue with its training.
With respect to the third element, namely the
maintenance of security, we agree that this is a key
element for achieving stability in Timor-Leste. While it
is true that — fortunately — the situation in the
country has been rather peaceful, we need to bear in
mind all factors and not ignore possible sources of
instability. We believe, therefore, that the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal is appropriate and reasonable.
Another essential element for achieving progress
and true stability in Timor-Leste is sustainable
economic development. In that respect, we hope that
greater progress will be made in the exploitation of the
country’s mineral resources. We would also highlight
the programmes financed by the World Bank and the
Asian Development Bank for the creation of rural
power stations, the construction of schools, road

S/PV.4965

improvements, and the rehabilitation of marketplaces
and health services.
We are pleased with the excellent cooperation and
political agreements between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. We hope that they will soon arrive at an
agreement on land borders and find a solution to the
problem of refugees, in particular regarding those
responsible for serious crimes, so that they may be
brought to trial.
We also recognize the outstanding work and
efforts of other regional actors and of donors from the
international community with respect to this young
country.
In the area of human rights, we value the
assistance provided by UNMISET in efforts to shed
light on the crimes committed in 1999, and we
recognize the need to continue decisively supporting
the process for an additional year. In that connection,
we particularly welcome the work carried out by the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
We look forward with interest to the publication of its
final report and recommendations in October of this
year.
Finally, we reiterate the need for a one-year
extension of UNMISET, in a reduced size and with a
modified mandate. We hope that the members of the
Council will reach an agreement in that regard to
support development and stability in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America): We too
would like to extend our condolences and our thoughts
and prayers for the victims of the terrorist action in
Grozny, which killed President Kadyrov and others.
We look forward to working on a presidential
statement on that matter.
I would like to welcome Senior Minister Ana
Pessoa to New York. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Sharma for his presentation today and for
his outstanding work as the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative at the head of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). His untiring efforts to promote political
and economic development in East Timor will have a
lasting effect on that new country.
As we stated in February, we agree with the
Secretary-General that UNMISET should be extended
to consolidate gains made during the past two years of
the Mission, and we thank the Secretary-General for

his revision of the components of the extended
Mission. Although we recognize that at this time an
UNMISET extension will increase stability in TimorLeste, we believe the peacekeeping mission should end
no later than May 2005, at which time the Government
should resume full responsibility for its own security
while continuing to receive support from elsewhere in
the United Nations system and from other members of
the international community.
The Government and the people of Timor-Leste
have made considerable strides towards selfsufficiency. With further assistance from the
international donor community, United Nations
agencies and UNMISET, we hope that the Timorese
can increase public administrative capacity, develop
strong security institutions and establish a strong
judicial tradition with emphasis on human rights and
the rule of law. Given the current limited capacity of
Timor-Leste’s public administration, we agree that
further support from UNMISET in the form of civilian
advisers will be necessary for the development of an
independent, functioning civil administration. We
expect that any assistance in that regard past May 2005
would be provided through normal bilateral and
multilateral donor support.
We were encouraged to learn that since the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2004/333) was
published, the Government of Timor-Leste acted to
promulgate an organic law and disciplinary code for
the Timorese police and an organic law for the
Timorese defence forces. As we stated in February, the
Government of Timor-Leste should do its part to
nurture respect for the rule of law, and this action
moves the Government closer to that goal. We look
forward to hearing updates on the development of the
Timor-Leste police and defence forces, and we ask that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
keep us informed of any new legislative and regulatory
governmental actions in defining the respective roles
and responsibilities of the Timorese security forces.
We commend bilateral donors that are providing
considerable assistance to Timor-Leste in the form of
police training. After UNMISET ends in May 2005, we
hope that those and other bilateral donors will continue
to provide any training and assistance that may be
required.
We commend the work of the Serious Crimes
Unit and underscore the usefulness of its role in

13

S/PV.4965

addressing the issue of accountability regarding the
human rights violations and atrocities committed in
East Timor in 1999. As with other elements within
UNMISET, we believe the Serious Crimes Unit should
maintain close adherence to its completion strategy,
ending investigations no later than November 2004 so
that it can conclude all its trials by no later than May
2005. The Secretary-General stated in his report that
the Serious Crimes Unit should focus resources in
order to complete trial and appellate litigation in a
timely manner. We urge all countries to cooperate fully
with the Serious Crimes Unit. In order to achieve
justice for all the victims of human rights abuses, the
international community and the United Nations should
consider an international truth commission as a means of
achieving accountability and, ultimately, reconciliation
in Timor-Leste by resolving outstanding cases.
We look forward to working with our Council
colleagues on a draft resolution to extend UNMISET.
We hope a mandate extension can be adopted later this
week.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): We join colleagues in
expressing our condolences and sympathy to the
Russian Government and to the victims of the terrible
act of terrorism in Grozny.
We thank Mr. Kamalesh
comprehensive briefing.

Sharma

for

his

This is a crucial period for Timor-Leste. Much
has been achieved by the people in building their
nation, with the help of the international community.
However, much remains to be done. After all, nationbuilding requires time, efforts and commitment in
order for the process to bear fruit. As the mandate of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) expires on 20 May, that is foremost in our
minds.
In defining the new mandate of UNMISET, the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2004/333) provides us
with important factors to consider. In the report, the
peace and security situation in Timor-Leste is
characterized as having remained generally “calm and
peaceful during the reporting period” (para. 45). The
proposal for a military component has been justified as
responding to exceptional situations that exceed the
capacity of Timor-Leste security agencies to undertake
preventive action to promote public order and to assist
in the provision of security to United Nations premises
and personnel there. On the basis of those

14

justifications, my delegation fully supports the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation
to
extend
UNMISET for a further one-year consolidation phase.
The Philippines agrees with the three main
elements of the role of UNMISET during that
consolidation phase: support for public administration
and justice in Timor-Leste; support for the
development of law enforcement; and support for the
security and stability of Timor-Leste. As a country
contributing to UNMISET, my country stands ready to
provide support in the areas identified as requiring
UNMISET’s support in the consolidation phase.
The Timor-Leste authorities and the Timorese
have always demonstrated their commitment to
fulfilling their responsibilities in nation-building,
notwithstanding their very limited capacities. The
presence at this meeting of the Council of Senior
Minister Ana Pessoa further mirrors that commitment.
My delegation is confident that the extension of
UNMISET under the Secretary-General’s proposed
plan will contribute substantially to bringing TimorLeste closer to self-sufficiency and to ensuring
sustainable peace and stability in the country. However,
my delegation’s optimism is tempered by the realistic
assessment that even after a one-year extension of
UNMISET for a consolidation phase, many areas will
still need further support and assistance.
Therefore, my delegation particularly appreciates,
and wishes to invite attention to, the very forwardlooking component of the report on the requirements
remaining after May 2005. It may be timely to bear in
mind at this point that peace in Timor-Leste — as in
any other country — is predicated on just social and
economic development. The report notes the limited
revenue and widespread poverty in Timor-Leste,
circumstances which continue to pose severe
constraints on the country’s social and economic
development. While the forthcoming conference of
development partners, to be held in Dili on 19 May,
could provide some donor assistance, Timor-Leste’s
development should be pursued by generating more
revenues from its own natural resources and industries.
All the efforts made and gains achieved by
UNMISET and the international community in ending
the conflict and in nation-building in Timor-Leste
would be for naught if, in the end, Timor-Leste’s selfsufficiency could not be assured or sustained. TimorLeste’s immediate neighbours and the other countries

S/PV.4965

in the region, the Philippines included, should be ready
to go the extra mile in providing the appropriate
support to Timor-Leste, not only to preserve but also to
further the dividends of peace in the country.
The essential role of Timor-Leste’s partners in the
country’s long-term development and the entire
region’s stability is a crucial one. When we consider
the situation there, it may be relevant to note that some
of the lessons learned have been applied and could be
applied to other United Nations operations. United
Nations involvement and regional leadership there
were successful because they had wide domestic
support. United Nations efforts were focused on getting
the cooperation of Indonesia, and the accent was on
persuasion and underscoring the realities on the
ground.
The Timor-Leste experience is one of the best
examples of consolidated action among the Council,
the Secretary-General, regional players led by the
Association of South-East Asian Nations, Australia and
Japan, and the international community at large. We
recognize Ambassador Sharma’s role in that regard. As
the Security Council’s involvement recedes, the rest of
the United Nations system will need to take up the
challenge of ensuring successful post-conflict recovery
in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by conveying our condolences to the
Government of the Russian Federation. We condemn
the terrorist attack carried out in Grozny on 9 May. We
extend our sympathy to the bereaved families.
We also wish to welcome here the Minister of
State of Timor-Leste, Ms. Ana Pessoa Pinto.
Like preceding speakers, we thank the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report on the situation in TimorLeste (S/2004/333). We also thank his Special
Representative, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for his
excellent briefing and his personal account. Having
listened to Mr. Kamalesh Sharma’s briefing and read
the report, we indeed welcome the ongoing progress
made by the Government and the people of TimorLeste in establishing democratic institutions and
building the structure of a viable State. We welcome
the adoption by the national Parliament of the Organic
Law on the Office of the Presidency, which opens the
way to establishing two new constitutional bodies —
the Superior Council of Defence and Security and the
Council of State.

Recent progress made by the East Timor national
police augurs well for the upcoming transfer of police
authority to the Timorese Government, despite the
shortage of capacity and available resources. It is
important that the instruments regulating the police be
adopted soon in order to create a republican institution
that will ensure the rule of law and freedom for all
citizens. Special attention must be given to efforts
aimed at avoiding excessive use of force and at
ensuring greater respect for human rights.
We moreover welcome the improved security
situation, as well as the work done by the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
in the area of transferring competences. We fully
support the modification of the composition of
UNMISET in order to deal with the problems
identified in that regard. We believe that that will
enable Timor-Leste ultimately to assume full
responsibility for security and stability throughout its
national territory.
The Government of Timor-Leste’s control of that
sovereign function will also depend on maintaining
good relations with its neighbours, which means
dealing with many pending issues such as finalizing
border demarcation, the return of refugees from the
western part of Timor and establishing maritime
crossing points. We therefore urge Timor-Leste,
Indonesia and Australia to intensify their cooperation
to make progress in these matters.
Regarding public administration and justice, we
welcome the efforts aimed at adopting a law on the
establishment of an Office of the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice. Given the crucial role that Office
will play in monitoring respect for human rights, it is
necessary that the international community provide
Timor-Leste with greater support for its establishment.
Like the Secretary-General, we stress the need to
continue efforts to fight impunity and to promote
national reconciliation.
As I said in my statement on 20 February 2004,
Timor-Leste is now among the least developed
countries. The assessment of the economic and social
situation of the country contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates the magnitude of the
challenges to be addressed. In that regard, we believe
that the problems of unemployment and difficulties
encountered in the reintegration of ex-combatants are
of real concern and merit the special attention of the

15

S/PV.4965

international community. In that regard, UNMISET’s
exit strategy must be coupled with a strategy for
strengthening Timor-Leste’s public administration and
productive capacity.

Secretary-General in his special report of February
2004 (S/2004/117) and is developed further in his most
recent report. This vision is shared by Romania, which is
supportive of the Secretary-General’s recommendations.

In the final analysis, we can state that the many
problems noted in Timor-Leste argue in favour of
supporting the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
extend the UNMISET mandate for one year. Therefore,
we anticipate with great hope the upcoming conference
of Timor-Leste’s development partners, scheduled for
19 May 2004. We are convinced that the international
community will take that opportunity to step up its
support to the Timorese people, who are so resolutely
committed to sustained economic growth and
sustainable development.

As the report states, ongoing international
support continues to be essential to enable Timor-Leste
to reach a critical threshold of self-sufficiency.
Romania believes that that support can best be
provided through a continued multisector United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste that includes a limited
military component.

Mr. Motoc (Romania): I cannot start without
expressing outrage at and strongly condemning the
terrorist attack in Grozny, Russian Federation.
Romania’s sympathy and condolences go to the victims
and the bereaved families and to the people and the
Government of the Russian Federation.
On the issue at hand, I join other members of the
Council in thanking the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2004/333) and Special
Representative Sharma for his briefing. My delegation
welcomes the participation in this Council meeting of
Senior Minister Ana Pessoa of Timor-Leste.
As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union, I will limit
myself to making a few brief comments.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the
authorities of Timor-Leste for their steady efforts and
encouraging achievements towards developing their
country as a stable and democratic nation. All the
remarkable progress that has been achieved so far has
brought closer the moment when responsibility will be
transferred from the international presence to the
people and the Government of Timor-Leste. The
Security Council, bilateral donors and the wider
international community have invested enormous
energy and expectations in Timor-Leste.
Remarkable success has been achieved so far, but
further international assistance will be required in
order to consolidate and secure its irreversibility. That
vision is reflected in the recommendations made by the

16

The extension of UNMISET for a further oneyear consolidation phase with a reduced size and a
modified mandate will consolidate momentum for the
development of full Timorese self-sufficiency and will
confirm Timor-Leste as a fine example of successful
United Nations peacekeeping and peace-building.
Finally, I wish to express Romania’s satisfaction
with the continued development of cooperation
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We hope that the
political commitment will be shortly followed by
concrete results in the finalization of an agreement on
the border line, as well as in addressing the issue of
former refugees remaining in West Timor. Likewise,
we encourage the strengthening of bilateral cooperation
in bringing those responsible for serious crimes to
justice.
Ms. Menéndez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish in turn to begin by conveying our condolences to
the Government and people of the Russian Federation
for the terrorist attack committed yesterday.
We welcome the briefing provided by
Ambassador Sharma and congratulate him heartily on
his work as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for East Timor. We also welcome
the presence of Minister Pessoa Pinto here at this
meeting.
My delegation fully endorses the statement to be
made by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union. We wish to add a few brief comments
of our own.
First, we wholeheartedly support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
for a further year in order to consolidate and further
strengthen the enormous progress registered by TimorLeste since it achieved independence. We believe that

S/PV.4965

the composition and objectives of the three
programmes proposed by the Secretary-General will
make it possible to accomplish those tasks.
As we said here in February, the additional efforts
proposed are relatively modest in comparison to
achievements made to date. At the same time, it is
essential that we successfully conclude the
consolidation of the institutions of Timor-Leste and
avoid any setbacks. To that end, we need the full
cooperation of the Timorese institutions, just as they
have cooperated with us so far. The Secretary-General
is quite right to note that
“The Timorese leadership can lay the foundations
for future progress by fostering a culture of
political dialogue and debate, anchored in the
values of human rights, tolerance and respect for
the law” (S/2004/333, para. 69)
as well as by promoting key legislation in the areas of
human rights, public administration, anti-corruption,
policing and defence.
We welcome the excellent cooperation shown by
the Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia and
hope that it will bear fruit in the settlement of two
principal issues: the delimitation of their land borders
and the presence of thousands of refugees in West
Timor.
In conclusion, the United Nations can be proud of
the success achieved by the people of Timor-Leste with
the support of the international community. Spain is
prepared to continue to contribute to the consolidation
of the self-sufficiency and full development of TimorLeste.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
associate the delegation of Brazil with the condolences
expressed by previous speakers to the Russian
Federation and to the victims’ families over the terrible
and cowardly terrorist act that killed President Akhmad
Kadyrov and other persons in Grozny, Chechnya,
yesterday.
I express my appreciation to you, Sir, for
convening this meeting and to Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma for introducing the Secretary-General’s report.
The positive developments taking place in Timor-Leste
can be attributed to a large extent to Ambassador
Sharma’s able and forward-looking leadership, as well as
to the work that the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) is undertaking in the country.

I would like to join you, Sir, and other speakers in
thanking Ambassador Sharma for his invaluable work
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor. We wish him the best.
I would also like to welcome the presence at this
meeting of Timor-Leste’s Senior Minister, Ana Pessoa
Pinto.
The progress achieved so far must be
consolidated into a stable Timor-Leste with improved
political, social and economic conditions. Our steadfast
cooperation in a good number of critical areas is still
required to underpin the exercise of sovereignty by the
East Timorese. We therefore concur with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations regarding the extension of
UNMISET for a consolidation phase, reduced in size
and under a modified mandate.
Improvements in the security sector, in particular
the recent approval of key legislation concerning the
police and defence sectors, have been encouraging.
Local authorities are fulfilling their commitments and
we expect Timor-Leste to further develop its own
capability and to reach self-sufficiency in security with
the support of the international community. The
extension of UNMISET’s mandate will prove an
important measure to achieve this goal.
As the Secretary-General points out, limited
revenue and widespread poverty in the country
continue to pose severe constraints on reconstruction
and development efforts. The expected flow of revenue
from the exploration for oil and gas in the Timor Sea
has not materialized. Progress in this area is crucial to
providing sustained means of income for the people of
Timor-Leste. In this regard, we welcome the convening
of a conference of development partners in Dili on 19
May and we concur with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that agreement between Australia and
Timor-Leste on exploiting mineral resources in the
Timor Sea, in a mutually beneficial manner, would
represent an essential contribution to that effort.
Brazil also welcomes the steady improvement of
relations between the Governments of Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. Brasilia has been actively supporting Jakarta
and Dili in their efforts to build upon their recent
achievements and strengthen new areas of cooperation.
While fully understanding all parties’ concerns and
constraints, we believe that there is enough common
ground to meet the requirements for justice, stability
and peace.

17

S/PV.4965

Stability and improved economic and social
conditions in Timor-Leste are extremely relevant not
only for the region, but also for all members of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries. On
their behalf, we would like to take this opportunity to
convey our appreciation for all international assistance
already provided to the country. We expect the
international community, through the United Nations
and its agencies, as well as bilaterally, to continue
providing support to the East Timorese. The decision to
be taken by this Council concerning the extension of
UNMISET can reflect such willingness.
No one wants an open-ended mission in TimorLeste. A clear exit strategy has been put forward by the
Secretary-General in his report, taking into account the
need for capacity-building and the importance of not
jeopardizing progress achieved so far. It is also in the
best interests of the international community that
Timor-Leste remain a showcase for the United Nations
accomplishments.

and external, and to build the foundations for
sustainable peace and progress.
Pakistan supports the efforts of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
to consolidate peace and assist international
development in Timor-Leste. We support the extension
of its mandate for a further year, as recommended by
the Secretary-General. We believe that that is necessary
to allow the Mission to fulfil its mandate. We also note
the report’s recommendations for a new composition of
the Mission’s downsized force structure, which
includes both military and police units.
The outstanding tasks for UNMISET include
providing support to Timor-Leste in key areas: public
administration and justice, development of law
enforcement and the maintenance of security and
stability.
We must bear in mind the observation in the
Secretary-General’s report

Finally, I would like to inform the Council that
Angola and Brazil will be circulating a draft resolution
regarding the extension of UNMISET’s mandate for
consideration by the Council’s members. We hope that
the Council will be able to adopt the draft resolution by
the end of this week.

“that the provision of support through
peacekeeping can only meet the most urgent of
the country’s requirements. It must be
complemented and built upon by bilateral and
multilateral support, if real progress is to take
place.” (S/2004/333, para. 72)

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Pakistan.

In our view, the most imposing long-term
challenge confronting Timor-Leste remains the
promotion of economic prosperity. International
assistance will continue to be indispensable for that
purpose. The international community must also
continue to assist the new country even after
UNMISET’s departure. The continued support of
Timor-Leste’s neighbours is vital in that context.

Pakistan adds its condemnation of the act of
terrorism in Grozny and conveys its deepest
condolences to the Russian Federation and to the
families of the victims.
I would like to thank Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma for introducing the Secretary-General’s report
and for updating us on the situation in Timor-Leste.
Pakistan has extended full support for the success of
the new State of Timor-Leste — a State that emerged in
an exemplary exercise of the right of selfdetermination, a Charter principle to which Pakistan is
deeply committed.
Timor-Leste has made remarkable progress since
its independence two years ago. Credit for that must go
first and foremost to the people and Government of
Timor-Leste. We appreciate in particular the bold
efforts of the Timorese leadership to encourage
national reconciliation. We hope that it will continue to
strive to heal the deep wounds of the past, both internal

18

Pakistan believes that the development of close
and friendly relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia is of utmost importance and is in the best
interest of both neighbours. We are confident that both
sides will continue to work together to resolve their
outstanding issues, in particular the arrangements for
the demarcation and management of their common
border as well as strengthening mutual support and
cooperation.
We hope that Timor-Leste’s other neighbours,
including Australia, will make every endeavour to
resolve their bilateral issues with Timor-Leste in order
to allow the new country to attain its full economic
potential.

S/PV.4965

Timor-Leste is widely considered a success story
for United Nations peacekeeping. However, as
Kamalesh Sharma said today, success is a retrospective
judgement. The real success of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste will be measured in years and perhaps
decades. Timor-Leste will continue to need the support
of the international community in the remaining phases
of UNMISET’s presence and beyond. All efforts must
be made to ensure that the gains so painstakingly
achieved are consolidated and are not lost, and that
Timor-Leste is remembered in history as a model of
collaboration between a committed national leadership
and a responsive and generous international
community.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
As another measure to optimize the use of our
time, and in order to allow as many delegations to take
the floor as possible, I will not individually invite
speakers to take seats at the table and to resume their
seats on the side. When a speaker is taking the floor,
the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on
the list at the table. I thank the non-members for their
cooperation and understanding.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Ana Pessoa Pinto,
Senior Minister and Minister in the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers of Timor-Leste.
Ms. Pessoa Pinto (Timor-Leste): Mr. President,
this is the first time that I appear before such an august
body that has contributed so much to my country’s
freedom and well-being. Hence, my first words are
necessarily of gratitude for the Council’s unrelenting
interest and support, without which the progress we
have made so far would not have been possible.
You are all very familiar with our Senior Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, José RamosHorta, who sends his warm regards. He has been in
Denpasar, Bali, this weekend in meetings with his
Indonesian colleague and friend, Hassan Wirayuda.
Together they have reviewed the progress so far on our
efforts to demarcate our common land border, as well
as addressing other residual issues.
It is a particular pleasure for me to be able to
participate in this meeting of the Council, which will
consider both the last report of the Secretary-General
and the last statement of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General under the Council’s current

mandate, leading to a consideration by the Council of a
resolution on the extension of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) with a
modified mandate.
The story of the association of the United Nations
with my country is a unique and inspiring chapter in
the history of our people and will always be linked to
the attainment of our independence and the vision of
self-reliance and social and economic fulfilment we are
striving to accomplish.
I would like to acknowledge the historic and
unique partnership that binds us so closely together.
Starting with a resolution of the General Assembly, the
contribution of the Special Envoys of the SecretaryGeneral, the role of the United Nations in conducting
the referendum, the endorsement of the INTERFET by
the Council in a particularly tragic time for our people,
the executive administration provided by the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) in close cooperation with the Transitional
Government of Timor-Leste, the national parliamentary
elections, the election of the President and, most
recently, the Mission of Support in specific areas to the
first Government of Timor-Leste offer a chain of
association that cannot be separated from the fulfilment
of the aspirations of our people. It is appropriate to
recall that, now that we are entering the phase of
gradual closure of that special relationship.
In historical terms, there was no road map, but
together we have managed to rebuild a nation. The
independent and self-confident State of Timor-Leste
has emerged from the debris of disorder and
desperation that is so fresh in our minds.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2004/333), which highlights many important
areas where considerable progress has been made.
However, I will not dwell on those achievements. The
report also identifies shortcomings and points the way
forward, stressing the need for concerted action, both
by the Government and people of Timor-Leste and the
country’s generous development partners.
However, it is appropriate to clarify that the
investigations of a number of civil servants and police
officers was due to the fact that the political rallies
referred to in the Secretary-General’s report took place
over two consecutive days, one of which was a work
day, were and conducted during work hours while the
police officers were in uniform.

19

S/PV.4965

In that regard, I would also like to stress that
following the approval of the Civil Service Act, which
embodies the code of conduct and disciplinary rules
and procedures, forms and manuals have been prepared
and finalized with the valuable assistance of UNDP
advisors to facilitate the understanding and the
dissemination of the Act. A major programme of
dissemination is being prepared and will involve
various Government institutions, including the
Ministry of State Management, the Inspector General,
the Human Rights Advisor and the Advisor for Gender
in the Office of the Prime Minister, and will also
involve members of Parliament and civil society.
In relation to civil society, allow me to focus on
the cooperation of the Catholic Church with the
Government to instil a culture of ethical and moral
values where transparency and accountability are not
merely fashionable slogans. Together, the Government,
the Church, the presidency and the national Parliament
are forging a new alliance to revive our cultural values
and beliefs. The Church’s programme was launched at
the ordination of Don Alberto Ricardo as bishop of Dili
on 2 May 2004. The programme is anchored in the
Church’s social doctrine, with the aim of attaining the
participation of women, preventing HIV/AIDS and
domestic violence and embarking on responsible
family planning where education and moral values play
a pivotal role.
With regard to the tensions in the Dili mosque, it
is worth noting that the mosque was built and is owned
by the Timorese Muslim community and that it has
been illegally occupied since “black September” in
1999; it has since been a source of problems. Today
there are close to 300 undocumented and illegal
immigrants living within the confines of the mosque. I
am pleased to report that tensions have eased
considerably, thanks to the professionalism of our
police, working in conjunction with the human rights
adviser to the Prime Minister and the International
Organization for Migration, and thanks to the tolerance
of my Government.
All illegal aliens occupying the mosque have
been advised by the Government that they are required
to present themselves to the Immigration Department
and to provide their documentation to the authorities
for verification. Those that are without identification
papers are required to contact their respective
embassies. To facilitate this, the Government has
extended the deadline. Those not in possession of the

20

required papers are at risk of being expelled;
applications for permanent visas will be processed on a
case-by-case basis and according to the laws of TimorLeste. Resolution of this issue will further enable
Timorese Muslims to exercise their constitutional and
fundamental human right to freedom of religion, which
until now has been jeopardized by the illegal
immigrants occupying the mosque.
I am also glad to inform the Council that the
Organic Law on the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and the Organic Law on the Timorese Armed
Forces (F-FDTL) have been approved and have been
promulgated by the President and that they have
entered into force. The law on a code of conduct,
disciplinary rules and procedures for the PNTL has
also been approved by the Council of Ministers and is
expected to be promulgated by the President and
published in the official gazette by Thursday of this
week. As pointed out, those laws are of great
importance for the maintenance of law and order,
because they provide clarity concerning the roles of the
police and armed forces, particularly with regard to
backup arrangements for support to civil power.
We would like also to thank Ambassador Sharma
for his insightful presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2004/333). We have worked closely
with him, and we feel a deep resonance with what he
has said. As has been pointed out, we have been
through good and not so good times together.
Ambassador Sharma knows our trials and tribulations
and has assisted us in facing them with solidarity,
wisdom and commitment. We are sorry that he will be
leaving Timor-Leste at the end of the present mandate
of UNMISET. We wish him all the best and are
confident that he will succeed in his future endeavours.
We are also convinced that the Secretary-General
will nominate an experienced special representative to
succeed him, as he did when he chose Ambassador
Sharma to follow in the distinguished footsteps of
Sergio Vieira de Mello, to whose memory we again pay
our deep respects. As this is my first time addressing
the Security-Council, I wish to acknowledge the
invaluable contribution that Sergio made to our nation.
I feel he was one of us.
I agree that much needs to be done to establish a
society based on respect for the rule of law. The
creation and continued professionalism of an impartial,
accountable and responsive police service is an

S/PV.4965

important element, and so is the development of the
judiciary. I am sure that members will appreciate that,
the importance of those goals notwithstanding, we have
worked within a very compressed time frame: on the
fast forward button, as it were. The results must be
considered in that perspective.
I trust that, through the deployment of police
technical advisers, the provision of judge-mentors and
the programme of assistance to core administrative
structures and to the justice system, the support of the
United Nations will contribute to the achievement of
our goals. Those officers, working in harmony with
their Timorese counterparts and conscious of the
cultural sensitivities and the needs of our country, will
enjoy unstinted cooperation with a view to meeting our
shared objectives.
I am grateful that the international community
has appreciated the need for maintenance of a small
military contingent to provide assistance to the FFDTL and the PNTL in emergencies, to preserve and
restore the fragile peace that currently exists.
Timor-Leste enjoys the best of relations with its
neighbours. We acknowledge the goodwill towards
Timor-Leste that exists at all levels in Indonesia and
particularly the efforts deployed by Indonesia’s leaders
to resolve outstanding issues. However, individuals and
groups inimical to our interests still exist. We trust that
the support of the international community, directed
towards resettlement of refugees, promotion of
reconciliation and economic and social development,
will produce concrete results and diminish such threats.
I would like to note that finalization of the land border
demarcation between Indonesia and Timor-Leste and
early operationalization of agreements to facilitate
cross-border links between residents of border areas on
both sides would contribute significantly to that
process. Despite political will and determination on
both sides, we have failed to reach agreement, through
a lack of technical development, on meeting our
deadlines. Timor-Leste would enhance its efforts, in
cooperation with Indonesia, so as to finalize an
agreement before the end of June 2004.
Negotiations on our maritime border with
Australia have begun, with the first formal round
having been held in Dili. The position of my
Government on this is simple and clear: we are entitled
to a just and fair maritime boundary with our two

neighbours, Australia and Indonesia; and we are guided
by principles of international Law and practice.
Between Timor-Leste and Australia, in an area
that is far closer to our shores, lie vast reserves of oil
and gas. A just and fair resolution of this issue would
mean better health care, education and economic
independence for our country, with the eradication of
poverty and the fulfilment of the Millennium
Development Goals. We know that international law is
on our side, and we believe that Australia, one of the
wealthiest countries in the world, as a neighbour and as
a friend, will find its way to respect justice and
democratic principles.
I must emphasize the need for substantial and
continuing support from our development partners to
overcome the formidable challenges before our new
nation. No efforts at enlightened governance can
succeed unless we can also advance economically and
show visible improvements in the quality of life and in
terms of the creation of jobs. The international
community must assist in ensuring that the investments
made in strengthening our self-governing capability are
a springboard to prosperity.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
having outlined several mechanisms and requirements,
including the appointment of Timorese counterparts, so
that maximum advantage can be gained from the
support being extended by the international community
through the Council. We appreciate that advice, and we
shall continue our endeavours in that direction. It will
have been noted that in recent months, great progress
has been made in that respect and many of the
recommendations in the report of the SecretaryGeneral have been met. However, I would like to stress
that, practically speaking, it is impossible to run until
one learns to walk.
While we certainly do not intend to rest on our
accomplishments, further progress in the areas of good
governance and political development will require
substantial economic growth and social development. I
trust that Timor-Leste will continue to benefit from the
support and assistance of the international community
in that regard, so as to guarantee that the success story
is sustainable and that it is a reason for all of us here to
be proud.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Singapore.

21

S/PV.4965

Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): At the outset, we
would like to associate ourselves with our colleagues
in expressing our condemnation of the bombing that
took place in Grozny. We express our condolences to
the families of those who lost who lives and our
sympathies to those who were wounded.
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. We are pleased that the Security Council has
once again provided an opportunity for concerned nonCouncil members to air their views on this important
subject. Let me quickly thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guéhenno for the latest report (S/2004/333). At the
same time, I should like to join Senior Minister Ana
Pessoa Pinto in paying a special tribute to Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma for the work he has done. I was
present in this Chamber when he was appointed. We
had no certainty then that today we would be as well
off as we are. We owe Ambassador Sharma a special
vote of thanks for all the success we have had. We wish
him all the best.
I will be concise, as Singapore’s position on this
issue is well known. The Council’s last public meeting
on Timor-Leste was held only three months ago. At
that time, we heard nearly every speaker support an
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for a
further one-year consolidation phase. While some
progress has been made since February, it remains
irrefutable that Timor-Leste will still require assistance
in a number of areas beyond May 2004 if the gains
made to date are to be sustained. Without the continued
support of the United Nations and the rest of the
international community, Timor-Leste’s path to selfsufficiency could very well be jeopardized.
The Secretary-General has once again set out in
his report a compelling case for the extension of the
Mission, with a modified mandate and a significantly
reduced presence of about 700 international personnel.
Singapore fully supports all of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations, and we urge the Council to support
and endorse them as well. It is important that we
ensure that the Secretary-General is provided with the
resources he requires, across the three broad
programmes that he has proposed, to allow TimorLeste to reach a critical threshold of self-sufficiency.
Such an additional investment would seem relatively
modest, considering the scale of the task at hand and
the difference it would make.

22

Let me add here that Singapore strongly supports
the proposed deployment of an international response unit
of 125 gendarmerie, along with the earlier proposed
military component of some 310 formed troops, to
form a two-element security force. Given the continued
possibility of challenges across the security spectrum, the
complementary deployment of both the gendarmerie unit
and the military component would enable UNMISET to
assist the Timor-Leste Government in dealing with a
range of security challenges, even while Timor-Leste
builds up its own capacities in that arena.
As the Senior Minister said only a few minutes
ago, we must be wary of being overconfident or hasty,
and mindful that we do not prematurely withdraw our
support for Timor-Leste. The fragility of the progress
made so far cannot be overstated. Let us stay the
course and ensure that the gains made so far are
consolidated and that a solid foundation is laid for
Timor-Leste’s future development.
This morning, I heard Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma say that a success story is a retrospective
evaluation. I also heard your comment on that subject,
Mr. President. But let me add here that the continuation
of this success story and the perception that it is a
success story are assets that the Security Council has.
At a time when the Council should be concerned about
its standing in the world, it helps the Council to have
the continuation of a success story such as TimorLeste. That is a responsibility that we hope the Council
will not walk away from.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ireland, Mr. Brian Cowen, speaking in his
capacity as President of the Council of the European
Union, yesterday condemned the terrorist attack during
the Victory Day celebrations at the Dynamo stadium in
Grozny. Minister Cowen said:
“I condemn utterly this appalling act of terror in a
crowded stadium, which has claimed the lives of
many people, including the President of the
Chechen Republic, Mr. Kadyrov. I extend my
condolences to the families of all the victims of
this terrible act. No political cause can justify
terrorism.”
As this morning is my first opportunity to address
the Council in the month of May, I would like to

S/PV.4965

congratulate you, Sir, and Pakistan on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Germany, for the excellent manner in which he and his
delegation executed the presidency in the month of
April. With your indulgence, Mr. President, I would
also like to note that this morning’s statement to the
Security Council by the European Union is the first
since the enlargement of the Union, on 1 May.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries Iceland and Liechtenstein, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union welcomes this opportunity
to express once again our support for the remarkable
achievements made since independence by the people
of Timor-Leste, with the assistance of the United
Nations, the support of the Security Council and the
commitment of the wider international community. In
that regard, I recall and refer the Council to the EU’s
most recent statement on Timor-Leste, delivered here
in this Chamber on 20 February 2004.
The European Union supports the efforts of the
Government of Timor-Leste to consolidate the political
institutions, to promote the social and economic
development of the country and to uphold the rule of
law while building a new nation. In particular, the
European Union welcomes developments such as the
largely calm security situation, the continuing positive
relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, the
continuing development of the country’s public
administration, the fact that the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation continues to
provide a community-based solution for less serious
crimes committed in connection with the political
conflict, and the assumption of responsibility for
routine policing throughout the country by the national
police force.
In addition, and in the context of ending impunity
and promoting a culture of accountability and
transparency, the European Union notes with interest
the continuing process of prosecuting those accused of

serious crimes. The European Union will continue to
follow closely the relevant trials in Dili and Jakarta.
Much remains to be done in all these fields and,
while the primary responsibility for a successful
transition lies with the Timorese people themselves, it
remains incumbent on the international community to
help consolidate the progress that is so evident in
Timor-Leste. In this regard, the European Union looks
forward to the planned conference of development
partners in Dili on 19 May.
The EU recognizes that a critical element of the
success so far has been the hard work of the men and
women of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET), and we commend them, and
those countries which have supported them in their
efforts, for their dedication. The European Union
recalls the advice of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, that
the international community should consider carefully
the completion of UNMISET’s drawdown while also
taking stock of what has been achieved, reflecting on
the remaining tasks to be completed, and deciding on
the best way forward to fulfil the legitimate needs of
Timor-Leste in the post-May 2004 period.
In that regard, the European Union thanks the
Secretary-General for his most recent report on and
assessment of the current situation in Timor-Leste. The
EU welcomes the report’s assessment that the
extraordinary progress that has taken place has left no
doubt as to the momentum of transfer of responsibility
to Timor-Leste. In particular, the European Union
welcomes the reported progress towards the adoption
of legislation for key public institutions.
Notwithstanding the progress made to date, the
European Union shares the Secretary-General’s view
that further assistance will be needed to consolidate the
achievements already made. In this regard, a
continuing though modified presence for UNMISET
seems required. The European Union looks forward to
the outcome of the Security Council’s consideration of
the
Secretary-General’s
analysis
and
his
recommendation for an extension of UNMISET for a
further one-year consolidation phase, with appropriate
modifications to its mandate and composition.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ireland for the kind words he addressed to me.

23

S/PV.4965

The next speaker is the representative of Japan, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Let me begin by
expressing our deepest condolences to the Government
of the Russian Federation for the lives that were lost,
including that of President Kadyrov, in the bombing
incident that took place in the Republic of Chechnya
on 9 May. Such terrorist acts should never be tolerated
on any grounds.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this public meeting. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing.
Timor-Leste will soon commemorate the second
anniversary of its independence. Looking back at the
last several years, the Government of Japan is deeply
gratified to see that the Government of Timor-Leste
and its people have been working as a united whole to
build, brick by brick, the foundations of a new,
independent State out of the turmoil that preceded its
formation, with the support of the international
community, especially the United Nations and the
parties concerned, including Indonesia. The role of
United Nations in particular has been significant. Japan
reiterates its sincere appreciation for the contributions
made
by
the
United
Nations
Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) under the leadership of the late Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello and Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma.
As a nation belonging to the Asia-Pacific region,
Japan attaches special importance to the stability and
development of Timor-Leste and has been devoting its
efforts to helping to achieve those objectives. We are
therefore delighted that Timor-Leste has attained its
current level of progress, after travelling such a long
way on the path towards independent statehood. At the
same time, my Government is of the view that the
international community must continue to extend its
support, so that continued progress for peace and
development in Timor-Leste is ensured. More
concretely, we believe it is crucially important to make
certain that the valuable incipient achievements in the
areas of peace, the rule of law, respect for human rights
and development take root and endure, and we believe
there is still an important role for the United Nations to
play in helping to reach that objective.

24

From that point of view, the Government of Japan
welcomes the Secretary-General’s proposal to extend
the mandate of UNMISET for a one-year consolidation
phase, while clarifying which tasks are truly necessary.
At the most recent Security Council meeting on this
issue, Member States expressed various opinions in
response to the Secretary-General’s proposal, and the
stakeholders in this enterprise, including Japan, have
been in close contact with the Secretariat in an effort to
build a consensus. My Government is convinced that
this proposal is one which the international community
can endorse unanimously.
What has been achieved by the international
community in Timor-Leste since the United Nations
undertook the transitional administration there may be
regarded as a striking success story. However, in order
for the story to be followed through to its conclusion,
UNMISET must complete its activities and achieve its
goals within this final one-year period. It is therefore
necessary to conclude during this period the transition
from the phase of peacekeeping operations for
resolution of the conflict to the next phase of
development activities, conducted through bilateral
channels or relevant international institutions.
Timor-Leste in turn must recognize that this will
be the final one-year period of active assistance on the
part of the United Nations peacekeeping operation and
must redouble its efforts to ensure that it will be able to
stand on its own. In that connection, the review of the
size of UNMISET, which is scheduled to be conducted
at the end of this year on the basis of the progress
achieved at that point towards the fulfilment of the
mandate, should be duly carried out.
In support of the building of a sustainable TimorLeste, Japan has pledged and has been steadily
implementing assistance of up to $60 million over the
first three years following independence, with a focus
on peace-building and on reconstruction in the three
key areas of agriculture, infrastructure and human
resources development. We are pleased to learn that the
roads and bridges which the Engineering Group of our
Self-Defence Forces has constructed and repaired for
the activities of UNMISET is benefiting the people of
Timor-Leste as well. We also plan to hand over the
equipment of the Engineering Group, including various
types of vehicles, to the Government of Timor-Leste,
in the hopes that it will meet their requirements. My
Government is also making efforts to transfer
technology by educating Timor-Leste Government staff

S/PV.4965

in the operation, maintenance and management of the
donated equipment and material. We believe that such
support is in line with the needs of Timor-Leste as
described in the report of the Secretary-General.
Japan has thus been devoting its energies, through
the activities of the Self-Defence Forces Engineering
Group and through official development assistance, to
the development of Timor-Leste. There remain,
however, many areas in which further international
assistance for nation-building is needed. For that
reason, my Government believes that it is essential for
the international community to continue its assistance
to Timor-Leste in those areas where support is still
required through well-coordinated activities of the
United Nations and bilateral contributions.
Finally, I wish to underscore once again how
important this final one-year period will be for TimorLeste. The Government of Japan is convinced that,
through the efforts of UNMISET and the people of
Timor-Leste, guided by their wise leaders, stability and
the foundations for development in Timor-Leste will be
strengthened, and the United Nations peacekeeping
operation will successfully complete its mission.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Nambiar (India): The Government of India
has strongly condemned the heinous terrorist attack in
Grozny, which killed the President of the Chechen
Republic of the Russian Federation and others. We
extend our condolences to the Government and the
people of the Russian Federation and to the bereaved
families on this tragic occasion.
We felicitate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Gunter Pleuger of Germany
for his capable stewardship of the Council during the
eventful month of April.
It has been almost two years since Timor-Leste
attained its independence. That period has seen rapid
progress in the emergence of Timor-Leste from conflict
into confidence as a new member of the international
community. In an era increasingly characterized by
global conflict and conflagration, the success of this
peace-building exercise, spearheaded by the United
Nations, represents optimism and hope for the future.

We are happy to have Senior Minister Ana Pessoa
Pinto participating in this meeting of the Council.
The comprehensive support of the international
community — mainly in the form of assistance for
political and socio-economic development, capacitybuilding and security — has been instrumental in
facilitating Timor-Leste’s emergence as a viable State
within the international community. This process needs
to be consolidated. India supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation, as contained in his report
dated 29 April 2004 (S/2004/333), that the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
be extended for a further, one-year phase to enable
Timor-Leste to attain a critical threshold of selfsufficiency.
The three broad programmes that the extended
United Nations mandate would facilitate appear fully
justified, given the reduced size of the Mission and the
imperative of ensuring a sound and logical conclusion
to one of the most successful exercises in post-conflict
peace-building that the United Nations has undertaken
in recent years. We note from the Secretary-General’s
report that the first programme, for public
administration and justice, would be undertaken by 58
civilian experts; the second programme, for the
development of law enforcement, would be advanced
through 157 civilian police advisers; and the third
programme, support for the security and stability of
Time-Leste, would be effected through 42 military
liaison officers, 310 formed military and 125
gendarmerie.
Those support measures indicate a minimum,
truncated international presence. The SecretaryGeneral has noted in his report that it was the
extraordinary progress that had taken place which
permitted this swift downsizing in the international
presence on the ground, leaving no doubt as to the
momentum of the transfer of responsibility to TimorLeste.
We agree with the Secretary-General when he
counsels Timor-Leste and its sagacious leadership to
further build on and consolidate the gains achieved by
taking full advantage of the assistance and by making
practical and policy decisions in a timely manner.
Among the critical issues that require to be addressed
early by the Government of Timor-Leste are the
adoption of key legislation for public institutions,
preparation for local elections through voter

25

S/PV.4965

registration and other logistical arrangements,
measures to enhance economic development and selfsufficiency, and the consolidation of Timor-Leste’s
security institutions.

shining beacon to inspire the international community
even as the United Nations continues in its effort to
foster peace and development in other parts of this
troubled world.

The international community cannot remain
permanently engaged. The United Nations role and
assistance in Timor-Leste will have to cede to the
country’s growing capacity and confidence in
governance. Multilateral assistance of the current scale
will also have to be substituted progressively by
bilateral and regional cooperation.

The President: I give
representative of Indonesia.

India’s relationship with Timor-Leste is
characterized by exceptionally close bilateral ties
marked by full understanding and support for one
another’s concerns. We welcomed the emergence of
Timor-Leste as an independent nation in May 2002 and
have keenly followed its successful efforts at
democratic institution-building as well as economic
development. We have assisted in Timor-Leste’s socioeconomic development through bilateral technical
training programmes in capacity-building, university
education and the deputation of experts for rural
development. We take this opportunity to compliment
the Timorese leadership for its steadfast and exemplary
commitment to democracy and its transparent and
accountable governance, which have greatly facilitated
nation-building.
The continued cooperation and good relations
between Timor-Leste and its neighbours, especially
Indonesia, are important not only for regional harmony
but also in the larger interest of South-South
cooperation. The commitment displayed by the
leadership of Timor-Leste and Indonesia towards
forging a harmonious, good-neighbourly relationship
must find practical expression through the completion
of agreements on the land border, the resolution of the
problems of refugees and the provision of socioeconomic opportunities for people living on either side
of the border.
In conclusion, I wish to join other delegations in
paying special tribute to the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the late
Sergio Vieira de Mello, and to the current Special
Representative, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for their
capable and dedicated leadership. We also pay tribute
to the members of UNMISET and the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor for their
exceptional contributions. Their actions provide a

26

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Let me start by
associating my delegation with the expression of
condolences and sympathy to the delegation of the
Russian Federation on the tragic loss of lives,
including President Kadyrov, and the many injured in
the bombing in Grozny.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
Senior Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, whom I thank for his important statement.
My delegation is always pleased to participate in
the Security Council’s discussions on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), the
present mandate of which ends in 10 days.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2004/333), in which he observes that
the relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia
has continued to benefit from the commitment to
cooperation at the highest political levels. From the
very beginning, the leadership of both nations agreed
to cooperate on the basis of forward-looking and
reconciliatory policies — a visionary and realistic
approach that has served both nations well. It has led to
peace in the area and has enabled both Timor-Leste and
Indonesia to focus on development and on the best
interests of their peoples.
My delegation is of the view that the strong
commitment of the national leaders of both countries to
the forward-looking approach to which they have
pledged themselves will be extremely useful in
resolving whatever problems we face now or may face
in the future. That was restated and reaffirmed by the
Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Timor-Leste at
their meeting in Bali just a couple of days ago.
In his report, the Secretary-General recommends
to the Security Council the extension of UNMISET for
a further one-year period, described as a consolidation
phase, to enable the Mission to sustain, strengthen and
build upon the gains made so far in Timor-Leste. My
delegation has no objection whatsoever to this
recommendation to the Council. Indeed, as has been

S/PV.4965

the case in the past, we are delighted to offer our
support to policies that will enable Timor-Leste to
make the greatest possible progress in the shortest
possible time.
Indonesia, within its limited capacity as a
developing country, has in a modest way contributed
concretely to the economic development of TimorLeste in various ways. Indonesia would like to urge the
members of the international community, especially the
developed nations, to redouble their efforts and
increase their assistance to help Timor-Leste in its
current economic development activities.
There are some other issues in the report on
which we would like to comment. With regard to the
border issue, in paragraph 11, the report, while
acknowledging the significant technical work that has
been accomplished, also alluded to the fact that
finalization of a border agreement, for which further
input is expected from Indonesia, has remained elusive.
We see that as an inaccurate and one-sided view that
reflects a lack of understanding with regard to the
issue.
For the Council’s information, the Technical SubCommittee of Border Demarcation and Regulation, as
part of the Joint Border Committee, since December
2001 has held meetings 11 times, and each meeting
was preceded by a joint field survey. Indonesia has
always been supportive of all activities aimed at
finding a solution on the determination of borders
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste and of all kinds of
community activities along the border.
With regard to paragraph 12, on the issue of
management of the border and the regulation of
economic activities, I wish to further inform the
Council that there are two agreements in place: the
Arrangement on Traditional Border Crossings and
Regulated Markets and the Technical Arrangements on
the Coordination of Measures to Facilitate the
Movement of People and Their Personal Effects
between the Enclave of Oecussi and Other Parts of
Timor-Leste. At this stage, Indonesia is awaiting the
readiness of its partner to start implementing the
agreements.
With regard to paragraph 13, on the problem of
the so-called former refugees, I would like first of all
to restate that there have been no more Timor-Leste
refugees in Indonesia since December 2002, when
more than 200,000 refugees returned voluntarily to

Timor-Leste. From the registration process conducted
by the Government of Indonesia from August until
November 2003, it is clear that there are about 125,000
East Timorese living in nine provinces and 61
regencies throughout Indonesia. Of that figure, 113
people opted to return to Timor-Leste, and the
Government will render its help to them. In addition,
out of the 125,000 others who live in Indonesia, 28,000
live in East Nusa Tenggara province, West Timor, but
not in camps, as the report suggested. They opted to
stay in Indonesia as citizens and are being offered
relocation within Indonesia. However, the Government
will always be ready to render its help should they
voluntarily decide to return to Timor-Leste at any time.
In relation to that issue, I also need to draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that the continued use of
the term East Timorese “former refugees” is giving the
wrong impression — that there are still problems
related to security. They do not pose security threats. In
that regard, it should be noted that the Government of
Indonesia has taken some important measures to
address security matters, including the Indonesian
police and armed forces sweeping for and confiscating
weapons in the border area; these in turn have been
destroyed by the authorities, as witnessed by
UNMISET representatives. Continuous checking is
conducted by the security apparatus in West Timor.
I wish also to bring to the Council’s attention the
fact that the outdated and unnecessary retention of the
Phase 5 security situation rating in West Timor,
unilaterally imposed since 2000, has prevented access
by and the operations of international agencies and
non-governmental agencies in this process and has
hampered their humanitarian programmes. As a matter
of fact, there have not been any reports of border
incidents since 2001. That clearly shows that security
has been improved along the border.
On the issue of separated Timorese children, the
Governments of Indonesia and Timor-Leste, in the
absence of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, are taking full charge
through their continued cooperation in order to see the
issue successfully concluded in the best interests of the
affected children.
Finally, my delegation is confident that the
Council will take into account the continued progress
in the bilateral relations between Indonesia and TimorLeste, as well as in the stable security situation along

27

S/PV.4965

our borders, in view of the fact that since 2001 there
have been no problems whatsoever in the area. As the
Timor-Leste Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ramos
Horta, correctly stated in his statement to the Council
on 20 February 2004, “Obviously, we do not anticipate
any external threat” (S/PV.4913, p. 21).
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of New Zealand, on whom I now call.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): At the outset, may
I join others in expressing our condolences to the
Russian Federation on the terrorist bombing that
recently occurred in Grozny.
I would also like, at the outset, to acknowledge
the presence of Senior Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto, who
we are very pleased to see here in the Council Chamber
today, as well as of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General,
Kamalesh
Sharma,
whose
leadership of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) we very warmly acknowledge
and appreciate. It is fitting that both of them are able to
join us today as we reflect on what has been achieved
in Timor-Leste and what remaining tasks lie ahead.
Ambassador Sharma’s goals, and those of the people
serving under him, have undoubtedly contributed to a
genuine, well-reciprocated partnership between the
United Nations and the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste.
New Zealand strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that UNMISET be extended
for a further 12 months. The reduced size and modified
mandate laid out in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2004/333) are, in our view, well judged and
appropriate for a final consolidation phase.
We are particularly satisfied with the emphasis
placed on the work undertaken by the Serious Crimes
Unit. This is a critical component of the United
Nations Mission, and we welcome the Security
Council’s continued support for the principle that those
who have perpetrated serious crimes shall not enjoy
impunity. We commend the Serious Crimes Unit for the
progress made this year and for its commitment to a
strategy that will refocus resources on litigation and
defence in order to work towards completion of its
programme of work by 20 May 2005.
The resolution of outstanding justice issues is
also being pursued through the parallel work of TimorLeste’s Commission for Reception, Truth and

28

Reconciliation, which New Zealand strongly supports
and to which it has contributed 1.2 million New
Zealand dollars during the past year.
There are two other aspects of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General that we would like to
briefly mention. First, the elaboration of the security
and stability component of UNMISET provides a clear
and meaningful picture of its composition and tasks,
and we appreciate the careful matching of capabilities
to practical requirements on the ground. Secondly, the
report highlights the deepening bilateral relationship
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, which was also
referred to by Ambassador Jenie in the statement that
he gave to the Council just a few minutes ago. The
attention given by both parties to further developing
this important relationship is clearly to be welcomed
by us all.
Finally, we commend the determination and the
leadership of Timor-Leste as the United Nations
Mission enters this final consolidation phase. As a
regional neighbour and friend, New Zealand will
continue,
through
multilateral
and
bilateral
mechanisms, to support Timor-Leste’s journey towards
self-sufficiency.
The President: I call on the representative of
Portugal.
Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal): Let me
join other speakers in condemning the bombing in
Grozny and in presenting my condolences to the
families of the victims.
I thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
on the situation in Timor-Leste, as well as Special
Representative Kamalesh Sharma and his staff for the
excellent work they have done and for the results
achieved so far. I especially thank Kamalesh Sharma,
who has done an outstanding job in Dili in the past two
years. I would also like to welcome the presence of
Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto and her valuable
contribution to this debate.
Portugal subscribes to the interventions of
Ireland, on behalf of the European Union, and of Brazil
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries.
Portugal welcomes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General on the extension of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), in a reduced size and with a modified

S/PV.4965

mandate, for a further 12-month consolidation phase in
order to allow key tasks to be performed and to sustain,
strengthen and build upon the gains made to date,
permitting Timor-Leste to attain self-sufficiency.
In this context, I welcome the proposals of the
Secretary-General on a programme of support for
public administration and justice; on support for the
development of law enforcement; and on support for
security and stability.
It is important to acknowledge the importance of
continuing bilateral assistance and to underline the
responsibility of the international community and of
the Security Council in relation to Timor-Leste. In this
context, I would just like to point out that Portugal,
from 1999 to 2003, invested about €300 million in
bilateral
investment,
development
assistance
programmes and technical-military assistance to
Timor-Leste alone. We are ready to maintain this level
of support for Timor-Leste and we encourage other
countries to do the same.
We note with satisfaction the steady and
significant developments in the relationship of TimorLeste with its neighbours, regarding important issues
such as refugees and in the determination of land and
maritime borders. We can only encourage the
strengthening of these bilateral relations and the
settling of all outstanding problems with neighbouring
countries in a climate of friendship and trust.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that, as in the
past, Portugal will remain committed to the
consolidation and development of Timor-Leste and to
the United Nations efforts to that effect.
The President: I call on the representative of
Australia.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): You will know, Sir, what
a personal pleasure it is always for me to address the
Council during your presidency.
I want to begin like others, however, by
associating Australia with the expressions of
condolences extended to our friends in the Russian
Federation following the appalling attack in Grozny
over the weekend. It is an appalling sign of the times
we live in.
I want to begin also, as others have done, and to
make a particular point of offering our congratulations
and paying our tribute to the work that our former

colleague and friend, Kamalesh Sharma, and his
colleagues have done in East Timor in the past two
years. It has been, as he himself said, good times and
bad times, but at all times he has maintained the
highest possible standards of professionalism, and we
in Australia have very much appreciated that.
We welcome the Security Council’s readiness to
adopt a draft resolution extending the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) for another year through to May 2005. In
doing so, Australia congratulates the SecretaryGeneral, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and Kamalesh and his team for their excellent work in
developing the follow-on UNMISET mission model.
No one would dispute the fact that Timor-Leste
has made remarkable progress in its first few years as
an independent nation. That success is, of course,
primarily due to the commitment and efforts of the
people of Timor-Leste. Nevertheless, UNMISET has
played an important supporting role. This contribution
is testament not only to UNMISET personnel, but also
to the continued attention of the Council, the efforts of
the Secretariat and the contributions of a number of
United Nations Member States.
In that context, the follow-on mission is a highly
appropriate response to Timor-Leste’s ongoing needs.
The mission will help Timor-Leste consolidate the
many gains that have been made and will address those
gaps in capacity that are still evident. In particular, the
Mission will continue to provide solid support to
Timor-Leste’s fledgling public administration, judicial
and security institutions — institutions critical to
Timor-Leste’s future.
Australia is particularly pleased with the shape of
the security sector support, with both a small
peacekeeping force and a 125-member international
response unit to provide backup support to TimorLeste’s security forces in emergency situations. This
arrangement will provide a strong and stable security
platform for Timor-Leste in the year ahead.
We are pleased to reiterate to the Council and to
Timor-Leste that Australia will continue to provide
strong support to UNMISET, including through the
contribution of personnel to the peacekeeping, military
liaison officer and police adviser contingents.
Australia will also continue to be a major
provider of bilateral development assistance to Timor-

29

S/PV.4965

Leste. Currently, Australia is fulfilling the final year of
its four-year, $150-million development pledge.
Further generous assistance for coming years will
shortly be announced. Consistent with our commitment
to assisting Timor-Leste to develop strong and
effective institutions, Australia, with assistance from
the United Kingdom, will be providing a four-and-ahalf year, $40-million programme of assistance to
develop the capacity of Timor-Leste’s police force and
justice sector. Australia’s significant defence
cooperation programme will also continue.
A number of delegations, and especially Minister
Ana Pessoa Pinto — who we, like others, very much
welcome to New York today — have referred to the
importance of maritime delimitation negotiations
between East Timor and both Australia and Indonesia.
I need hardly say that we, too, recognize the
importance of those talks. In this context, I want to
remind the Council that we have already negotiated
valid and generous interim arrangements, and I was
pleased this morning, I have to say, to hear Minister
Ana Pessoa Pinto’s expression of confidence in
Australia as a negotiating partner in these very
important negotiations.
May I conclude by restating to the Council that
Australia is committed to supporting and working
closely with UNMISET for the term of its renewed
mandate. Australia wishes the follow-on mission every
success and will actively contribute to that success.
The President: I thank the representative of
Australia for his kind words addressed to me.
I now call on the representative of Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): At the outset, I, too,
would like to associate myself with remarks made by
other delegations over the very tragic loss of life in
Grozny following an act of terrorism.
Allow me first, on behalf of the Government of
Norway, to express our support for the Government of
Timor-Leste, which has made significant achievements
in the reconstruction, development and creation of a
new nation.
We welcome the report of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor. The United Nations
has played a crucial role in the extraordinary political
progress made by a newly independent, post-conflict
Timor-Leste. However, we must not risk setbacks as a
result of premature exit and we need a continued, but

30

modified international presence, as suggested by the
Secretary-General, to consolidate the achievements
made.
One achievement Norway would like to highlight
today is that the role of women has been enhanced in
Timor-Leste. According to a report from the InterParliamentary Union, Timor-Leste is number 22 on the
ranking of countries with the highest percentage of
women in national parliaments. It is fair to say that the
work of the United Nations and of the Government to
promote gender equality in Timor-Leste has been
impressive.
Norway has followed the process of prosecution
and trial of those accused of serious crimes and calls
for a continued fight against impunity. Furthermore, we
are pleased with the work of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation and we look
forward to its final report, to be presented later this
year.
In addition to United Nations assistance, bilateral
development assistance will also be critical in the years
to come. The overall goals for Norwegian support to
Timor-Leste are to assist the new State in its efforts to
establish sustainable democratic institutions, to
promote human rights and to combat poverty through
development of a sustainable national economy.
Norway remains a firm supporter of Timor-Leste and
will attend the donors meeting in Dili from 17 to 19
May.
Lastly, Norway would like to express its gratitude
to Kamalesh Sharma, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his tireless efforts in fulfilling
his tasks in Timor-Leste. The contribution of the
Special Representative and that of the men and women
serving with him have been nothing less than
outstanding, and we commend them for the progress
made.
The President: I shall now give the floor to Mr.
Sharma, if he wishes to respond to any of the
comments made.
Mr. Sharma: We have made a very serious
inroad into lunchtime, and I would not like to test the
apparent popularity of UNMISET by holding forth for
too long. Indeed, this is not required of me any more, I
feel, in the light of the statement by Senior Minister
Ana Pessoa Pinto. She has given much information and
clarification and important perspectives for all of us.

S/PV.4965

We have noted, however, the various points that
delegations have made on various issues and security
concerns on the rule of law, the national police and
further requirements to professionalize it, human
rights, serious crime and advisors to public
administration. I wish to advise the Council and the
delegations that we stand ready to throw further light
on any of these issues, should that be desired.
I would only like to restrict myself to thanking all
the delegations for their kind and complimentary words
directed to myself and to members of UNMISET. I will
faithfully communicate these sentiments soon after
return. I am convinced that the confidence and
encouragement expressed by the Council — indeed,
which I have always received — regarding the work

being done by them will further galvanize them
towards realizing the Council’s goals for UNMISET,
particularly in this consolidation phase, should it be
approved by the Council and on which virtually all
members have spoken.
The President: I thank Mr. Sharma for those
concluding remarks. Once again, on behalf of the
Council, we wish him all the best in the future.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

31
