S/PRST/2017/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7974th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 June 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions 2014 (2011), 2051 (2012),
2140 (2014), 2201 (2015), 2204 (2015), 2216 (2015), 2266 (2016), 2342
(2017), and presidential statements of 15 February 2013, 29 August 2014,
22 March 2015 and 25 April 2016.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about the devastating
humanitarian impact of the conflict on civilians and emphasises that the
humanitarian situation will deteriorate in the absence of a political solution.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern about the recent outbreak
of cholera, which is the latest indicator of the gravity of the humanitarian
crisis.
“The Security Council recalls that the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Initiative and Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue conference, and relevant Security Council resolutions
provide the basis for inclusive negotiations for a political settlement o f the
crisis in Yemen and expresses concern at the continued non -implementation of
these resolutions.
“The Security Council expresses its continued support for the tireless
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, to bring the parties to negotiations with a view towards swiftly
reaching a final and comprehensive agreement to end the conflict in Yemen.
The Security Council calls on the parties to immediately agree on the
modalities for a durable Cessation of Hostilities. Furthermore, the Security
Council reiterates its call to all parties to engage in peace talks in a flexible
and constructive manner without preconditions, and in good faith.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the attack on the UN Spe cial
Envoy’s convoy during his recent visit to Sana’a, and calls upon the Houthis
and supporters of former President Saleh to undertake a full investigation to
identify those responsible and hold them to account. The Security Council
calls upon all parties to the conflict to engage constructively with the Special
Envoy’s proposals for peace and ensure the unhindered access of the Special

17-09924 (E)

150617

*1709924*

S/PRST/2017/7

Envoy to all parts of Yemen. The Security Council notes the statement by the
Government of Yemen contained in document S/2017/476.
“The Security Council calls upon all parties to comply with international
humanitarian law, including to at all times distinguish between the civilian
population and combatants, and between civilian objects and military
objectives, and by taking all feasible precautions to avoid, and in any event
minimize harm to civilians and civilian objects, and to end the recruitment and
use of children in violation of applicable international law, in order to pr event
further suffering of civilians. The Security Council further underlines the need
to ensure the security of humanitarian and United Nations personnel. The
Security Council calls on all parties to respect and protect medical facilities
and personnel. The Security Council further calls on the parties to allow the
safe, rapid and unhindered access for humanitarian supplies and personnel to
the populations of all affected governorates, and to facilitate access for
essential imports of food, fuel and, medical supplies into the country and their
distribution throughout. In this regard, the Security Council stresses the
importance of keeping all Yemen’s ports functioning, including Hodeida port,
as a critical lifeline for humanitarian support and other essenti al supplies, in
line with the Special Envoy’s latest proposals for Hodeida port and city.
“The Security Council shares the grave concern of the Secretary -General
about the threat of famine in Yemen, which he described as the largest food
insecurity emergency in the world, and notes with deepest concern the
additional humanitarian challenge presented by the alarming cholera outbreak
in the country. The Security Council emphasizes that the spread of cholera and
the threat of famine reflect the gravity of Yemen’s humanitarian crisis and the
severe strain the conflict has placed on the country’s institutions.
“In light of this worsening crisis, the Security Council calls on all parties
to engage constructively with the Special Envoy’s latest proposals for
increasing commercial and humanitarian shipments through Red Sea ports
including new arrangements for the management of Hodeida port and city.
These proposals would act as a confidence-building mechanism between the
parties, with a view to a durable cessation of hostilities as a step towards the
resumption of peace talks under UN leadership. The Security Council urges
the parties to work with the Special Envoy to conclude an agreement for the
resumption of government salary payments and the preservation of essential
government services in all areas of the country.
“The Security Council, with a view both to addressing the humanitarian
emergency, and to building confidence between the sides in a way which will
be conducive to political negotiations, encourages rapid agreement on
(a) deployment of additional United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism monitors; (b) increasing the capacity of all of Yemeni ports,
including through the timely installation of cranes at Hodeida to increase the
port’s capacity; (c) increased access to Sana’a Airport for lifesaving
humanitarian supplies and movement of urgent humanitarian cases.
“The Security Council calls for immediate mobilisation of the funds
pledged to Yemen at the Geneva Pledging Conference of 25 April 2017, hosted
by the United Nations Secretary-General together with the Governments of
Sweden and Switzerland, and full funding of the United Nations 2017
Humanitarian Response Plan for Yemen as part of a coordinated international
response to the crisis. The Security Council also expresses support for the
statement made by the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator on 26 May
on the urgent need to provide funding to halt the spread of cholera.
2/3

17-09924

S/PRST/2017/7

“The Security Council calls on all Member States to fully i mplement the
arms embargo as required by the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Security Council also calls on the Houthis and forces allied to former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh to cease all attacks at the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia.
“The Security Council takes threats to shipping around Bab al-Mandeb, a
strategically important shipping passage, extremely seriously and stresses that
the continued exercise of navigational rights and freedoms in and around
Bab al-Mandeb strait in accordance with relevant international law must be
upheld.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about the presence of
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) in Yemen, and the impact its
violent extremist ideology and actions have upon civilians and stability in
Yemen and the region. The Security Council further expresses concern at the
presence and future potential growth of affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq
and Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh), and reaffirms its resolve to address
all aspects of the threat posed by AQAP, ISIL (Da’esh), and all other
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. In this regard, the
Security Council calls upon all Yemenis to combine their efforts in countering
the threat posed by terrorism.
“The Security Council emphasises that the conflict in Yemen will only be
resolved through the resumption of an inclusive political process, and calls
upon all parties to the conflict to engage constructively and in good faith to
overcome obstacles and find a peaceful solution. The Security Council calls
upon the parties to ensure at least 30 percent representation of women in peace
negotiations, and calls upon the UN to regularly report on consultations with
women leaders and women’s organisations in line with resolution 2122 (2013).
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen.”

17-09924

3/3
