S/2018/789

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 August 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 24 August 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my report on the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), covering the period from 15 November
2017 to 15 May 2018 (S/2018/521), and to your related statement, as President of the
Security Council, on 10 August 2018 (S/PRST/2018/17).
In the aforementioned report, I noted that a key priority of UNOCA in its next
mandate would be to work with the Economic Community o f Central African States
(ECCAS) and its member States towards laying the groundwork for the structural
prevention of election-related violence.
I also noted that the complex nature of ongoing conflicts in the subregion, the
emergence of new threats to peace and security and outstanding challenges required
sustained and more coordinated and coherent support from the United Nations and
the international community. As ECCAS and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community (CEMAC) pursued their efforts to implement institutional
reforms, mobilizing the necessary political and technical support should remain a
major priority. The convening of regular tripartite meetings between UNOCA,
ECCAS and CEMAC would be a useful tool in that process.
In addition, I noted that the growing transregional threats also necessitated
strengthened cooperation between ECCAS and the Economic Community of West
African States and between UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
In the light of the above, I recommend that the mandate of UNOCA be extended
for a period of three years, from 1 September 2018 to 31 August 2021.
I also submit herewith the draft mandate of UNOCA for the period 2018–2021,
in which the four core objectives of UNOCA are described (see annex). The objectives
are to be pursued in close collaboration with ECCAS, CEMAC, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and other relevant regional and subregional partners.
UNOCA will continue to work in close collaboration with UNOWAS on issues
related to maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, as well as on the impact of the
activities of Boko Haram on countries of the Lake Chad Basin region. In line wit h the
policy of the United Nations, UNOCA will ensure that gender and human rights are
mainstreamed into its activities.

18-14257 (E)

300818

*1814257*

S/2018/789

I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex brought
to the attention of the members of the Security Counc il.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/4

18-14257

S/2018/789

Annex
Draft mandate of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa for the period 2018–2021
The objectives below are to be pursued by the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA), in close collaboration with relevant subregional and
regional partners.
Objective 1. Monitor political developments in Central Africa, carry out good
offices and special assignments on behalf of the Secretary-General and enhance
subregional capacities for conflict prevention and mediation in countries of the
subregion, with due attention to human rights and gender dimensions:
(a) Perform good offices on behalf of the Secretary-General, including in
countries facing electoral or institutional crises;
(b) Enhance the capacity for conflict prevention, mediation and peace
consolidation of subregional actors, including the Economic Community of Central
African States;
(c) Serve as secretariat for the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa and assist States in implementing the
recommendations of the Committee, in accordance with relevant General Assembly
resolutions.
Objective 2. Support United Nations efforts in the subregion as well as regional
and subregional initiatives on peace and security, including from human rights
and gender perspectives:
(a) Promote and support, as appropriate, regional and subregional efforts to
address the impact of emerging security threats, including Boko Haram, maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and other cross-border threats, such as issues related to transhumance, as well as the
regional dimension of security crises in some States of the subregion;
(b) Support the African Union-led African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic;
(c) Coordinate the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the activities of the Lord ’s Resistance Army
(S/2012/481), in close collaboration with the African Union and relevant partners;
(d) Cooperate with subregional organizations, in particular the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, the Gulf of Guinea Commission, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and
other key partners and assist them, as appropriate, in their promotion of peace and
stability in the broader Central African subregion and in the strengthen ing of their
capacities.
Objective 3. Enhance coherence and coordination in the work of the
United Nations in the subregion on peace and security:
(a) Increase internal United Nations exchanges, collaboration and joint
initiatives within the subregion;
(b) Advocate the priorities identified by United Nations entities in the
subregion.

18-14257

3/4

S/2018/789

Objective 4. Advise the Secretary-General and United Nations entities in the
region on significant developments in Central Africa:
(a) Undertake regular analysis of, and reports on, the situation in the countries
of the subregion and regional trends;
(b)
Section.

4/4

Establish a dedicated analytical unit integrated under the Political Affairs

18-14257
