The Special Committee feels that the allocation of
items to committees might be effected in a less rigid
manner and that questions which may be considered
as falling within the competence of two or more committees, should preferably be referred to the committee with the lightest agenda.

stresses the value of having, as in the past, a legal
adviser from the Secretariat in attendance at meetings
to give the Chairmen or the committee such advice as
they may need for the conduct of their business and
the interpretation of the rules of procedure.

23. Another means of lightening the task of any
given Main Committee would be to consider directly
in the plenary meeting, without preliminary reference
to committee, certain questions which fall within the
terms of reference of the Main Committee. This procedure would moreover have the great advantage of
reducing to a notable extent repetition of debate.

363 (IV). Application of Liechtenstein
to become a party to the Statute
of the International Court of Justice
Whereas the Government of the Principality
of Liechtenstein, by a letter5 dated 6 March 1949
addressed to the Secretary-General, has expressed
the desire to learn the conditions under which
Liechtenstein could become a party to the Statute
of the International Court of Justice.

It is felt that the amount of time saved by this
method would be considerable, especially if the Main
Committee and plenary meetings could be held
concurrently.
If the Main Committee could not meet at the same
time as the plenary meeting, the fact that the Committee was not meeting would enable another Main Committee to meet in its place.

Whereas Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter
provides that a State which is not a Member of
the United Nations may become a party to the
Statute of the Court on conditions to be determined in each case by the General Assembly
upon the recommendation of the Security Council,

The consideration of questions in plenary meetings
would have the benefit of the attendance of leaders
of delegations and of greater solemnity and publicity.
The slightly higher cost to the United Nations oi
plenary meetings, due in particular to the distribution
of verbatim records of the meetings, would undoubtedly be compensated by the shorter duration of the
session.

Whereas the Security Council has adopted a
recommendation 6 on this matter,
The General Assembly
Determines, in pursuance of Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter and upon the recommen-

The General Committee would be responsible for
suggesting to the General Assembly which items on
the agenda might be dealt with in this manner. The
Special Committee recommends that this method
should be introduced on an experimental basis at
future sessions.

dation of the Security Council, the conditions on
which Liechtenstein may become a party to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, as
follows:

The Special Committee is of the opinion that this
procedure would be especially appropriate for certain
questions the essential aspects of which are already
familiar to Members, such as items which have been
considered by the General Assembly at previous sessions and which do not require either the presence of
representatives of non-member States or the hearing
of testimony.

"Liechtenstein will become a party to the Statute on the date of the deposit with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations of an instrument,
signed on behalf of the Government of the Principality of Liechtenstein and ratified as may be
required by the constitutional law of Liechten stein, containing:

"(a) Acceptance of the provisions of the Statute of the International Court of Justice ;

39. At this point the Special Committee desires to
stress once more the importance of the role of the
President of the General Assembly and of the Chairmen of committees. The satisfactory progress of the
proceedings depends essentially on their competence,
authority, tact and impartiality, their respect for the
rights both of minorities as well as majorities, and
their familiarity with the rules of procedure. The
General Assembly, or the committee, as the case may
be, is the master of the conduct of its own proceedings. It is, however, the special task of the Chairmen
to guide the proceedings of these bodies in the best
interests of all the Members.

" ( b) Acceptance of all the obligations of a
Member of the United Nations under Article 94
of the Charter ;

" ( c) An undertaking to contribute to the expenses of the Court such equitable amount as
the General Assembly shall assess fr6m time to
time after consultation with the Liechtenstein
Government."
262nd plenary meeting,
1 December 1949.

The Special Committee considers that everything
possible should be done to help Chairmen in the discharge of these important functions. The President
of the General Assembly and the General Committee
should assist the Chairmen of committees with their
advice. The Secretary-General should place his experience and all his authority at their disposal.

364 (IV). Registration and publication
of treaties and international agreements
A

The Special Committee is happy to note the Secretariat's valuable practice of holding daily meetings
of the committee secretaries, under the chairmanship
of the Executive Assistant to the Secretary-General,
where the procedural questions arising from day to
day in the General Assembly and committees are thoroughly examined. Furthermore, the Special Committee

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 7 of the SecretaryGeneral on the registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements,
1. Notes with satisfaction the progress achieved
in regard to the registration aIJd publication of
treaties;

• See Official Records of the Srcurity Council, Fourth
Year, Supplement for April 1949, document S/1298 and
Corr.l.
8 See Official Records of the fourth session of the Gen-

7
See Official Records of the fo11rth session of the Geti·
era/ Assembly, Anne.r to the Si:.th Commit/er, document
A/9S8.

eral Assembly, Aunex to the Sixth Committee, docu-

ment A/967.

63
