Ill.

63

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Expressing regret that those negotiations have not
moved as rapidly a·s had been expected,
Emphasizing the urgent need for all nuclear-weapon
States to cease the testing of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the indispensable role of the Committee
on Disarmament in the negotiation of a comprehensive
test-ban treaty capable of attracting the widest possible
international support and adherence,
Believing that the Committee on Disarmament should
establish an ad hoe working group on a nuclear-test-ban
treaty,
Recognizing the importance to a treaty prohibiting
nuclear testing of the work being carried out under the
auspices of the Committee on Disarmament on the
development of a global seismic verification system,
Convinced that the conclusion of such a treaty would
create a favourable international climate for the second
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, to be held in 1982,
1. Reiterates its grave concern that nuclear-weapon
testing continues unabated against the express wishes of
the overwhelming majority of Member States;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty to achieve
the prohibition of all nuclear-test explosions by all
States for all time is a matter of the greatest urgency and
priority;
3. Calls upon the three negotiating nuclear-weapon
States to exert their best efforts to bring their negotiations to a successful conclusion in time for consideration during the next session of the Committee on Disarmament;
4. Expresses the conviction that such a treaty is a
vital requirement to halt the nuclear-arms race and the
qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons and to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries;
5. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to take
the necessary steps, including the establishment of a
working group, to initiate substantive negotiations on a
comprehensive test-ban treaty as a matter of the highest
priority at the beginning of its session to be held in 1981;
6. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament
to determine, in the context of its negotiations on such a
treaty, the institutional and administrative steps
necessary for establishing, testing and operating an international seismic monitoring network and effective
verification system;
7. Urges all members of the Committee on Disarmament to co-operate with the Committee in fulfilling its
mandate and, to this end, to support the creation of a
working group on a comprehensive nuclear-test ban;
8. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament to exert all efforts in order that a draft comprehensive
nuclear-test-ban treaty may be submitted to the General
Assembly no later than at its second special session
devoted to disarmament, to be held in 1982;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item relating to the implementation of the present resolution.

94 th plenary meeting
I2 December 1980

35/146.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
NUCLEAR C,\PABILITY OF Sounl AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/76 B of 11 December 1979,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa 21 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17
to 21 July 1964,
Alarmed by South Africa's increased sophistication in
the nuclear field, including the advanced processing and
enrichment of uranium as nuclear-weapon fuel and its
advanced nuclear technology,
Alarmed also at the fact that South Africa's nuclear
capability has been enhanced by the co-operation of certain Western States and Israel with the racist regime,
Taking note of the report of the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways and means
of making the mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa more effective, 2'
Noting with concern that South Africa has persistently
refused to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 24 and to conclude adequate
and comprehensive safeguards agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency with a view to preventing the diversion of nuclear materials from peaceful
uses to the manufacture of nuclear weapons and other
nuclear explosive devices.
Recalling its decision taken at the tenth special session, devoted to disarmament, that the Security Council
should take appropriate effective steps to prevent the
frustration of the decision of the Organization of
African Unity for the denuclearization of Africa, 10
Bearing in mind the persistent concern with which the
international community regards South Africa's
capability and plans in the nuclear field,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on South Africa's plan and capability in the nuclear
field, including the reported explosion of a nuclear
device in the South Atlantic on 22 September 1979, 11
I. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on South Africa's plan and
capability in the nuclear field;
2. Expresses its deep alarm that the report has established South Africa's capability to manufacture nuclear
weapons;
3. Also expresses its deep concern that South Africa's
nuclear capability is being developed to preserve white
supremacy by intimidating neighbouring countries and
blackmailing the entire continent of Africa;
4. Reaffirms that the racist regime's nuclear plans
and capability constitute a very grave danger to inter~ational peace and security and, in particular, jeopardize the security of African States and increase the
danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons;
:, Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.
"Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year. Supplement for July, August and September /980, document S/14179.
" Resolution 2373 (XXI I), annex.
"' Resolution S-10/2, para. 63 (c).
"A/35/402 and Corr.I.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

64

5. Requests the Security Council to prohibit all
forms of co-operation and collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa in the nuclear field;
6. Calls upon all States, corporations, institutions or
individuals to terminate forthwith such nuclear collaboration between them and the racist regime of South
Africa;
7. Requests the Security Council to institute effective
enforcement action against the racist regime of South
Africa, so as to prevent it from endangering international peace and security through its acquisition of
nuclear weapons;
8. Demands that South Africa submit all its nuclear
installations to inspection by the International Atomic
Energy Agency;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the report on South Africa's plan and
capability in the nuclear field and to distribute it to
Member States, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental
organizations, so that the international community and
public opinion may be fully aware of the danger inherent in the programme;
I0. Further requests the Secretary-General to follow
closely South Africa's activity in the nuclear field and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
B
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa 27 adopted by the Assembly of the Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17
to 21 July I 964,
Recalling its resolution 1652 (XVI) of 24 November
1961, 32/81 of 12 December 1977, 33/63 of 14 December 1978 and 34/76 A of 11 December 1979, in which it
called upon all States to consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising the continental African
States, Madagascar and other islands surrounding
Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Recalling also that in its resolution 33/63 of 14
December 1978 it vigorously condemned any attempt by
South Africa to introduce in any way whatsoever
nuclear weapons into the continent and demanded that
South Africa should forthwith refrain from conducting
any nuclear explosion on the continent of Africa or elsewhere,
Reaffirming that the nuclear programme of the racist
regime of South Africa constitutes a very grave danger
to international peace and security and, in particular,
jeopardizes the security of African States,
Noting with concern that South Africa has persistently
refused to conclude adequate and comprehensive safeguards agreements with the International Atomic
Energy Agency with a view to preventing the diversion
of nuclear materials from peaceful uses to the manufac-

ture of nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive
devices,
Taking note of the report of the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977) concerning the question of South Africa 2x on ways and
means of making the mandatory arms embargo against
South Africa more effective and, in particular, its recommendation that all forms of nuclear collaboration
with South Africa should cease,
Having seriously examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on South Africa's plan and capability in the
nuclear field, 11 including the reported detonation of a
nuclear explosive device in the South Atlantic on 22 September 1979,
Gravely concerned that South Africa might have acquired nuclear weapons.
Expressing its indignation that certain Western countries and Israel have continued to collaborate with
South Africa in the nuclear field despite the risk of proliferation of nuclear weapons which the South African
nuclear programme poses,
Recalling its decision taken at the tenth special session, devoted to disarmament, that the Security Council
should take appropriate effective steps to prevent the
frustration of the decision of the Organization of
African Unity for the denuclearization of Africa, 10
I. Strongly reiterates its call upon all States to consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising the
continental African States, Madagascar and other
islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free
zone;
2. Reaffirms that the nuclear programme of the
racist regime of South Africa constitutes a very grave
danger to international peace and security and, in particular, jeopardizes the security of African States and increases the danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons;
3. Condemns any form of nuclear collaboration by
any State, corporation. institution or individual with the
racist regime of South Africa since such collaboration
frustrates, inter alia, the objective of the Declaration of
the Organization of African Unity to keep Africa a
nuclear-weapon-free zone:
4. Calls upon such States, corporations, institutions
or individuals, therefore. to terminate forthwith such
nuclear collaboration between them and the racist
regime of South Africa;
5. Requests the Security Council, in keeping with the
recommendation of its committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977) concerning the question of South
Africa, to prohibit all forms of co-operation and collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa in the
nuclear field;
6. Demands that South Africa submit all its nuclear
installations to inspection by the International Atomic
Energy Agency;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Organization of African
Unity towards the realization of its solemn Declaration
on the Denuclearization of Africa;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
