United Nations

asdf

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6849th meeting
Wednesday, 17 October 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosenthal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Guatemala)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sharifov
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Mr. Quintana
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Eick
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Chekkori
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Panin
Mr. Tladi
Mr. Afande
Mr. McKell
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security
Peace and justice, with a special focus on the role of the International
Criminal Court
Letter dated 1 October 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Guatemala
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/731)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-55302 (E)

*1255302*

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Timor-Leste to participate in this
meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is a great
honour for me to address the Council also on behalf of
the Permanent Representative of Jordan, His Excellency
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein, and His Excellency
Bruno Stagno Ugarte of Costa Rica. As the three
former Presidents of the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), we have closely followed the relationship
between the Council and the Court in the past 10 years.
A generic debate on that relationship is very timely, and
we are grateful to you, Mr. President, for initiating it.
Like others, we would suggest that the Council discuss
the issue at regular intervals.
In the early days of the Court, the debates in the
Council revolved largely around the use of article
16 of the Rome Statute, which gives the Council the
competence to defer investigations and prosecutions
for a period of 12 months. Those debates led to some
of the most controversial and questionable resolutions
to come out of the Council, namely, resolutions 1422
(2002) and 1487 (2003), which we consider contrary to
both the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome
Statute. Today, thankfully, that topic belongs to the
past, although it would serve the Council’s interest to
be better prepared for possible deferral requests in the
future.
At the heart of today’s political debate is the other
competence that the Rome Statute gives to the Council,
namely, its authority to refer situations to the Court.
The Council has used that competence only twice in 10
years — in 2005, on the situation in Darfur and, in 2011,
on Libya. However, that is still more frequently than
most of us expected when the Statute entered into force.
Supporters of the Court have generally welcomed such
referrals as breakthroughs for international criminal
justice. The 2005 decision on Darfur (see resolution
1593 (2005)) was made in an overall climate that was

2

difficult for the Court. The Libya referral (see resolution
1970 (2011)) seemed to illustrate the preparedness of
the Council to act swiftly to ensure accountability for
the most serious crimes and was even by a unanimous
vote.
Nevertheless, we believe that today, our assessment
must be more calibrated. The referral decisions of the
Council have proven to be a mixed blessing for the
Court and for international criminal justice as they
were driven by political convenience as much as by
the desire to establish justice. The referral decisions
were significant in the history of international criminal
justice but they came at a high cost for the Court. The
Court was accused of politicization, of bias against a
particular region and of manipulation by powerful
countries that chose to stay outside the Rome Statute,
and it found itself with very limited support from
its constituency. It is therefore paying the price for
the decisions of the Council, and sometimes the lack
thereof.
Obviously, that is not in the interest of the Court, and
more broadly justice, or in the interest of the Security
Council. The Council should therefore take several steps
to move towards a more symbiotic relationship with the
ICC as an independent judicial institution. In order to
genuinely advance accountability, several aspects of
the Council’s practice would have to be addressed in
future referrals. Most important, the Council must back
up its referral decisions with measures that enforce
cooperation. A referred State’s obligation to cooperate
with the Court is based solely on the Council’s powers
under Chapter VII. A lack of cooperation by that State
is therefore a violation of its obligation under Article 25
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Nevertheless, the Council has been notoriously
silent, or even tacitly acquiescent, in most instances
where the Court required its backing. The Council does
not even have a mechanism to deal with notifications of
non-cooperation by the Court — a serious shortcoming
that should be urgently addressed. Our colleague from
Togo and other speakers mentioned that earlier in
today’s debate. An important challenge in that respect
may face the Council once the Court has decided on
the admissibility challenge put forward by the Libyan
Government.
Closely linked to that is the question of the
financing of judicial Court activity triggered by a
referral decision. In referring situations to the ICC, the
Council effectively uses the Court as an alternative to
12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

the establishment of an ad hoc tribunal, which is a very
cost-efficient alternative, as a comparison with other
tribunals illustrates. Both the Relationship Agreement
between the Court and the United Nations and the
Rome Statute clearly indicate that the costs arising from
such referrals should therefore be borne by the United
Nations budget, subject to a decision by the General
Assembly. We do not think that the independence of ad
hoc tribunals has been undermined by the fact that they
were financed by the United Nations membership.
Finally, the Council should delete the language
exempting certain individuals from the Court’s
jurisdiction in future referral decisions. Such
formulations corroborate the suspicion of selectivity
in creating accountability and reflect an ideology that
we hope the Council has overcome. Also, they may not
withstand the judicial scrutiny of the Court, should the
occasion arise.
In addition to subjecting the language that it has
used in the past to a fundamental review, the Council
should also do what is necessary to address some of the
problems that have arisen in connection with referrals.
In particular, the rules concerning complementarity
should be clearly reflected in such decisions, in
accordance with article 19 of the Rome Statute. The
Statute always gives primacy to the jurisdiction
exercised by the national authorities but it also provides
for very clear rules governing such jurisdiction. Finally,
referral resolutions should stipulate that the obligation
of the referred State to cooperate is of course based on
the Rome Statute in its entirety.
In that way, the Council could prevent discussions
suggesting that referred States would have to respect
only parts of the Rome Statute. Indeed, it is the integrity
of the Statute that makes the Court deliver justice in
an independent and credible manner, and thereby
contributes a fundamental building block to sustainable
peace.
The Council has made important advances in the
area of accountability. It should now make full use of
the potential offered through the Rome Statute system.
A genuine commitment to accountability also entails
immunity agreements contrary to international law not
being endorsed by the Council.
Ultimately, the political challenge for the Security
Council will often be to square the principles of peace
and justice. That is often not an easy task, and we clearly
need more and more inclusive discussions on that

12-55302

challenge. However, we find it difficult to understand
why the Council is unable to make a simple and
straightforward statement on accountability concerning
the situation in Syria. There is ample evidence that
crimes against humanity and other international crimes
are being committed by the parties to the conflict. The
Council should therefore call for accountability in that
situation and ultimately, if there is genuine political
will, refer the situation to the Court.
The activation of the Court’s jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression, hopefully in 2017, will create an
additional connection between the Council and the
International Criminal Court. The Kampala consensus
preserves the competence of the Council under Article
39 of the Charter. At the same time, the Court’s
exercise of jurisdiction is not ultimately contingent
upon the Council’s decisions. Therefore, both legally
and politically, the Kampala consensus strikes a careful
balance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Guatemalan delegation for having organized
today’s debate. We extend a warm welcome to the
country’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, whose presence
demonstrates the importance of the subject and the
commitment of his country to the causes of peace and
justice.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing. I also thank the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the representative of the
Office of the Prosecutor for their insightful remarks.
As the quest for peace and justice is a key common
purpose of the United Nations and the ICC, it is most
relevant that we discuss ways to improve the relationship
between them.
As a founder of the International Criminal Court,
Brazil remains steadfast in its commitment to the
Rome Statute, which we consider to be a remarkable
achievement in the development of international law. In
Brazil’s view, sustainable peace and justice go hand in
hand and are mutually supportive. For any society that
has suffered the trauma of violent crimes, such as those
typified in the Rome Statute, coming to terms with
the past and addressing grievances is a very important
aspect of true reconciliation.

3

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

From that point of view, justice is not only a
matter of redressing evil done to individuals, but also
a powerful tool to help rebuild societies free from
resentment and the ensuing instability. In discharging
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
must take those elements into consideration.
At the same time, a referral to the ICC by the
Security Council should not be the default procedure
whenever violations occur. The political circumstances
of any given conflict and the likely consequences of
resorting to the ICC must be carefully considered by
the Council. As we know, balancing the imperative of
justice and the search for peace is a challenge that the
Council may occasionally be called upon to address.
In order to succeed in that critical effort, the
Council should consider that peace and justice will be
best served if the involvement of the ICC is very well
timed. A referral of a given case to the Court must not
negatively impact the political calculations of those on
whom war and peace may depend. In some cases, the
risk of jeopardizing a peaceful solution that may spare
many innocent lives is real and should be duly taken
into consideration.
We must also bear in mind that the most immediate
and effective means for saving lives is the cessation of all
violence. In that regard, we believe that the prerogative
of invoking article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute should
be used with caution, after other tools have proven
to be inadequate or insufficient and after thorough
consideration has been given to its repercussions for the
prospects of peace.
The power of the Security Council to refer and defer
cases is unique. Given the fact that the decision to refer
a case to the ICC is based on political considerations,
the Council must avoid all risk of double standards and
selectivity. When the Council decides to pursue the
referral track, it must do so rigorously and consistently,
following a principled and coherent approach, so as to
promote, first and foremost, peace and international
criminal accountability. Brazil believes that the
observance by the Council of certain conditions when
referring a case may help to ensure that both peace and
justice will be strengthened.
First, we reiterate Brazil’s commitment to the
integrity of the Rome Statute and our firm opposition
to any form of exemption from the jurisdiction of the
ICC of certain categories of individuals. Initiatives

4

aimed at establishing such exemptions are not helpful
to advancing justice and accountability and do not
contribute to strengthening the role of the Court. The
notion of selective criminal accountability is foreign to
the values we uphold when advocating for the cause of
justice.
Working towards universalization of the Rome
Statute also stands as a priority. Nearly two-thirds of
the United Nations membership has ratified the treaty.
We need to ensure further progress towards universal
adherence, which will advance the legitimacy and
credibility of the Court, thereby allowing it to better
serve, as it must, the purpose of promoting peace and
justice.
Another crucial aspect regarding referrals of
situations to the International Criminal Court is
the financial burden of such decisions. Referrals
of situations may entail formidable expenses to an
institution that already works on a tight budget. If
we want to be coherent in the support for the Court
expressed by so many speakers today, we must give
practical meaning to the provision of the Rome Statute
according to which expenses of the Court may be
provided by funds of the United Nations, subject to the
approval of the General Assembly.
Finally, the issue of cooperation deserves further
consideration. In that context, the Security Council
is particularly important in following up on its own
referrals, making sure that the Court receives enough
political support, and fostering the use of relevant
regional and subregional organizations to help the fight
impunity.
In its 10 years of existence, the International
Criminal Court has already demonstrated that it is an
essential institution for furthering justice. As such,
it can also make an invaluable contribution to peace.
In that endeavour, the ICC will continue to count on
Brazil’s support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate. We know
how important the issues we are discussing today
are for your country. Guatemala has faced the awful
realities of conflict and the difficult challenges of postconflict accountability, and you personally, have been
at the forefront of the fight against impunity.

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council is a political body, charged
with maintaining international peace and security.
But one of the most important lessons of the past
two decades is that peace can neither be achieved in
the absence of justice, nor sustained in the absence of
justice. When communities, even whole countries, are
subjected to horrendous war crimes against innocent
civilians, any subsequent peace will be very difficult to
sustain unless the perpetrators of those crimes are held
accountable.

with the ICC. Moreover, it should not encroach on
the prerogative of the General Assembly to decide on
funding for those situations that have been referred to
the Court, and it should never refer a case to the ICC
simply because of political outrage at an intractable
problem, or because it has no other political strategy to
deal with it. We join with Brazil and others that say that
the Council should not use its powers under the Rome
Statute to shield nationals of States that are not party to
the Statute.

So it is not sufficient for the Security Council
to focus only on politically pragmatic solutions;
it must also systematically apply the justice and
accountability mechanisms that are now available to
it. The International Criminal Court (ICC) is now an
important feature of that justice and accountability
landscape, so it is very timely indeed to address the
relationship between the Council and the International
Criminal Court.

The credibility of both the Security Council and
the ICC will be damaged if referrals are perceived to
be politicized or justice is seen to be discriminatory. In
that regard, I reiterate New Zealand’s call at last month’s
general debate (see A/67/PV.18) for the permanent
members of the Council to agree voluntarily not to use
their veto in situations involving mass atrocities.

During its most recent term on the Security
Council, New Zealand played important roles in the
establishment of the first two international criminal
tribunals, the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and we have been a very strong
supporter of the ICC since the idea of a permanent
tribunal was first mooted. Sadly, we know that, in
the future, there will still be cases where the Security
Council must again use its power under the Rome
Statute to refer a case to the ICC. But we also firmly
believe and hold the view that when the Council does
make a referral to the ICC, it should do so with a clear
commitment to follow through and ensure the Court
receives the necessary cooperation. We endorse the
statement of the representative of Liechtenstein on
behalf of the former presidents of the Assembly of
States Parties in that regard.
Moreover, New Zealand believes that, where the
Council has referred a matter to the ICC, it should also,
and as a matter of course, establish a working group to
monitor and follow up on that case.
The Council already has a Working Group on the
Tribunals, and it needs to devote at least as much effort
to the cases it has initiated with the ICC. Moreover, it
should not encroach on the prerogative of the General
Assembly to decide on funding for those situations that
have been referred to the ICC. The Council already has
a working group on the tribunals, and it should devote
at least as much effort to those cases it has initiated
12-55302

As I said earlier, New Zealand is a very strong
supporter of the Court. However, the ICC is a court of last
resort, with jurisdiction only where national courts are
unwilling or unable to investigate and prosecute. There
will be times when the ICC is not the best mechanism
to be applied in a particular case. It is equally clear that
even where it is the appropriate mechanism, the timing
of its application needs to be very carefully judged,
particularly in situations of ongoing conflict.
It seems to us that, in the future, the Council
will have to think very seriously about a number of
questions, especially in situations where violent conflict
is continuing. Issues for possible consideration include
whether an ICC referral might be an incentive or a
disincentive for a peace settlement, including whether
there is a risk of prolonging the violence, resulting
in yet more victims; and also the likelihood that any
indictees can actually be brought to trial. In particular,
it should consider the willingness of the Council itself
to ensure that indictees are brought to trial. The extent
of cross-regional support for the decision might also be
a factor.
Finally, New Zealand also emphasizes that
experience in criminal justice jurisdiction, whether
national or international, shows that credible
restorative justice processes can also help to promote
accountability and build sustainable peace in societies
emerging from conflict. We have seen this in your
own country, Mr. President, with the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala, in
South Africa and Sierra Leone with their truth and
reconciliation commissions, in Rwanda with the gacaca
5

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

tribunals, and, in places such as Timor-Leste, with
even more nuanced individual solutions. The Security
Council should respect the fact that conventional
judicial mechanisms are not the only credible ways of
establishing accountability in post-conflict situations
and, where appropriate, it should encourage the use of
such mechanisms.
For New Zealand, the establishment of the
International Criminal Court was a most welcome
development, and it has our strong, ongoing support. In
this, the Court’s tenth year, it is now clear that it is a hugely
valuable resource for the international community in its
efforts to deter, to ensure accountability for the most
serious crimes, and to end impunity. But, as with all
such resources, we must be careful in its application
and wise in its use.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. King (Australia): Australia would like to
thank Guatemala for holding this important debate
and welcomes Guatemala’s accession to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
We thank the Secretary-General, President Song and
Mr. Mochochoko for their briefings today.
Australia has been a steadfast supporter of the
Court since its inception. Ensuring accountability
for international crimes is a key component of
peacebuilding, as well as conflict prevention. Our
experience in providing support to States transitioning
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding has taught us that
peace and justice are both fundamental to establishing
sustainable security in all societies.
Australia recognizes that there will be different
views on the appropriate time to press for accountability,
particularly when delicate political settlements to end
conflicts are being negotiated. Nonetheless, combating
impunity and acknowledging the wrongs of the past are
important factors in establishing lasting peace based on
respect for human rights and the rule of law — a point
underscored in the World Development Report 2011 of
the World Bank.
On that basis, Australia views the ICC as a vital
partner for the Security Council. We welcome the
evolving relationship between the Court and the Council,
particularly the increased attention being given to the
ICC in the Council’s country-specific and thematic
resolutions and statements. Effective coordination
between the ICC and the Council is essential in order to
6

send a clear message that those who commit the most
serious international crimes will be held to account.
It is important to ensure that the separate efforts of
the two bodies, which have, after all, very different
mandates, have a multiplying effect and that they are
able to work together to end impunity for these serious
crimes. As President Song said this morning, there is
a clear rationale for the Court’s relationship with the
Council.
For our part, Australia wishes to offer some
suggestions for how the Court and Council can work
most effectively together. It is critical for the Security
Council to speak with one voice on the question of
accountability. As the independent international
commission of inquiry has shown, there is a body of
alarming evidence to suggest that the most serious
international crimes have been committed in Syria.
In such circumstances, the Council, as the ultimate
guardian of international peace and security, has
an important role to play, and we urge it to consider
referring the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court. This would send an important message
that there will be no impunity for those who commit
the most serious crimes of international concern and
that the Syrian people can expect justice for the crimes
committed.
Of course, ICC referrals must not be used as a
substitute for the Council’s exercise of its broader
responsibilities. We also urge the Council to be vigilant
about referring situations such as that of Syria to the
Court without taking complementary action, where
appropriate. Indeed, once the Security Council has
referred a situation to the ICC, it is crucial for it to give
the work of the Court ongoing support. Such support
will maximize the prospects of States that cooperate
with the ICC and ensure that the objective of the referral
is achieved. Such support is most necessary when the
Court notifies the Council that a State has failed to meet
its obligations to cooperate with the Court. Looking
forward, it is also important that any future referrals by
the Council be precisely drafted so as to clearly identify
States’ cooperation obligations.
Of course, cooperation between the Council and
the Court should not be limited to situations where the
Council has referred a situation to the ICC. In many
scenarios, situations before the Court also feature
on the Council’s agenda and cooperation in such
situations is equally important. The decision of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire to lift
the travel ban on Laurent Gbagbo to enable his travel
to The Hague is an example of the importance of such
cooperation. More generally, sanctions committees
covering situations that are before the ICC should give
close consideration to the question of whether indictees
should also be designated for sanctions purposes.
Finally, Australia recognizes that cooperation is a
two-way street. For that reason, we encourage the Court
to continue to engage with the Council through regular
briefings and the provision of detailed advice on the
support it looks to the Council to provide. We welcome
this debate as a very important contribution to further
exploring how the ICC and the Council can better
collaborate to achieve the goal of ending impunity for
the most serious crimes, and, in the process, contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
We should continue this discussion.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): Japan firmly believes that
the rule of law is the basic concept in the maintenance
of international peace and security, and that it plays a
pivotal role in preventing international disputes and
finding peaceful solutions to them. In that regard, Japan
continues to attach great importance to the role of the
international courts, such as the International Court of
Justice, the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea and the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The ICC in particular plays an important role in
the maintenance of international peace and security
through punishing and preventing the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a
whole. Since this year marks the tenth anniversary of
the entry into force of the Rome Statute, it is very timely
that we should review the achievements of the ICC over
the past 10 years and consider the future development of
the ICC. On this very day, my Government is hosting a
symposium in Tokyo on the ICC, with the participation
of the ICC Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, in
commemoration of its tenth anniversary.
Japan notes with appreciation that the ICC has
started its full activities, exemplified in its very first
judgment in the case of Thomas Lubanga in March this
year. On the other hand, one of the major challenges
the ICC has faced in its 10-year history is how to bring
justice to war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in the territory of a non-State party to the

12-55302

Rome Statute. In that regard, the ICC experienced
the cases of Darfur and Libya,whose situations were
referred to the ICC by Security Council resolutions.
Japan appreciates those decisions of the Security
Council and its positive collaboration with the ICC.
Acts of violence and oppression against innocent
civilians and other serious violations of human rights
in Syria must not be tolerated in the context of the rule
of law. It is totally with reason that there is a call for a
referral of the situation in Syria to the ICC. However,
the essential problem lies in the regrettable fact that
the Security Council is divided in how to deal with the
grave problem of the current situation in Syria and has
failed to respond in an effective manner. Japan strongly
calls upon the members of the Council to recognize
their duty as members of an organ with the primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security.
The ICC is a body working to bring justice based
on the rule of law. But decisions made by the Security
Council, whose primary role is to maintain international
peace and security, are rather political in essence.
Therefore, if the Council refers a situation to the ICC,
it is not for purely legal reasons. Still, Japan believes
that the Security Council should give due consideration
to handing down justice not only from the viewpoint
of contributing to a peaceful solution on a particular
situation, but also as a deterrent of future crimes.
It is also important that the Security Council
continue to be duly engaged even after its referral of a
situation to the ICC in order to make the referral truly
effective. If a lack of cooperation on the participation
of the Security Council results in a failure to indict
a perpetrator of serious crimes, it undermines the
credibility of both the Council and the ICC. I would
like to point out that once the Security Council makes
a decision of referral, its members bear the moral
responsibility to cooperate with the ICC, even if they
are non-States parties to the Rome Statute. Japan
expects that the dialogue and cooperation will deepen
between the Security Council and the ICC in general
and on the financial implications of referral as well.
Japan, as the leading contributor to the ICC,
expects that the Court will further contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security as a
more effective, efficient and universal organ. Japan
therefore calls upon all States parties to fully cooperate
with the ICC in accordance with their obligation under
the Rome Statute, and also encourages all non-States
7

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

parties to accede to the ICC expeditiously. Japan is also
determined to continue its efforts to promote accession
to the ICC by other countries, in particular those in the
Asia-Pacific region, by extending assistance for the
development of legal systems and human resources.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank Guatemala for this timely
initiative. On 3 April, the High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, Catherine Ashton, welcomed Guatemala’s
accession to the Rome Statute. At present, 121
States are parties to the Rome Statute. We welcome
the announcement made by Haiti during the recent
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
concerning its intention to ratify it, and we praise the
decision of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire to commit
to ratifying the same treaty following the reform of its
constitutional framework.
The European Union and its member States are
firm supporters of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), which is critical to the international community
in bringing to justice those individuals bearing criminal
responsibility for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity when national courts are unwilling
or unable to prosecute them. The year 2012 represents
a milestone for the ICC as the Court delivered its first
verdict against Thomas Lubanga, who was convicted
for recruiting and using child soldiers.
In that context, the European Union and its member
States underline the important relationship that already
exists between the ICC and the Security Council.
Resolution 67/1 of the General Assembly recalled the
role of the ICC in a multilateral system that seeks to end
impunity and establish the rule of law. The Security
Council acknowledged the role of the ICC, in particular

8

in its resolutions 2053 (2012) on the Democratic
Republic of Congo, 2062 (2012) on Côte d’Ivoire, and
2071 (2012) on Mali. It also did so with regard to sexual
violence in conflict in resolution 1960 (2010) and
concerning children and armed conflict in resolution
2068 (2012).
The Security Council is also connected to the ICC
by its ability to take action, as foreseen in the Rome
Statute. We commend the Security Council for its
decisiveness in referring the situations in Darfur and
Libya to the ICC. Follow-up by the Security Council on
the situations which it has referred, inter alia with regard
to instances of non-cooperation, remains important, as
does sufficient support for the actions of the Court.
Efforts to combat impunity will not be effective
unless there is greater collective and individual
cooperation with the ICC. Without State cooperation,
the ICC cannot fulfil its mandate. That also applies
to all States parties to the Rome Statute when the
Security Council has referred a situation to the Court
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Out of 23 individuals against whom the ICC
currently has open cases, 12 are currently absconding
from justice and some have done so for several years.
That stifles the ICC’s capacity to deliver justice.
Non-cooperation with the Court in regard to the
execution of arrest warrants constitutes a violation
of international obligations; in certain circumstances
related to referrals by the Security Council, it also
constitutes a beach of obligations under the Charter.
The European Union and its member States underline
the importance of consistent action to encourage full
cooperation of States with the ICC, including the
prompt execution of arrest warrants.
In March, High Representative Catherine Ashton
firmly recalled, in the context of resolution 1593
(2005) referring the situation in Darfur to the ICC,
the importance of all States Members of the United
Nations abiding by and implementing the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council under Chapter VII
of the Charter. She recalled the fundamental principle
contained in the Rome Statute of the ICC, namely, that
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole must not go unpunished. Putting
an end to impunity for the perpetrators of those crimes
contributes to the prevention of such crimes.

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

Justice and peace, indeed, constitute intertwined
goals, and it is both logical and necessary that the ICC
and the Security Council collaborate for that purpose.
We have already seen the deterrent effect of the Court’s
action and are convinced of its positive contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We call upon all States to cooperate with the Court.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank Guatemala for
scheduling this very important open debate on peace
and justice, with a special focus on the role of the
International Criminal Court, under the agenda item
entitled “The promotion and strengthening of the rule
of law in the maintenance of international peace and
security”.
Allow me to express our appreciation to Foreign
Minister Harold Caballeros of Guatemala for his
participation in today’s debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the representative of
the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC for their
comprehensive briefings this morning.
Peace and justice are complementary to each other.
Peace processes that take justice into account are
more sustainable and lasting than those that do not. In
negotiating peace processes, taking into account the
views of victims is critical. Victims want peace at the
beginning, and once peace is obtained they demand
justice. If justice is not achieved, that leaves room for a
relapse into conflict.
The establishment of the International Criminal
Court, a permanent court to help fight impunity for
the crimes of highest concern to the international
community, is considered a milestone. The ICC was
given jurisdiction over genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and aggression. As of September
2012, 121 States had ratified the Rome Statute, which
came into force on 1 July 2002, and were subject to its
jurisdiction. Bangladesh is a State party to the ICC. We
have signed and ratified the Statute.
The Rome Statute granted the Security Council
unique powers to refer situations and place them under
the jurisdiction of the Court, even in a case concerning
a non-State party. Article 13 (b) of the Statute allows
the ICC to exercise its jurisdiction regarding the
aforementioned crimes when the Council, acting under

12-55302

Chapter VII of the Charter, refers a situation to the
Prosecutor of the Court. Article 16 allows the Council,
in exceptional circumstances, to adopt a resolution
under Chapter VII to defer an ICC investigation or
prosecution for a renewable period of 12 months.
The Security Council is a political organ of the
United Nations. On 26 February 2011, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1970 (2011), referring
the situation in Libya to the ICC, imposing an arms
embargo and targeted sanctions and establishing a
sanctions committee. Resolution 1970 (2011) also
invited the Prosecutor to address the Council within
two months, and every six months thereafter, on actions
taken pursuant to the resolution.
However, it also appears that the Council could
not actively cooperate with the ICC on that referral. In
fact, the few instances of Council cooperation with the
ICC are related to situations that were initiated by the
situation countries themselves, or by the Prosecutor,
under articles 13 (a), 14, 13 (c) and 15 of the Statute,
respectively, and therefore independently of the
Council.
Another worrying factor is that the pertinent
resolutions contain provisions that are contrary to the
integrity of the Rome Statute. In its referral on Libya,
the Council excluded nationals of non-State parties to
the ICC from the jurisdiction of the Court, or a domestic
court in another country, even for crimes committed
within Libya. The resolutions also recused the United
Nations from any financial obligation regarding the
referrals, notwithstanding article 115 (b) of the Rome
Statute, which provides for United Nations funding for
Council referrals, subject to approval by the General
Assembly.
It is our understanding that those elements are
undermining the rule of law by infringing on the work
of the ICC and are undermining the perception of the
Court as an independent legal body free of political
considerations. Therefore we hope that the ICC will
be better equipped to function as a tool of preventive
diplomacy so that it is able to assist the Security Council
in carrying out its mandate to uphold the rule of law
objectively and fairly, maintain peace and security and
combat impunity, while ensuring accountability.
We call on all concerned to translate their
commitment into action, in particular, through
executing arrest warrants and helping to reinforce the
fair rule of law across the globe, but also by building

9

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

new institutions, social and economic, to achieve, in the
long term, justice in a broader sense.
Victims want justice, no matter how much time
has elapsed since the perpetration of mass atrocities.
Here I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the case of Bangladesh. In order to bring the
perpetrators to justice, we set up, in March 2010, an
international crimes tribunal to try and punish any
individual or group of individuals, or any member of
any armed, defence or auxiliary forces, who committed
crimes against humanity, or genocide, war crimes,
premeditated murder, rape, arson, ethnic cleansing or
looting of people’s property and assets, during the 1971
war of liberation.
Our ongoing effort is a natural expression of our
intention to end the culture of impunity for crimes
against humanity. That emanates from our firm belief
that peace and justice are mutually reinforcing and
that full enjoyment of peace is not possible without a
mechanism to ensure sound justice.
We have been taking every step to ensure that our
national process conforms to international standards.
That is why leading judicial personnel of the tribunal
that we set up in Bangladesh have visited The Hague.
They followed the work of the Court, including
evidence collection, the process of assessing veracity,
investigations of gender crimes and other war crimes.
We hope that our tribunal will be exemplary in ending
impunity while also cementing national reconciliation.
The trials are important not only for us, but their
outcome is equally important to the international
community and to our future generations. The process
will send a strong message to others who would commit
such crimes anywhere in the world. It will show that it
is possible for a national system of a developing country
to bring to justice those who are responsible for war
crimes, even long after the event.
Let me conclude by saying that Bangladesh is a
responsible, peace-loving nation and the Government
is a strong proponent of democracy, rule of law, human
rights and secularism. Bangladesh also expresses its
unequivocal commitment to the International Criminal
Court and the evolving system of international criminal
justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.

10

Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): At the outset let me
thank you, Sir, for organizing this timely and useful
open debate on peace and justice, with a special focus
on the role of the International Criminal Court.
Slovenia is a strong supporter of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We were actively involved in
the promotion of the Court and its work from Rome to
Kampala and will remain committed in the future.
Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the European
Union. In addition, we would like to make three more
remarks.
First, let me encourage the Security Council to
hold open debates with a special focus on the ICC on
a regular basis. We welcome the first judgment of the
ICC and the first decision on reparations for victims. It
is a clear sign that we have in place an effective judicial
institution that can deliver impartial justice to victims
and show perpetrators of the most serious crimes of
international concern that there will be no impunity
for their atrocities. Having achieved this, the ICC is an
important element in maintaining international peace
and justice. We encourage all States to become parties
to the ICC in order to achieve its universality.
Secondly, I would like to place special emphasis
on the Court’s preventive function. It is now well
established that grave crimes represent a threat
to international peace and security. An effective
international criminal justice system plays a key role
in prevention. It is the prevention of grave atrocities
that is our final goal. Individuals should be aware that
there is no impunity for committing such crimes, and
everything possible should be done in order to prevent
them in the future.
Slovenia also sees this aspect of shared
responsibility in the light of a concept known as the
responsibility to protect. Our leaders have committed
all States to the responsibility to protect, and we must
now enhance our dialogue to find a viable strategy for
implementing it in practice.
Let me draw the Council’s attention to the initiative
that my Prime Minister presented during the general
debate, entitled “A world free from genocide” (see
A/67/PV.12). Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations system should
form an intergovernmental forum of like-minded
countries that would provide the concept of the

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

responsibility to protect with new tools to enforce
prevention and develop a mechanism to enable a
more rapid and effective response to acts of genocide
and mass atrocities. Slovenia stands ready to start a
dialogue on this.
Lastly, let me express our deep concern about
the escalation of the situation in Syria. In our view,
the Security Council should refer the situation to the
ICC, at least for the sake of the innocent victims. The
atrocities committed should be investigated and their
perpetrators brought to justice. At the same time, we
also encourage the Security Council to follow up on the
cases already referred and to address the questions of
States’ cooperation with the Court and their compliance
with Council resolutions with all due attention.
It is our obligation to make the world of the twentyfirst century free from genocide and mass atrocities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Guatemalan presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on
peace and justice, with a focus on the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We welcome the presence of
President Song and Mr. Mochochoko of the Office of
the Prosecutor.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court is one of the most notable achievements of
multilateral diplomacy, and its contribution to the
fight against impunity for crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes is obvious. Little more than
a decade after the adoption of the Rome Statute, the
Court is today a fully functioning permanent tribunal
of international justice.
We now must recognize that, with time and
experience, the international community has left the
peace-versus-justice paradigm to embrace “peace and
justice”. According to this paradigm, justice and peace
are conceived not as competing but as complementary
objectives.
The Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute
recognized the need to address this issue, and did so
for the first time in the international criminal justice
stocktaking exercise at the 2010 Review Conference
of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala. The exercise,
for which Argentina was a joint focal point along with
Switzerland and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,

12-55302

arrived at important conclusions that we should take
into account. The need for peace and justice to be
complementary objectives is confirmed by reality.
I would also like to refer to other important
aspects of the relationship between the International
Criminal Court and the Security Council. The Rome
Statute provides for a role for the Security Council and
a cooperative relationship with the United Nations.
This cooperative relationship is also referred to in the
Relationship Agreement between the Organization
and the Court. Over the years since the entry into
force of the Statute, that relationship has become more
fluid, and the Council itself has included the need for
accountability for Rome Statute crimes and for the
Court itself into its consideration of concrete situations.
There are a few elements of that relationship that
my delegation would like to point out. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Court is crucial,
and must always respect the judicial independence of
the Court. The question of non-essential contacts with
persons for whom the Court has issued arrest warrants
must be part of the cooperation provided for in the
Relationship Agreement.
But the element that is the most crucial for the
ability of the International Criminal Court to fulfil
its mandate is cooperation by States. A permanent
international justice system requires the cooperation
of all United Nations Member States. All Member
States must cooperate with the Court, whether or not
they are parties to the Rome Statute. That obligation
is particularly relevant with regard to arrest warrants.
The obligation to cooperate with the Court leads
to the question of the follow-up that we believe the
Council must engage in with respect to referrals.
The fact is that when the Council makes a referral, it
receives reports of the Prosecutor of the Court with
a certain frequency, as well as information from the
Court in cases of non-cooperation. We are of the view
that the Council cannot merely take note of such reports
without ensuring follow-up of — for example — the
status of cooperation with the Court or situations on
the ground, such as in the case of the detention of Court
staff some months ago. Argentina believes that the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism for situations
referred to the Court would contribute greatly to
responsible collaboration between the Council and the
ICC.

11

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

I should like to highlight two issues of concern
for my delegation. One is the clause that, in the two
referrals already made, seeks to exempt nationals
of non-State parties to the Rome Statute from the
jurisdiction of the Court for acts or omissions arising
from operations established or authorized by the
Security Council or related to them. This could lead
to the Court being constrained in its ability to enforce
justice in an independent and impartial manner through
the action of a political organ that seeks to create an
exception not provided for in the Rome Statute. It could
also affect the credibility of the Security Council and
of the ICC itself.

of the most notable contributions to the fight against
impunity. I would like to remind the Council of the
words from the Kampala Declaration,

The other concern, which also applies to both
referrals, is an issue that could have a serious impact
on the Court. In establishing that the expenses derived
from both referrals will be defrayed not by the United
Nations but by the States parties to the Rome Statute,
the Council is ignoring the provisions of article 115 (b)
of the Rome Statute and article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement. With the increasing number of cases, the
pressure on the resources available to the Court has
intensified. In practical terms, failure to address the
financing of referrals could threaten the long-term
viability of the Court.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Honduras.

Argentina wishes to emphasize in this respect that
the fight against impunity is an objective of States
parties to the Rome Statute and of the United Nations.
This debate is evidence of that. But that objective must
also be accompanied by the commitment to providing
the Court the necessary means to fulfil its mandate. It
is not a commitment alien to the Council or the United
Nations; it has been addressed with regard to the ad hoc
tribunals established by the Security Council. We must
now address it with regard to the ICC.
The entry into force and activation of the jurisdiction
of the Court over the crime of aggression will add a new
element to the relationship between the Council and the
ICC. In the evolution of the international community
towards a permanent international criminal justice
system based on the Court, the crime of aggression is
nothing but the corollary of the prohibition of the threat
or the use of force, as provided for in Article 2.4. of
the Charter of the United Nations. Argentina is actively
engaged in the internal process for the ratification of all
the Kampala amendments.
In conclusion, this year marks the tenth anniversary
since the Rome Statute entered into force. Argentina
reiterates once again that the Court represents one
12

“recognizing the noble mission and the role of
the International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the rule
of law, promote and encourage respect for human
rights and achieve sustainable peace, in accordance
with international law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations”.
Argentina reiterates its firm commitment to the
International Criminal Court.

Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We are
honoured as Central Americans to participate in this open
debate under Guatemala’s presidency of the Security
Council on the promotion and strengthening of the rule
of law in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We value the full content of the report of the
Secretary-General (A/66/749), which provides updates
and makes important recommendations on the matter,
and in particular proposes mechanisms to strengthen
the rule of law at the national and international levels
through actions aimed at building a fair, secure and
peaceful world.
We recall the commitment we made as States
through the Declaration of the High-Level Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (resolution 67/1), by adopting
a series of measures that will allow us to complement
our agendas with a view to ensuring the prevalence of
the law, justice, full respect for human rights, and the
fight against impunity.
To the extent that all nations within the system, big
or small, can secure our ability to guarantee our citizens
their individual and collective rights and freedoms in
an inclusive context of tolerance and participation, in
conformity with international law, we will undoubtedly
help sustain the delicate responsibility of the Security
Council in seeking to provide global peace and security.
Since their inception, in addition to the regional
instances for conflict resolution, Honduras has
accepted the jurisdictions of the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Court. We urge
other nations that have yet not done so to adhere to
these bodies without reservation. Those responsible for

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

the most serious violations must be held accountable so
as to achieve peace and reconciliation in societies that
have suffered internal conflicts.
We appreciate the difficult task of the Security
Council in promoting and implementing the rule of
law in domestic jurisdictions in the context of the
powers and limitations of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the Organization itself. It is from that
legal framework that the Council derives its authority
to require Member States to abide by its decisions,
especially in situations in which international peace
and security are threatened. Judicial bodies have played
a fundamental role in strengthening the rule of law and
in the promotion of stability and reconciliation within
societies.
Thus, the relationship between the Council and
other United Nations derived bodies should always be
constructive and transparent. There must be an ongoing
dialogue that allows resort to preventive diplomacy
and to specific and effective mechanisms that serve
as deterrents where hostility and violence prevail.
Similarly, those judicial bodies should work with
Member States in providing exhaustive information
regarding the reports and ongoing investigations in
order to ensure accuracy and objectivity. In specific
cases, domestic capacities should be strengthened,
but judicial power should be applied with respect for
domestic laws and national sovereignty. In that way, we
value the role played by the ICC in the fight against
impunity and in strengthening the rule of law within
individual nations.
Our region has also been severely shaken by vicious
and painful armed conflicts. Thanks to the mercy of
God, we have survived the tempests, and from the
tears of loss and bloodshed we began to build towards
redemption. Amidst tribulation, the light of national
and international law has illuminated our democratic
path. While unrest divided us in the past, today we
are making efforts to work together, united in peace
and harmony, as sister nations should. We bring the
power of the whole to face our shared problems and to
overcome the challenges of our common destinies.
We must not forget, however, that institutional
stability and progress in the rule of law depend on
national capabilities to generate collective well-being
and on the capacity of Governments to respond to
the people’s needs, especially the huge needs of the
most vulnerable sectors. They must lighten the heavy

12-55302

burden of accumulated social problems, simultaneously
increase freedoms while narrowing the distance
between inequalities, and ensure that the marginalized
masses who are caught in the tangled web of poverty
have access to the benefits of participation and inclusion
in the face of the overwhelming tide of globalization.
In our efforts to build the genuine rule of law,
democracy must construct creative bridges to
development so that we can make our way towards
progress so that those who are alienated can turn their
disappointment into hope.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of Lithuania.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): I wish to
congratulate Guatemala on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month, and to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this critical debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Peace and justice, as linked in the Rome Statute,
need to be regarded as mutually reinforcing imperatives.
That link, however, is often tested by practical and
moral dilemmas. Being a State party to the Rome Statue
and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Lithuania
strongly supports the ICC in its struggle as an important
arbiter of international justice. Its existence reflects
our common determination to end impunity and to
uphold accountability for the most serious international
crimes. It also bolsters international humanitarian law
and human rights law by playing an important part
in their interpretation and enforcement. It could and
should be an effective tool of preventive diplomacy that
the Security Council may refer to it in carrying out its
mandate.
The complementary nature of the ICC reminds us
that the best investment in the long run is the building
of national capacities to investigate and prosecute
international crimes.
The Security Council has its own unique role in the
system of international justice, derived from both the
Rome Statute and the Charter of the United Nations.
When it considers that there is a threat to peace and
security, the Security Council may refer a situation to
the ICC, thus extending the reach of its jurisdiction to
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute.

13

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

The powers vested in the Security Council present
both an opportunity and a great responsibility. If
exercised improperly, they could undermine the
credibility not only of the ICC and the whole system
of international justice, but primarily the Security
Council itself. We believe that the Security Council
would benefit from consistent and coherent practices
that meet the expectations of certainty, predictability
and impartiality in its response to alleged international
crimes.
The Security Council has thus far referred two
situations to the ICC. Many strongly believe that the
Security Council should also refer other ongoing
situations. Developing a coherent approach to referrals
would facilitate the process of determining when a
referral should be made. Lithuania believes that once
a referral has been made, the Security Council should
exercise responsibility for making that referral effective.
This relates in particular to adequate arrangements for
financing. The Security Council might also consider
extending an obligation of cooperation to all Member
States, and providing specific steps that concerned
States should take.
The ICC relies primarily on the assistance from
concerned States and requires international support
when domestic support is insufficient or lacking.
The Security Council should extend a greater degree
of cooperation with the ICC also through diplomatic
and political support, the coordination of its sanctions
regime and the strengthening of peacekeeping
mandates.
The ICC and the Security Council in their
interaction have gained a great deal of experience. One
example of a common area of concern with potential
for further cooperation and action is resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women, peace
and security. A more formal framework for interaction,
regular exchanges of views or open briefings between
the two bodies may constitute a welcome and useful
practice.
This year marks a milestone for the International
Criminal Court. It has delivered its first verdict. With
greater support by all, the ICC will make a difference
in our quest for sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank the delegation of Guatemala, in
14

its capacity as President of the Security Council, and
the Security Council itself as the body charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security, for the
holding of this timely debate.
Uruguay believes that peace and justice are two
fully complementary and mutually reinforcing values.
It is short-sighted to believe that one of these values
may be overlooked in order to achieve the other, and
although such a view has occasionally prevailed in
the actions of individuals, countries or international
organizations, we cannot conceive that, in the twentyfirst century, there can be talk of peace without justice,
and of both without referring necessarily to the full
attainment of the rule of law at both the national and
international levels.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court and thus the beginning of the end of international
impunity. In this regard, we welcome the issuance this
year of the first judgment with conviction of the Court
in the case of The Prosecutor — whom we identify with
the international community — vs. Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo, and the completion of the second trial, which is
currently in the stage of sentencing.
We call for the prompt ratification of the
amendments to the Statute of the Court made at the
Kampala Review Conference. We are pleased to report
that my Adminstration has sent a message to the
national Parliament requesting its approval. We hope
that this approval will be given as soon as possible.
We welcome the fact that, from 1998 to date, the
membership of the Court has grown to 121 States
parties. This number corresponds roughly to two-thirds
of the total membership of the United Nations. We hope
that this trend will continue so that the membership of
both organizations may be identical in the near future.
We understand that, in accordance with the
provisions of article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute, the
United Nations should help finance the expenses
incurred as a result of referrals by the Security
Council in order to share the financial burden of
international criminal justice. On this basis, we expect
that, in accordance with article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement between the two bodies, arrangements shall
be made to implement such cooperation.
With respect to the cases referred by the Security
Council, we are pleased that this practice in now in
effect, and advocate its continued use. We continue to
12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

view with concern the impact of armed conflict and the
increase in the number of those responsible for serious
violations of human rights. We believe that consistent
action should be taken by the Security Council in
situations or cases of a similar nature.
For this reason, we agree with a group of countries
that deem it appropriate to request the Security Council
to refer the case of human rights violations in Syria
to the Court for the prosecution of its perpetrators,
whoever they may be or represent. In this context, we
recall the proposal of the group of five small nations,
in its draft resolution before the General Assembly,
recommending that the permanent members of the
Security Council consider refraining from using
the veto to block Council action aimed at preventing
or ending genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
For the reasons stated, and to conclude, we
believe that cooperation should be deepened between
the Security Council and the Court, involving the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism for cases
referred by the Council to the Court.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation sincerely
commends your great country, Mr. President, for the
initiative you have taken to put this key agenda item
on the table for debate during your presidency of the
Council. The fact that the Council agenda is featuring a
debate on this subject shortly after your country became
the 121st State party to the Rome Statute should itself
speak volumes about your country’s commitment to
supporting the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
to contributing positively to strengthening the rule of
law at both the national and international levels.
There is no doubt that the drafters of the Rome
Statute must have envisioned a promise of a universal
justice system guaranteed by a permanent court of last
resort. My delegation is pleased to see the Court being
recognized, and we pledge our full support to that
institution because we believe that it is irreplaceable.
Prior to the drafting of the Rome Statute in 1998, the
Security Council had formally endorsed the marriage
between peace and justice through the establishment
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

12-55302

My delegation believes that in order to guarantee the
separation of powers and the integrity of the Court and
the Council, a clear distinction must be made to avoid
politicizing their relationship. We see that relationship
as both complementary and mutually reinforcing.
Botswana further believes that both the International
Criminal Court and the ad hoc tribunals have served
and continue to serve as useful tools available to the
Security Council in its quest to promote the rule of law
and to entrench universal respect for human rights.
There can be no doubt that the ad hoc tribunals and
the Special Court for Sierra Leone have also acted in
their own right as a deterrent against mass atrocities
and abuse of human rights the world over. As a State
party to the Rome Statute, Botswana is encouraged
to see the growth and evolution of the institution and,
indeed, its relationship with the Security Council,
which we want to see strengthened over time. We attach
great importance to strengthening the implementation
capacity of the Court so that it may successfully
implement its mandate.
Over the past few years, Botswana has been
outspoken in its defence of the International Criminal
Court, because we believe that it has a very vital
function to fulfil in the international justice system.
We believe that, in order to achieve a robust and
sustained international criminal justice system, the
Rome Statute must be empowered by those who wish
to see it achieve its intended objectives. It must work in
complementarity with the ad hoc tribunals to promote
peace and justice for victims of serious crimes and
crimes against humanity.
The International Criminal Court therefore serves
as the centrepiece of a worldwide criminal justice system
with jurisdiction to prosecute those responsible for the
most serious crimes of international concern. The fact
that the central feature of the Statute is the principle
of complementarity demonstrates the readiness of
the International Criminal Court to defer to national
justice systems. It must at all times be appreciated that
the International Criminal Court intervenes only in
situations where the national criminal justice system is
either unable or for some reason unwilling to take action.
Similarly, even in the most formal link between the
International Criminal Court and the Security Council,
as provided for in article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute,
authority to defer cases was assigned to the Council in
recognition of its primary role in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

15

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

We further believe that the Court therefore
provides a system of checks and balances in enabling
the Security Council to pursue its mandate for the
promotion of international peace and security. Whether
or not the Council has in the past missed opportunities
to reflect the provisions of article 16, that should not
be held against it. It is therefore important to maintain
a mutually reinforcing relationship between the
International Criminal Court and the Security Council,
which has a political mandate whereas the International
Criminal Court exercises a judicial mandate.
The critical question we should be asking is how the
relationship can be managed to prevent the possibility
of undue pressure being exerted by one institution over
the other. There are those who argue that the Security
Council should follow up its referral actions and pursue
States’ cooperation with the Court. My delegation is
of the view that, while that suggestion could result in
an improved relationship between the Court and the
Council, it is not apparent that it would translate into
the implementation of arrest warrants or successful
prosecution. It is the view of my delegation that the
limited application of article 13 (b) does not extend
beyond triggering the work of the Prosecutor and
should remain as such. Allowing an extended political
role to be played by the Council could diminish the
judicial authority of the Court, and thereby undermine
its integrity and independence.
Looking ahead, more ways could be explored
on the engagement of the Security Council, in order
to reinforce the Statute in the same manner that the
Council benefits from the pursuit of justice and peace
that is fully embraced by the Court.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I remind speakers
to limit their statements to four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Costa
Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate
Guatemala on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and to commend you for organizing
such an important debate. We participate in it convinced
that justice, peace and security are global public goods
that deserve enhancement and protection. Their nature
is complimentary, not contradictory, and their final
purpose is to protect the integrity and dignity of people
and to provide reparations to victims.

16

Former Secretary-General Kofi Anan says it well
in his recent memoir Interventions: A Life in War and
Peace:
“The choice between justice and peace is no longer
an option. We must be ambitious enough to pursue
both, and wise enough to recognize, respect and
protect the independence of justice”.
In order to fully exercise its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security, the Security
Council has the duty to promote the full exercise of
international justice and the rule of law. That obligation
is particularly important in relation to the International
Criminal Court. Although the Court is an independent,
treaty-based tribunal, the Statute of Rome gives the
Council two prerogatives in its workings — to refer or
defer cases. From that arise the right of the Council to
influence the Court’s actions and the possibility for the
Court to expand its jurisdictional scope.
The nature of the Council is political; that of the
Court is judicial. Therefore, their relation will always
be complex. But for the same reason, the cooperation
of the Council with the Court should be responsible and
guided by a set of impartial and general principles that
scrupulously respect the Court’s independence. The
Council should abide by the principle that international
criminal justice is not a licence for political negotiation
or a means to appease despots, but a tool to fulfil an
essential duty to humanity and to foster a more peaceful
and safer international order, based on general rules.
From that perspective, Costa Rica wishes to suggest
some guidelines to the Security Council regarding
its referrals to the Court. First, the Council should
establish a protocol to refer to the Court any case in
which there are strong indications of the perpetration of
crimes defined by the Rome Statute, provided there is
no action in the respective national jurisdiction. That is
precisely what is happening in Syria, but the Council’s
reaction has been paralysis. It is time for this situation
to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
Secondly, the Council should make a commitment
to providing follow-up and support, including financial
support, to its referrals to the Court. In the two situations
referred to the Court so far, Darfur and Libya, follow-up
and further cooperation have been almost non-existent.
Thirdly, it should establish, in its referrals, the
obligation of compliance by all States, including arrest
warrants.

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

Fourthly, it should establish subsidiary bodies to
systematically ensure cooperation and follow-up.
Fifthly, it should harmonize and coordinate its
sanctions regimes, so that they support the orders and
decisions of the Court.
Sixthly, and finally, it should strengthen the
mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions,
so as to ensure their cooperation with the investigations
and actions of the Court.
In short, the Council should apply clear political
will in the interest of justice, establishing standards for
action, acting in accordance with them and rejecting
impunity. Thus the triad of peace, security and justice
will be promoted seamlessly and with consistency, for
the benefit of the rule of law.
The members of the Council that are signatories to
the Rome Statute should take the lead in this respect.
We congratulate Guatemala on its recent ratification of
the instrument and for its commitment to advancing it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lesotho.
Mr. Motanyane (Lesotho): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of October and on having
convened this very important debate. I thank you also,
Sir, for the concept note (S/2012/731, annex) that you
circulated in preparation for this meeting.
Allow me to also thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
the Director of the ICC’s Jurisdiction, Complementarity
and Cooperation Division for their briefings earlier
today.
The United Nations was created as a platform
from which all countries, big or small, rich or poor,
can collectively contribute to efforts to achieve the
objectives of the United Nations Charter. Justice, peace
and stability remain the main challenges of our time
and, indeed, a sine qua non for addressing all other
global problems. It is in that context that we welcome
the opportunity to participate in this open debate on
peace and justice, with a special focus on the role of
the International Criminal Court. This is an occasion
for us to reflect on how the International Criminal
Court and the Security Council can better solidify their
relationship and strengthen their cooperation in the
pursuance of our common objective of the maintenance
of international peace and security.
12-55302

History has demonstrated that political solutions
on their own do not bring about lasting peace in
societies ravaged by conflict. But justice has proved to
be a necessary ingredient for the sustenance of peace. It
helps societies heal from the scars caused by conflict.
With the establishment of the ICC, the international
community confirmed its commitment to ending
impunity and ensuring individual accountability for
crimes committed under international law. We view the
ICC as an indispensable pillar of the United Nations in
advancing the rule of law and maintaining international
peace and security.
For a decade now, the ICC has been an effective
partner with the Security Council in the pursuit of a
peaceful and just world order. Indeed, this has brought
about heightened expectations on the part of the world’s
population that the era of impunity is no more and that
the perpetrators of the most heinous crimes will be
punished. The faith that the international community has
in the ICC can be sustained only if the Court maintains
its independence and impartiality in delivering justice.
The ICC must not only be independent and impartial,
but it must be seen to be so.
The ICC cannot deliver without the support of all
of us, including the Security Council. We must not
politicize the work of the Court if its legitimacy and
integrity are to be protected. In exercising its powers
of referral under the Rome Statute, the Council must
not be persuaded by any political motives. Instead, it
must do so objectively, on the basis of concrete facts
that justify such a move.
Moreover, the Council must adopt a consistent
approach to referrals. There should be clear parameters
within which the Council works in crafting resolutions
referring cases to the Court. Such resolutions must be
clear and avoid double standards. Similar situations
must be treated in the same way. When acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter, the Council acts on behalf
of all States Members of the United Nations. As such,
the aspirations of the general membership of the United
Nations should override the individual national interests
of Council members and must therefore be embodied
clearly in the resolutions it adopts.
In our view, the referral of cases by the Council
is not an end in itself. It is critical that the support
of the Council, without infringing on the Court’s
independence, be maintained from the commencement
of the case until the successful conclusion thereof. The
need for the Council to follow up on its referrals cannot
17

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

be overemphasized. Equally important is the need to
ensure that mandates are matched with resources. It
is difficult to fathom how the ICC could discharge its
obligations under article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute if it
is not provided with adequate funding.

debate of the Security Council on peace and justice in
relation to the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). It is encouraging that this debate is taking place
following the High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels.

The Rome Statute was signed by 120 States when
it was opened for signature in 1998. It was only after
almost a decade and a half that one more State Member
of the United Nations ratified the Treaty and thereby
brought the number of States parties to 121. We welcome
Guatemala as a new State party, but we must redouble
our efforts to promote more ratifications of the Statute.
Our commitment to the maintenance of international
peace and security must be manifested in our actions
in support of the international judicial architecture. We
could not agree more with the Secretary-General when
he said:

We congratulate you, Sir, and the Government
and the people of Guatemala on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council and for having convened
this open debate on a subject that my country deems
important.

“There can be no sustainable peace without justice.
Peace and justice, accountability and reconciliation
are not mutually exclusive. To the contrary, they go
hand in hand”.
Allow me to conclude by emphasizing that the
pursuit of a sustainable, peaceful world is an ideal that
our forebears cherished. The supremacy of the rule
of law over all individuals, ensuring accessibility to
justice and the independence of the judiciary, should
be our common goal. In the light of the ever-changing
global threats and challenges to the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should continuously develop and expand a rule-of-law
approach in order to fulfil its quest to save humanity
from the scourge of war.
The value of international judicial institutions
such as the ICC must be recognized. With the full
support of the Security Council and the international
community, the ICC can fulfil its mandate of tackling
impunity, providing justice to the victims of the most
atrocious crimes, and contributing to the reconciliation
of societies ravaged by violence.
As a State party to the ICC, Lesotho stands ready
to support and cooperate with the Court in the quest to
achieve justice and peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
The United Republic of Tanzania welcomes this open

18

The United Republic of Tanzania is a State party to
the Rome Statute. We applaud its values and support its
universality. We believe that its universality would be a
great milestone in eliminating impunity and in denying
safe haven to the perpetrators of the most heinous
crimes. At this stage, nothing would be more gratifying
than to see the members of the Council that have not yet
done so accede to the Rome Statute.
The pursuit of peace and justice is the main concern
of both the Security Council and the ICC. It is often
said that there cannot be peace without justice. Indeed,
peace and justice are two sides of the same coin because
one cannot flourish without the other. However, in some
instances, the international community and the Council
have had to grapple with the challenge of balancing
between the two, especially when one seemed to take
precedence over the other.
Not surprisingly, that balancing act has been an area
of great tension. For some, it would be inconceivable
for the Court to pursue justice at the expense of a peace
process, even if it meant that the perpetrators of heinous
crimes would get temporary relief from prosecution.
The facilitation of peace should by no means be
equated to an acceptance of impunity. However, the
Court should be one of last resort, as has often been
said today. It should complement and should not disrupt
or subvert the efforts of the international community,
through the Security Council, or even of regions to seek
peace and security.
Similarly, the Security Council should support
the work of the Court in securing justice for victims
of atrocities by holding accountable the perpetrators
of such crimes. Cooperation between the Council and
the Court, as with States, is pivotal. The Council would
also assist the work of the Court by calling on Member
States to fully cooperate with the Court and by taking
appropriate actions to ensure the implementation of
arrest warrants issued by the Court. In addition, for

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

the Court to fulfil its mandate, it is imperative that
it be provided with the necessary financial support,
especially for referrals by the Council, which have
proven burdensome to States parties.
My delegation cannot fail to identify some
commonalities between the Security Council and the
ICC. The most obvious is that both bodies have a global
mandate but are preoccupied with activities in Africa.
The Court’s activities in Africa have faced significant
difficulties, even when the issues that the Court seeks
to address are matters of legitimate concern regarding
justice and peace. As a result, the Court’s work has
regrettably been a cause of concern among many
Governments on the continent. Such concerns are a
source of great discomfort to many that are among the
Court’s great champions.
Impunity should be fought whenever and wherever
it occurs. However, the adage “not only must justice
be done; it must also be seen to be done” is true for
any judicial body, as it must be for the ICC. The Court
must be insulated from any form of political influence,
including from this body. Therefore, the Security
Council should assist the Court in that regard, as should
Member States.
However, fortunately, not only the Council and
the Court are preoccupied with Africa. Other United
Nations organs and bodies are also concerned about
the continent, mostly over its development. Their
work reaffirms our belief that there cannot be peace,
security and justice without sustainable and inclusive
development in Africa and elsewhere.
Article 16 of the Rome Statute gives the Security
Council the ability to defer ICC proceedings. There have
been several attempts to invoke the Security Council
to defer situations. We urge the Council to be more
transparent by providing clear explanations to States
that request deferrals. That would enhance cooperation
and help offset some of the negative discourse against
the ICC.
Justice for victims of heinous crimes is not the sole
prerogative of the ICC. The principle of complementarity
enshrined in the Rome Statute must be upheld. Member
States have the primary responsibility to prosecute such
crimes within their national jurisdictions. International
assistance and cooperation are vital in building the
capacity of national jurisdictions, especially in postconflict countries, to enable them to discharge their
obligation.

12-55302

My delegation believes that there should be
a reasonable mix between formal and traditional
justice, whereby the latter provides for forgiveness,
reconciliation and reintegration rather than trial and
punishment, as stressed by the former. Traditional
justice processes conducted in communities where
crimes were perpetrated, as was the case in the
gacaca courts in Rwanda after the genocide, are a true
illustration of justice not only being done but being
seen to be done.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Tanzania’s firm
belief in the International Criminal Court. We see the
Court as an important instrument in the search for
peace and justice. It is not a perfect instrument. It faces
significant challenges. However, the advantages of the
Court outweigh the challenges that it faces. It is still
the best model for addressing international justice. It
deserves our support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this very timely debate.
(spoke in French)
The role of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security and the mandate of the
International Criminal Court to fight impunity go hand
in hand. We must therefore do our utmost to maximize
the synergies between the two bodies. In my statement,
I will focus on the powers of the Security Council to
refer situations to the Court in order to highlight two
points.
First, the decision to refer a situation to the Court
should be reasoned and consistent, as nearly all previous
speakers have stated. In order to ensure a significant
deterrent effect and to uphold the credibility of the Court
and the United Nations in their fight against impunity,
there can be no double standards. When a State fails
to assume its primary responsibility, namely, to protect
its population, on the one hand, and to investigate
mass atrocities and prosecute their perpetrators, on the
other, the International Criminal Court must be tasked
to intervene as a measure of last resort. The Security
Council must ensure that there is justice for all victims
of the worst crimes, not only for some.
In that context, the situation in Syria, where
heinous crimes are being committed daily, is of

19

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

particular concern. We deplore the fact that, to date,
the Syrian Arab Republic has not responded to the
repeated calls of the international community for it to
establish a credible, fair and independent mechanism
to ensure accountability for the perpetrators of those
crimes. Switzerland therefore calls on the Security
Council to refer the situation in Syria to the Court
so that all allegations of grave crimes, irrespective
of who committed them, can be investigated. It falls
to the Council to find a political solution that brings
lasting peace and reconciliation for the Syrian people.
The imperative of accountability is, for us, a necessary
precondition of such a solution.
At the very least, the Security Council should send
a clear warning to all parties to the conflict, urging
them to fully respect international human rights and
humanitarian law in the ongoing conflict. It should
also declare its intention to refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court unless a credible, fair and
independent mechanism is rapidly implemented in order
to try and to punish the perpetrators of the violations.
We note that an increasing number of Member States
support our appeal. We encourage all other States to
join our initiative for a letter on Syria to be addressed
to the Security Council.
Our second point that we wish to underscore is the
need for referrals to be made in a strong and coherent
manner. In the past, the Security Council advanced
international criminal justice like no other institution,
by establishing two ad hoc tribunals that were
financed by the United Nations. It would only seem
consistent that the United Nations contribute to the
costs of referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Likewise, deferrals should not provide for exemptions
for nationals of non-State parties. Furthermore, it is
necessary that the Security Council determinedly
follows up on referral resolutions. As shown by the high
number of outstanding arrest warrants, cooperation
from States is one of the most significant challenges
faced by the Court, particularly in deferred situations.
Referrals should not be the end of the Security Council’s
commitment to end impunity; rather, they should be the
beginning.
In order to establish a stable and just world order
for all, we need to strive unremittingly for peace and
justice. Peace cannot be sustainable where injustice
persists and, conversely, justice is an illusion when war
drags on. From time to time, there may be situations
where efforts for peace seem to jeopardize efforts for

20

justice, in the short term at least. However, such a
situation should not lead us to play peace off against
justice, but to work harder on reconciling both goals
in the long term. It is true that it is a great challenge,
but we are convinced that we can and will meet it with
success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. My delegation, acting
in its national capacity, would like to make some
additional remarks. Today’s thematic debate provides
us a unique opportunity to comment on the relationship
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court a decade after the Court came into
being.
In handing down its first verdict in the Lubanga
case, the International Criminal Court has confirmed
its commitment to being at the forefront of the fight
against impunity. In that struggle, the cooperation
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court is essential. That relationship promotes
the rule of law, encourages respect for human rights
and contributes to the establishment of lasting peace.
Although mass atrocities amounting to crimes under
the Rome Statute very often are threats to peace
and security, the very existence of the International
Criminal Court has a preventive effect fully consistent
with the vocation of the Security Council. The Council,
too, has repeatedly reaffirmed its strong opposition to
impunity for the perpetrators of serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
I shall restrict myself to making three points.
First, the fact that the Security Council is increasingly
including provisions related to the International
Criminal Court in its resolutions on specific countries
is a positive development. However, the Council’s
unwillingness to respond when the Court informs it of
non-cooperation by some States in cases referred to it
harms its credibility and is, for Belgium, a cause for
concern. The cooperation of States is essential to the
proper functioning of the Court. The Security Council
should encourage all Member States to cooperate fully
with the Court in its investigations and prosecutions
with which it has been entrusted.
Generally, a regular interactive dialogue between
the Security Council and the International Criminal

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

Court about challenges that both institutions face
could usefully contribute to strengthening synergies
and the coherence of their action. In addition, Belgium
wishes to reiterate how much it regrets that the Security
Council places the financial burden of investigations
and prosecutions arising from the two referrals on the
State parties alone. It calls on the States Members of the
United Nations to take collective responsibility in order
to enable the International Criminal Court to fulfil its
mandate as is appropriate.
Secondly, in accordance with the principle of
complementarity, the Security Council may first
request the competent national authorities to investigate
and prosecute serious crimes of concern at the
international level, instead of referring them right away
to the International Criminal Court. Complementarity
will only be fully implemented by States under two
conditions. On the one hand, States would have to adopt
legislation and adequate resources at the national level
to enable effective prosecution of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes of genocide. On the
other hand, it is essential that they have the legal tools
necessary for full inter-State judicial cooperation in
the matter, given the multitude of extraneous elements
in prosecutions. It is within the framework of that last
point that Belgium, in conjunction with the Netherlands
and Slovenia, is launching a new initiative to negotiate a
new international instrument on mutual legal assistance
and extradition in those areas.
Finally, I would like to mention the initiative of
Switzerland aimed at asking the Security Council to
initiate investigations into all allegations of serious
crimes committed in Syria, regardless of their
perpetrators, and do everything possible so that those
responsible for the crimes in question are prosecuted
and punished. A referral of the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court is one possible approach
in that regard. Belgium therefore supports the Swiss
initiative and calls on other States committed to the
fight against impunity in the world to join the 35 others
that have already signed on to it.
In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like once
again to warmly thank you and your country for having
taken the initiative to hold today’s debate. I express
the hope that we will have the opportunity to continue
the discussion within the Security Council on the
relationship between the Council and the International
Criminal Court.

12-55302

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the presidency of Guatemala for holding
today’s open debate.
Mexico is an active promoter of the work of the
International Criminal Court and of the complete and
effective consolidation of the international criminal
justice system created by the Rome Statute. The
Declaration adopted during the High-level Meeting on
the Rule of Law (General Assembly resolution 67/1)
recognizes the importance of combatting impunity for
international crimes in order to preserve the rule of
law, as well as the role of the Court in that important
endeavour.
Ten years after it was established, it has been
demonstrated that one of the most important challenges
that the Court faces is the lack of cooperation from
States. A total of 13 out of 19 arrest warrants issued
by the Court to date remain outstanding, despite
the fact that, in some cases, the whereabouts of the
individuals is known worldwide. Mexico regrets the
open and manifest lack of cooperation shown by some
States, which undermines the effectiveness of the
international criminal justice system and perpetuates
the unacceptable impunity for the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community as a whole.
The Security Council has a pivotal role in supporting
the work of the Court. Allow me to express some ideas
in that regard. First, Mexico believes that the capacity
conferred by the Rome Statute on the Council to refer
to the Prosecutor of the Court situations in which it
appears that international crimes have been committed
is a useful tool that contributes to the maintenance of
international peace and security, complementary to
other forms of triggering the Court’s jurisdiction. That
capacity should be used responsibly and effectively and
be guided by objective criteria that are not selective
or politicized. It is also essential that the Council
follow up such referrals effectively, particularly when
the Court informs it of a State’s non-cooperation. In
Mexico’s view, there is no question that all States, party
or non-party to the Statute, are obliged to cooperate
with the Court in such situations, due to the mandatory
nature of the Council’s resolutions.
Secondly, the capacity that the Statute confers on
the Council to request the Court to defer an investigation
or prosecution should be used responsibly, carefully

21

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

weighing its implications for the safeguarding of
evidence, the status of detainees and the protection of
victims and witnesses, and only when the interests of
peace and justice conflict.
Thirdly, whether or not the Council has referred
a particular situation to the Court, both bodies should
cooperate in situations in which they are both involved.
A continuing exchange of information between the two,
as well as the backing of the Council in urging States,
whether parties or non-parties, to cooperate with the
Court in such situations, is essential in order to ensure
the system’s effectiveness.
We are convinced that there can be no lasting
peace without justice. The relationship between the
Security Council and the International Criminal
Court contributes to the necessary balance that must
be achieved between both goals. A day before the new
members of the Council are to be elected, we note that 7 of
the 15 current members, including 3 of the 5 permanent
members, are not yet parties to the Rome Statute.
While the Security Council, according to the Charter,
acts on behalf of all Members of the United Nations,
Mexico calls on all States, and especially those that are
current or upcoming members of the Council, to ratify
the Statute as part of their commitment to combating
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
significance and to maintaining international peace and
security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate
on promoting and strengthening the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
It gives us an opportunity to review the progress that
has been made in this area and to contemplate future
actions so as to meet the aspirations of peoples striving
to consolidate justice and the rule of law.
We are convinced that promoting the rule of law
at the international level is fundamental to building a
more prosperous, just and peaceful world. The United
Nations plays a major role in this area. We believe that
the efforts of the international community require
more than developing the normative framework of
international law. National priorities in that regard
should support and implement international judicial
mechanisms that can ensure accountability and end

22

impunity for those who commit genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, violations of international
humanitarian law or gross violations of human rights.
My own country’s endorsement of the Rome
Statute and the accession to the Statute of 121 States
attest to the respect that exists for the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and its role in ending impunity.
In order to support the Court, it is essential that
it be given adequate resources. Such support also
entails ratifying the Statute in order to enhance its
effectiveness and establish close cooperation and
constructive dialogue between the States concerned
and the Court, which would enhance mutual trust. The
multiple ways that the Security Council and the ICC
can cooperate, as laid down in the Statute, reflect the
importance that the international community attaches
to enforcing international humanitarian law. As the
body with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the involvement of
the Security Council can provide strong support for the
Court in dealing with more serious crimes.
It is also important that the Security Council
continue to develop an integrated approach to using
its power to refer the most serious international crimes
to the ICC. In that regard, it must avoid policies that
reflect a double standard in dealing with situations
that pose a clear threat to international peace and
security, particularly where there are practices that
constitute war crimes that fall under the jurisdiction
of the ICC. In that regard, a case in point was cited
in the 2009 report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) — the
Goldstone report — which was followed up by the ICC
Prosecutor’s 3 April decision regarding Palestine. We
are confident that the Security Council’s adherence to
the basic tenets of the rule of law in developing that
approach will enhance the effectiveness of its future
resolutions in such cases.
The creation of the ICC was a first and important
step. In our view, it should be reinforced by taking
additional steps and making further efforts to
prevent such crimes before they take place. We would
therefore urge States to respect their obligations
under existing international legal and human rights
instruments. In that regard, Tunisia proposes creating
an international constitutional court, similar to the
ICC, to which national and international civilian
organizations, as well as democratic political parties,
can turn to challenge constitutions or laws that

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

contravene international law or the holding of unfree
elections. The proposed court’s mandate would include
reviewing disputed constitutions and laws and, in
extreme cases, invalidating fraudulent elections, thus
rendering illegitimate vis-à-vis the United Nations
the regimes that they support. Another fo the court’s
no less important mandate would be to provide advice
to countries that are in the process of writing their
constitutions so that they are in line with international
standards. We believe that the establishment of such a
court would encourage Governments to abide by their
obligations under international instruments, which in
turn would help to meet the aspirations of peoples to
freedom, justice and democracy and to seek peaceful
change, thereby avoiding any resort to violence, with
all its evident and bloody costs.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the first time in the history of your country.
I wish you every success in your hard work.
Slovakia is very much in agreement with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union, but there are some points we would like to
reiterate in this discussion. Among those points is the
acknowledgment of the unique role that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) plays as a court of last resort in
the absence of genuine action by national authorities.
The second principle is that of complementarit, which
is one of the core principles on which the Rome Statute
is based.
This year we commemorate 10 years since the
Rome Statute came into force, which is why we
commend the initiative to organize this important
debate in the Security Council. We firmly believe that
it will positively contribute to further developing the
cooperation between the Council and the International
Criminal Court.
The Court and the Council should be on the
same page and work on the same wave length. The
maintenance of international peace and security and the
fight against impunity are of the utmost importance for
both of them and for all of us. The Court is dealing with
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. It should therefore enjoy the highest
degree of confidence from the United Nations and its

12-55302

Members, as well as the powers conferred upon it by
the Rome Statute.
We welcome the resolutions of the Security Council
referring the situations in the Sudan and Libya to the
ICC under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Slovakia also supports the initiative taken
by Switzerland with regard to the situation in Syria.
However, simply referring a situation to the Court is
not enough. Adequate follow-up and enforcing full
compliance by the parties concerned with the Council’s
resolutions, in particular with regard to cooperation
with the Court, are also necessary. We are seeing cases
where the lack of cooperation undermines not only the
Court’s activities but also the fundamental principles of
the United Nations.
We believe that this meeting is only an initial step
towards further discussions. Constructive dialogue and
effective cooperation between the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court are essential to deal
with the most serious crimes under international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union and would like to make some additional
comments in our national capacity. I sincerely thank
Guatemala for the work that it has undertaken to
advance this initiative, on which we should all cooperate
to further development it and provide timely follow-up.
Following on the High-level Meeting on the Rule
of Law at the National and International Levels, held
on 24 September, Spain believes that the holding of this
debate is very pertinent. We hope it will allow us to
delve deeper into this topic with the goal of improving
coordination between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, as well as strengthening
the concept of the rule of law in this context.
The rule of law is essential for the maintenance
of international peace and security, respect for human
rights and sustainable human development. Legal
certainty and compliance with obligations derived
from international commitments are preconditions for
stable and peaceful relations based on trust and mutual
respect. Effective multilateralism is not possible
without respect for the rule of law and international
legal certainty.

23

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

Spain is a country firmly committed to respect
for the rule of law, which is a basic principle of our
political model and our coexistence and it guides our
Government on domestic and international matters.
I believe that holding a debate such as this is of great
interest, as it allows us to strengthen relations between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court. As we all know, relations between the Court and
the Council are governed by the provisions of the Rome
Statute and the Charter of the United Nations, signed
in San Francisco. While the Security Council is the
organ responsible for maintaining international peace
and security, as set forth in paragraph 1 of Article 24
of the Charter, the International Criminal Court is the
organ responsible for prosecuting, with the support of
States, those crimes of international scope that, due to
their seriousness, endanger peace and security around
the world. The prosecution of those crimes that most
concern and affect the international community is
therefore a complimentary and constitutive element
in maintaining international peace and security. The
existence of the International Criminal Court and its
action and prestige have in many cases put an end to
the impunity that was enjoyed by known international
criminals. That is having a deterrent effect, which
is playing an enormous role in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The cases of Darfur and Libya, referred by the
Security Council to the International Criminal Court,
are good examples of the complimentary nature of the
relationship between the Council and the Court. The
4 October 2004 Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court,
signed by the President of the Court and the SecretaryGeneral on behalf of their respective institutions,
provides a framework for cooperation that still offers
a wide range of room to manoeuvre for improving and
strengthening relations between both bodies. To that
end, it is essential that the necessary political will be
put forth.
Beyond the technical and legal aspects of the debate
on the relationship between the International Criminal
Court and the Security Council, I should now like to
underscore a number of proposals that could improve
the relationship between the two institutions, and thus
contribute to bolstering the rule of law and, with it, the
maintenance of international peace and security.

24

There are different opinions or perspectives within
the Organization that must be heard with the objective
of fully understanding the attitude of some of the States
with regard to the International Criminal Court. For
that reason, there must be dialogue between all United
Nations Members, especially between and among the
members of the Security Council. That is the only way to
avoid polarization among States members of the Council
and to help them to come together on compatible and
constructive points of view. What I have just said could
also help to reduce the gaps that separate members of
the Council on important issues of international justice.
It could also lend greater consistency and coherency to
their relations with the Court.
Some members of the Council continue to be great
champions of the International Criminal Court since
its inception. I call upon those countries to continue
to promote cooperation between the Court and the
Security Council.
The holding of periodic meetings on this topic more
frequently than those that have been held so far, similar
to those that are held on other issues, would allow for an
improvement of the relations between the two bodies. It
would also allow for all parties to know the stance of all
Council members with regard to cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.
It would also be desirable for those countries that
are part of the Rome Statute to play an informative role
vis-à-vis the countries of their region that have yet to
ratify the Statute, passing along their experience in the
International Criminal Court. In short, an open dialogue
at the United Nations on the relationship between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court would contribute to a greater understanding
of international justice in general and of the Court
in particular. That would help to generate greater
confidence in the institutions of the international
system of justice, and in particular in the Court.
In conclusion, I also wish to stress that the relations
of the Court have broadened beyond the Security
Council to other bodies, as set forth in article 87 of
the Rome Statute. Improved cooperation among the
Court, the Peacebuilding Commission, the African
Union and the Organization of American States is also
of great importance in supporting the fight against
impunity with respect to serious international crimes,
strengthening the rule of law among the international
community.

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.

development. We should also not forget the need for a
rule-based approach to environmental protection.

Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join other speakers
in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate. In one sense, the rule of law at the national and
international levels provides an essential framework
to protect and consolidate the rights and freedoms
of individuals in societies, including developing
and maintaining peace, stability and good order and
dispensing justice.

Grievances based on violations of economic and
social rights, defined by law, have the capacity to spark
violent conflict that could even spill over borders. The
rule of law is therefore best understood in such a holistic
manner. The flash points of future conflicts may very
well lie in access to critical resources such as water and
energy.

The concept of right and just goes back to very
early organized societies. The concept of the rule of law
evolved over the centuries. It is ingrained in the culture
of all nations and is the topic we are discussing today.
What initially evolved within domestic society, at some
point began to influence international society as well.
Since 2003, the Security Council’s thematic debates
on the rule of law have focused on egregious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
and have helped to reinforce the global community’s
disapprobation of such violations.
I would like to recall a landmark meeting (see
A/66/PV.128) that was convened by the President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session,
on 13 September. The event marked the adoption of
resolution 66/291, entitled “Strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution”, and was followed
by the screening of the documentary Beyond Right and
Wrong.
The presentations on that day offered creative ways
to make mediation more effective. One of the speakers
emphasized that justice should not always be reduced
to retribution — an all too easy solution. Besides, that
approach is derived from a certain specific cultural
background. Other approaches to dispute resolution
and addressing wrongs should be explored as we give
greater meaning to the concept of rule of law. There are
other mechanisms used by different societies.
The rule of law at the international level helps
to maintain peace, good order and respect for the
law. It also sustains economic progress, including
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
While it has long been used in the context of individual
rights, the rule of law must also be understood in the
context of ensuring economic progress of individuals
and societies, particularly with regard to the right to

12-55302

In maintaining a balance between economic
progress, development, environmental sustainability
and the utilization of natural resources, the rule of law
can be broadened both at the national and international
levels.
The codification of international law and legal
obligations is an important aspect of the rule of law
at the international level. The Office of Legal Affairs
plays a central role in that regard. Today, there is hardly
an area of human activity that is not regulated by treaty
law. Over 550 multilateral treaties are deposited with
the Secretary-General. Domestic compliance with
treaty obligations is an area where the United Nations
can play a crucial and helpful role, particularly in
assisting States with capacity-building.
Close cooperation in the application of laws at
the national, regional and international levels is vital
in addressing the growing problems of transnational
organized crime and terrorism, which threaten
international peace and good order. Drug trafficking
has become associated with high levels of violent crime
that contribute to cross-border instability.
International organized crime is now a funding
source for terrorism that is becoming a destabilizing
factor both economically and socially. Piracy is a major
challenge to the established global order. Confronting
that challenge involves close cooperation and capacitybuilding at both national and regional levels, including
in enforcement of the law.
However, long-term solutions to transnational
organized crime, terrorism and piracy will need to
focus on the delivery of basic services by justice and
security institutions, without forgetting the complex
root causes that have generated those challenges.
The principle of sovereign equality enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, which is intrinsic
to international rule of law, must be maintained, as
international rules are made and implemented. It is a

25

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

principle that protects all States, especially the small
and the weak.
Equally important is the maintenance of the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
Member States, especially in situations that do not pose
a threat to international peace and security. Specific
circumstances may call for international involvement,
which should be based on broad consensus within the
international community and among concerned States.
Unilateral and selective applications of international
law rules must be avoided, as it undermines the very
principles that we seek to promote.
Sri Lanka has always advocated the settlement of
internal and international disputes by peaceful means.
Negotiations, mediation and other peaceful means must
be the first essential resort.
Mindful that conflict and post-conflict settings are
complex environments, we must recognize the challenges
of trying to balance national security interests and the
maintenance of rights. Countries with strong legal
foundations have the resilience to restore democratic
institutions to their inherent strengths. Countries must
be allowed to create their own local mechanisms to
consolidate peace, encourage reconciliation and, most
important, to strengthen democratic institutions. There
is therefore a need to give them the much needed space
to begin that restorative process. In such situations, the
United Nations can provide assistance to address the
gaps, while factoring in local sensitivities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. De Vega (Philippines) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me, on behalf of my country, to thank you,
Sir, and to assure you that the Philippines, a developing
country and the only Asian country with Spanish roots,
welcomes Guatemala’s presidency of the Security
Council, a primary body of our United Nations.
(spoke in English)
The Philippines expresses its appreciation and full
support for the efforts to bring attention and muchneeded focus to an issue of vital importance. The rule
of law at national and international levels is the bedrock
upon which nations build stable and flourishing
societies and foster strong relations. It emphasizes the
protection of rights and underscores compliance with
obligations. And it exacts responsible behaviour from
both individuals and States.

26

The rule of law is essential as an instrument and
object of policy as we seek to rebuild and strengthen
societies in, or emerging from, conflict; as we strive
to maintain international peace and security; as we
pursue greater progress and prosperity; and as we
toil to achieve justice. But even as we recognize the
importance of the rule of law in post-conflict, transition
and post-transition situations, we appreciate full well
that it should rightly be considered first and foremost
as an effective tool in preventing conflict and impunity.
For the Philippines, the rule of law is a cornerstone
of the President Benigno Aquino’s programme of good
governance. The strict implementation of the rule
of law demonstrates our Government’s commitment
to carrying out its responsibilities and obligations in
a democratic environment. Adherence to the rule of
law has contributed to the further strengthening of
our democratic institutions and processes, and it has
translated into significant inroads in economic growth.
It has allowed us to act responsibly as a member of the
community of nations.
Our country’s adherence to the rule of law includes
our commitment to settling differences and conflicts not
by resorting to arms, but through positive engagement
and negotiations. That was demonstrated by the historic
signing on 15 October of the Framework Agreement
between the Government of the Philippines and the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front in southern Mindanao.
The framework agreement was signed before President
Aquino and Prime Minister Razak of Malaysia, and
witnessed by the Secretary General of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu.
The Framework Agreement serves as a road map and
lays down the groundwork to achieve just, lasting and
genuine peace in Mindanao. In the words of President
Aquino:
“In full view of the Filipino people, and
witnessed even by our friends from different parts
of the world, we commit to peace: A peace that will
be sustained through democratic ideals; a peace
that heals and empowers; a peace that recognizes
the many narratives of the Filipino people, and
weaves them into a single, national aspiration for
equitable progress.”
While that is a clear victory for peace and justice in
our corner of the world, as an international community
we continue to be seized with situations that require
greater cooperation, coordination and concerted action.
That is particularly the case in combatting impunity for
12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

the crimes of the greatest concern to the international
community: genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and crimes of aggression.
Ten years after the entry into force of the Rome
Statue, the International Criminal Court (ICC) has
taken its place as a fully functional, independent
judicial institution in the continuing campaign against
impunity for grave crimes. We take note of the statement
made this morning by the President of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Sang-Hyun Song, apprising us of
the developments, inroads and challenges facing the
Court.
Last year, six States, including the Philippines,
ratified the Rome Statute, more than at any time
since 2002. We welcome the ratification this year by
Guatemala, which brings the number of States parties
to 121. We must continue to work hard to achieve the
universality of the Rome Statute.
The Philippines notes the need to consider
developing a systematic approach towards the Security
Council’s relationship with the International Criminal
Court, especially in relation to the situations that
the Council has referred under article 13 (b). That
necessitates a better understanding of how article 13
(b) and the 16 prerogatives given to the Council under
the Rome Statute are best utilized in country-specific
situations on the Council’s agenda.
In consideration of that approach, it must be
emphasized again that attention must be given to
exploring ways in which the ICC can assist the
Council as a preventive tool for upholding the rule
of law, ensuring accountability and achieveing peace
and security. In regard to future improvements in the
Council’s relationship with the ICC, the pertinent
resolutions of the Security Council must preserve the
integrity of the Rome Statute.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency of Guatemala for convening
today’s meeting. Chile attaches great importance to
the debate on peace and justice, with a special focus on
the role of the International Criminal Court, under the
agenda item “The promotion and strengthening of the
rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security”.

12-55302

We believe that without justice there is no peace.
Peace cannot exist without justice, and justice must
be exercised with the objective of ensuring peace.
Chile therefore considers that this debate is extremely
important, as we are convinced that the relationship
between the International Criminal Court and the
United Nations, through the General Assembly
and the Security Council, promotes the rule of law,
encourages respect for human rights, and contributes
towards attaining international peace and security, in
accordance with international law and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Chile considers the International Criminal Court to be
the most advanced expression of the development of
international criminal justice, and that it represents one
of the most important initiatives of recent times.
From the perspective of protecting human rights, the
creation of the Court was an important step in the fight
against impunity and a clear sign that States parties are
committed to the international community in making
progress in that direction. For that reason, our country
strongly supports the work of the International Criminal
Court, and takes this opportunity to highlight the tenth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Rome Statute.
We also welcome the Court’s first judgment this year,
which demonstrates its proper functioning.
The main connection between the Security Council
and the International Criminal Court resides in the
capacity of the former to refer situations or to suspend
investigations in accordance with articles 13 and 16 of
the Rome Statute. Nevertheless, our view is that the
Security Council should exercise its power to refer
situations to the Court or to suspend investigations
on the basis of consistent parameters, showing that
its decisions are not arbitrary. We are also convinced
of the need for the Security Council, in addition to
supporting its own decisions on the matter, must follow
up its referrals to the Court. Likewise, in respect of
its referrals, the Security Council must pay special
attention to refusals to cooperate with the Court.
The principle of complementarity is the
cornerstone of the Rome Statute, whereby it is the
primary obligation of national courts to investigate,
prosecute and punish the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes of international scope, identified in the
Rome Statute. In that regard, the Court is called upon to
intervene in cases where crimes have been committed
within national jurisdictions but the State concerned is

27

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

unable or unwilling to carry out the respective judicial
proceedings.
Finally, we believe that cooperation is critical
to the work of the Court. For that reason, within the
framework of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels that took place on 24 September,
my country, Chile, pledged to develop legislation aimed
at cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union. On behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law, we warmly thank Guatemala for organizing
today’s open debate with a special focus on the role
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which is a
most welcome continuation of the initiative concerning
the Security Council and the rule of law that Austria
started in 2004.
At the outset, I would like to reaffirm Austria’s
strong commitment to the rule of law and the fight
against impunity. As a State party to the Rome Statute,
Austria fully supports the work and independence of
the ICC. We need to provide the ICC with all necessary
support and cooperation for the effective discharge of
its mandate.
The Security Council and the ICC share a common
concern when it comes to international crimes that pose
a threat to peace and security. The Security Council has
played a leading role in promoting individual criminal
responsibility, in particular by creating the ad hoc
criminal tribunals that inspired the creation of the ICC.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Rome Statute, and we can look back at
remarkable achievements. First, the ICC is well on its
way towards universality. Almost two-thirds of United
Nations Members are now party to the Rome Statute.
Secondly, the consensus reached at the Kampala
Review Conference in June 2010 on the crime of
aggression and other amendments to the Rome Statute
was a landmark achievement in the evolution of the
Court, which demonstrated the strong commitment of
all States parties to the Rome Statute.
Thirdly, the ICC is now generally recognized as
a key instrument in combating impunity, preventing

28

future crimes and promoting an international order
based on the rule of law. The Court has now been fully
operational for several years and is dealing with an
increasing number of cases. It has delivered its first
sentence, in the Lubanga case. Its expanding docket,
which includes Heads of State and other high-ranking
accused, sends a strong signal that justice applies to
all, without any distinction based on official capacity
or rank.
Accountability and the fight against impunity for
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law are crucial responsibilities of both
the Security Council and the ICC. The referral of the
situation in Libya to the ICC through the unanimous
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1970
(2011) was a milestone in this regard. We believe
that other situations would warrant the same decisive
action by the Security Council, and call for a coherent
approach to referrals.
We cannot turn a blind eye to mass killings of
innocent civilians, such as those we are currently
witnessing in Syria. We must stop the atrocities and
ensure that the perpetrators and those ordering the
crimes are brought to justice. A referral of the situation
in Syria to the ICC would send a clear signal that every
individual responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity will be held accountable and should
reconsider his or her actions. We are pleased that, on
Monday, the Council of the European Union reaffirmed
its support for the investigations of the independent
international commission of inquiry on Syria, with
express reference to crimes against humanity and war
crimes according to the definition of the Rome Statute
of the ICC.
However, the referral of a situation by the Security
Council to the ICC is only the starting point for
justice. The ICC cannot fulfil its mandate without the
continuing political support of the Security Council and
the material support and cooperation of Member States,
in particular with regard to the arrest and surrender of
suspected perpetrators. All States must abide by their
obligations to cooperate under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Rome Statute. When
considering referrals, the Security Council should
ensure that ICC staff and officials are granted all the
immunities and protection that are necessary to fulfil
their mandate. In view of the increasing caseload of the
ICC, we call on the United Nations to bear an adequate
share of the costs incurred by Security Council referrals.

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

Finally, with regard to the question of the use of
article 16 of the Rome Statute, we are fully aware that
the Security Council has the power to ask the ICC to
defer an investigation or prosecution in full accordance
with the Rome Statute. However, we believe that this
power should be used with great caution, especially in
situations which the Council had referred to the ICC in
the first place.
Cooperation with the ICC remains the key challenge
for the future. We call on the Security Council to ensure
full cooperation with the Court in accordance with the
obligations of Member States under the Rome Statute
and relevant Security Council resolutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Troya (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great pleasure for my country to participate in this open
debate organized by the presidency of the Security
Council under the leadership of Guatemala, which we
thank for having convened this meeting.
Without justice there is no peace. Ecuador is
convinced that the International Criminal Court is the
only means by which the victims of the serious crimes
under its jurisdiction can make their heard and see
their suffering addressed. As expressed in the fourth
paragraph of the preamble of the Rome Statute, the most
serious crimes of concern to the whole international
community must not go unpunished.
To this end, the best tool in the fight against
impunity is specifically the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. In its 14 years of
existence, it has allowed for the prosecution of some
of the worst violators of human rights, as shown by
the recent sentence issued in the Lubanga case, which
brought to an end one of the bloodiest chapters in the
history of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and demonstrated the contribution of the
International Criminal Court to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The punishment of those who commit crimes
referred to the International Criminal Court
complements the Security Council’s task of maintaining
peace and security. It does so because, in rendering
justice and punishing those who commit criminal
acts, it contributes to overcoming the trauma of the
victims of armed conflict around the world and lays the
groundwork for building lasting and strong peace.

12-55302

Cooperation between the two bodies is essential,
within the framework of the greatest respect for the
work of each, if the Court is to support the maintenance
of international peace and security by judging those
who seek to undermine it, and if the Security Council
is to act within and in favour of the rule of law at the
international level.
The Court cannot do its work without the firm
political support not only of Member States, but also of
the Security Council, expressed through respect for the
Rome Statute and compliance with the commitments
that led to the establishment of the Court, including
those relating to its financing. For my delegation, it is
indispensible for the International Criminal Court to
enjoy the financing necessary to allow it to meet its
objectives as set out in the Rome Statute, especially in
the light of the increase in the caseload submitted to the
judges, in the investigations being undertaken by the
Prosecutor’s Office, and in the general workload.
The delegation of Ecuador is of the view that
the cases referred to the Court by the Security
Council continue to create a financial burden for the
States parties to the Rome Statute, while there is an
unnecessary delay in compliance with the stipulations
of article 13 of the Relationship Agreement between the
ICC and the United Nations and article 115 of the Rome
Statute, relating to the financing for expenses incurred
by the Court due to cases referred to it by the Security
Council.
The relevant arrangements must be made without
further delay to fulfil what is stipulated in those articles.
The Secretary-General and the General Assembly, each
within its respective area of competence, must take the
steps necessary to include in the United Nations regular
budget the financial contributions of this Organization
to the budget of the Court.
Ecuador believes that progressive universalization
of the Rome Statue and of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court is an irrevocable goal.
Beyond political considerations of the day, it is essential
to progress toward the creation of genuine international
criminal justice in order to take on the most heinous
crimes and to punish the guilty, without regard to their
nationality, position or office. Along those lines, we
strongly call for every necessary effort for the effective
operation of the 2017 provisions on the crime of
aggression, without delays or excuses.

29

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

Unfortunately, it must be acknowledged that on
innumerable occasions we have witnessed instances
of a double standard being applied in referrals to
the International Criminal Court. That kind of
decisions — based on political considerations and
using different measures for similar behaviour,
condemning or defending on the basis of political
interests or ideological leanings rather than on clear
norms — detracts from the credibility of the Security
Council’s work and encourages impunity, with the
regrettable consequences that that implies.
Particularly regrettable is that three of the
permanent members of the Security Council continue
to refuse to recognize the valuable contribution of
the International Criminal Court and to accede to the
Rome Statute, when their example would lead other
nations to join the Court and contribute to the effort
to fight impunity and strengthen the rule of law at the
international level.
To conclude, we call on all States parties to the
Rome Statute and on all organs of the United Nations
to cooperate with the Court, not only by complying
with the stipulations in article 3 of the Relationship
Agreement between the Court and the United Nations
and article 86 of the Rome Statute, but also by
honouring the principles that nourished the founding of
our Organization and that guide its work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate you
on Guatemala’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month and to thank you for organizing
today’s debate.
We hope that our deliberations today will achieve
the desired results by diagnosing and treating the root
causes of conflict, which in many instances leaves
behind civilian casualties and violates the rights of the
most vulnerable segments of society, especially women
and children. War is war, and wherever there is fighting
and use of arms, there will be casualties and violations
of human rights. Therefore, it is always best for the
Security Council to pay utmost attention to the root
causes of conflict and to work to address them.
As stated in Guatemala’s concept paper (S/2012/731,
annex), the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court have their own mandates, completely
independent of each other. Therefore, attempts to
30

confuse the two mandates have no logical basis. The
International Criminal Court is a judicial organ and its
constitutional framework is the Rome Statute, whereas
the Council is a political organ and its framework is
the United Nations Charter, which tasks the Council
with responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In other words, the Security Council
is contrary to the International Criminal Court.
Therefore, promoting the rule of law within the
framework of the maintenance of international peace
and security must not be used as a pretext to politicize
international justice in a way that contravenes the
mandate of the Security Council as set out in the
Charter. That point has already been made repeatedly,
including at the founding Rome Conference. I refer
specifically to the statement made by the Arab Group. I
also want to draw attention to the fact that creating new
international laws and making them binding, without
giving the third party the right to adopt a national,
sovereign decision and position, is unacceptable and
contravenes the rules of international law, especially
the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Peace is the most transcendent value of justice.
Therefore the inseparability of peace and justice must
be taken into consideration when setting priorities.
For instance, peace should first be established on
the ground and then national machinery should be
mobilized to achieve justice and combat impunity,
provided that there is a parallel and complementary
effort at reconciliation, compensation and mending the
social fabric in post-conflict States. Perhaps the truth
and reconciliation commissions of South Africa are
the best example of how to overcome the bitterness of
struggle, conflict and fighting through reconciliation
and settlement committees in in a way that allows
different communities to regain the spirit of peaceful
coexistence.
The Sudan has managed to turn over a new leaf
after the Darfur conflict. Since the signing of the Doha
Peace Agreement, now in effect, the Sudan has made
great progress in achieving justice, settlement and
reconciliation. With the same determination that led us
to sign that Agreement, we will continue on our path
towards settlement and justice. What we expect of the
Council is for it to assume its natural role, which is to
support those efforts and to adopt the necessary firm
measures against the armed groups that have refused
to join the Doha peace process and that occasionally
launch attacks and carry out acts of sabotage in order

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

to create the illusion in the international community
that the conflict persists. It is the duty of the Security
Council to maintain peace and security and to promote
the rule and primacy of law. There is therefore a need
to respect the pillars and principles of international law,
especially as regards the sovereignty of States and the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States.
Many issues pertaining to the ICC’s mandate and
application of the rules of its Statute, especially with
regard to its relationship with the Security Council,
remain the subject of international legal and political
contention, as was reiterated by many speakers during
today’s debate.
In closing, I cannot fail to commend those members
of the Council who spoke today and warned of the
Security Council’s haste in using its privileges under
Chapter VII in terms of its relationship with the ICC,
especially when security is related to issues of justice
and peace in post-conflict situations, and stressed also
the need to take into consideration the fact that peace
and justice are indissociable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mrs. Hrdá (Czech Republic) (spoke in Spanish):
The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union (EU). I
should like also to touch on a few points in our national
capacity.
(spoke in English)
The Czech Republic is strongly committed to the
idea of international criminal justice, in particular with
respect to the International Criminal Court (ICC). The
history of our country — where serious crimes under
international law and serious human rights abuses
were perpetrated during the Second World War and,
after that, during the Communist era — constitutes an
argument for the Court’s existence. Such crimes must
not happen again, and the ICC is one of the means to
achieve that goal. Consequently, we believe that its role
in the fight against impunity is irreplaceable, and we
stand ready to support it wherever possible. For that
reason, last month here in New York, the Deputy Prime
Minister of the Czech Republic joined the informal
ministerial network on matters related to the ICC that
was established by Lichtenstein.

12-55302

Until the universality of the Rome Statute is
achieved, the ICC will not be able to deal with crimes
without a link to its States parties, either the commission
of such crimes on their territory, or by their nationals.
During this period, the Security Council has, in our
view, a special responsibility to close this impunity gap
by making referrals to the ICC. We were encouraged
by resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970 (2011), although
we regret that the ICC has not yet received the Security
Council support that it needs to fulfil its mission.
Specifically, this principal United Nations organ has
the power to enforce its own resolutions and ensure
that States cooperate with the ICC. In that context, we
hope that today’s open debate will be taken as a call by
the United Nations membership to act on this matter.
Impunity is not a solution.
We commend the Security Council for having
adopted the aforementioned resolutions referring
certain situations to the ICC. In that respect, we believe
that two referrals during the Court’s 10-year existence
cannot be qualified as an overuse of this tool. During
the past decade, there have been some situations, mostly
internal armed conflicts around the world, that involved
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole, as set out in the preamble to
the Rome Statute. In our opinion, those cases could
have been referred by the Security Council to the ICC,
including some situations where these crimes continue
even today.
There is a need for consistency in the Security
Council’s practice, which would also have a preventive
effect. We would like to recommend that the costs of
future referrals be covered by the United Nations, as
is done for United Nations ad hoc tribunals. In a world
based on the rule of law, there should be no authority
without responsibility, and vice versa.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Independent State of Samoa and my own country,
Timor-Leste.
Allow me, Sir, first to thank Guatemala, as the
most recent State party to the Rome Statute, for having
organized this important open debate under your
presidency. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, International Criminal Court (ICC) President

31

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

Song, and Mr. Mochochoko of the Prosecutor’s office
for their briefings today.
The nexus between peace and justice are complex
and intertwined. As such, the role and importance of the
International Criminal Court in fighting impunity and
promoting the rule of law is ever more interconnected
with sustainable peace and the delivery of justice.
Those linkages were clearly articulated in the outcome
of the recent High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels.
For peace to be sustainable, justice and the rule of
law must be guaranteed. The ICC plays an integral part
in the architecture of the rule of law at the international
level. The establishment of the Court 10 years ago
was a major achievement in the protection of human
rights and in upholding international humanitarian and
criminal law.
Recently there have been major developments in
the work of the Court. The first verdicts were delivered,
in the cases of Thomas Lubanga and Charles Taylor.
Those verdicts send a strong message to the victims
of violence that the global community is serious about
fighting impunity and ensuring justice for the most
heinous crimes against humanity.
The mandates of the Security Council and the
Court are complementary in nature, as international
peace and security must go hand in hand with justice
and the rule of law. We note the unique relationship
between the Court and the Security Council and hope
that such initiatives as this continue, to allow for this
relationship to be further strengthened.
Greater cooperation between the two entities would
allow the Court’s work to be carried out in a more timely
and efficient manner. We note the lifting of the travel
ban on President Gbagbo, allowing him to be present
for ICC proceedings at The Hague, and the increase
in the number of references to the Court in Council
resolutions, the most recent being in resolution 2071
(2012), of 12 October, as examples of such cooperation.
The growing faith of the international community
in the ICC is evident not only in the increasing caseload,
but in the growing number of ratifications of the Rome
Statute. Currently there are 121 States parties to the
Statute as the Court moves towards universalization,
becoming the global justice institution it was envisaged
to be. In this regard, we encourage those States that
have not done so to consider ratifying the Statute.

32

Given the number of referrals, both nationally and
from the Council, we must also strengthen the ability of
the Court to implement its mandate. Security Council
referrals should include a financing mechanism to
ensure that the ICC has the resources and capacities to
fulfil its mandate in an efficient and effective manner.
The Council’s support of the Court, however, is not
limited solely to providing the adequate and necessary
funding. Referrals to the Court under article l3 of
the Rome Statute should also seek to encourage the
cooperation of States with the Court.
The aforementioned challenges create impediments
that affect the Court’s ability both to carry out its
mandate and that prevent the delivery of justice to
victims. Justice needs to be seen to be done and must
happen in a timely manner. As the growing number
of States parties to the Rome Statute shows, the fight
against impunity is universal. As such, States Members
of the United Nations and the Security Council should
support the efforts to strengthen the Court’s capacity to
deliver justice and to receive the necessary cooperation,
when needed.
The ICC is charged with fighting impunity for
the most serious crimes against humanity. Last year,
the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute were
unanimously approved, adding crimes of aggression
to the list of those crimes that cannot go unpunished.
In that regard, we note Samoa’s ratification of the
Kampala amendments on crimes of aggression during
last month’s United Nations treaty event. In ratifying
the Kampala amendments, Samoa reaffirmed its faith
in the rule of law and the vital protection that the law
provides all States, especially to weak and small States,
without having to resort to armed forces or to belonging
to a military grouping to guarantee their protection.
In conclusion, we appreciate the holding of this
open debate and we hope that it becomes an annual
event on the calendar of the Security Council. I would
like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the strong
commitment and support of both Samoa and TimorLeste for the mandate and the work of the International
Criminal Court. I congratulate you, Mr. President, once
again on holding this debate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Den Bogaard (Netherlands): The
Netherlands would like to align itself with the statement

12-55302

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

delivered by the observer of the European Union and
takes this opportunity to add a few considerations.
The Netherlands thanks Guatemala for its
involvement in the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and commends it for organizing this important Security
Council debate so soon after its ratification of the Rome
Statute. The Netherlands would welcome a regular
meeting of this nature given the interdependence of
the work of the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court. The Netherlands would encourage the
Security Council to take advantage of the opportunity
to receive periodic briefings from the Court’s President
and Prosecutor, as provided for in the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court.
The Rome Statute states that atrocities are a threat
to the peace, security and well-being of the world. While
States bear the primary responsibility for protecting
their citizens, the international community has an
important role to play in enforcing international law and
in ending impunity. The ICC is a powerful instrument
for achieving those aims. Holding the perpetrators of
atrocities to account is part of prevention. It serves
as a deterrent and, as such, can help prevent future
crimes. Ending impunity is both a beginning and an
end in the responsibility to protect process. It helps to
send the signal that atrocities are unacceptable to the
international community.
Over the past 10 years, the Security Council
has developed a constructive relationship with the
International Criminal Court. The Netherlands
compliments the Security Council on its decisiveness
in referring the situations in the Sudan and Libya to the
ICC. It is important for the Security Council to exercise
consistency when it refers situations to the ICC. The
Netherlands would also welcome a discussion on the
financing of the situations that the Security Council has
referred to the ICC.
The Netherlands calls upon the Security Council
to remain actively engaged in the matters that it refers
to the Court. For the ICC to function effectively, it
is essential that States be urged to cooperate in the
investigation and prosecution of the accused.
With regards to Syria, the Netherlands regrets
the persistent disagreement in the Security Council.
That has prevented the United Nations from taking
decisive action. The world needs a strong, united
and determined Security Council. The Netherlands

12-55302

is in favour of referring the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court. The decision to do so
lies with the Council. The Netherlands would like to
note that a referral of the situation in Syria does not
necessarily exclude the possibility of prosecution at the
national level.
The primary responsibility for an effective
functioning of the International Criminal Court lies
of course with the ICC and its States parties. The
Netherlands calls on all States parties to ratify the
Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute swiftly. The
Netherlands would like to call on all non-State parties
to sign and to ratify the Rome Statute.
The Netherlands is prepared to make an active
contribution to international justice and the work of
the ICC. To promote inter-State cooperation in the
investigation and prosecution of international crimes,
the Netherlands, Belgium and Slovenia are looking
for ways to develop a multilateral instrument that will
fill the gaps in the international legal framework with
regard to extradition and mutual assistance in criminal
matters.
The Rome Statute came into force 10 years ago this
year. The Netherlands applauds the ICC’s successes. As
the Court’s host country, in cooperation with the ICC
and together with several States parties, it is organizing
a commemorative ceremony, to be held on 13 and
14 November prior to the Assembly of States Parties
session.
In the years to come, the Netherlands will remain
firmly committed to a strong and effective International
Criminal Court and is confident that the Security
Council and the ICC will continue to work together
constructively.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having convened this important debate, which
is certainly timely. We hope that our statement and
the other interventions today will enable us to make
progress in achieving a lasting world peace based on
social justice and security for all sovereign nations on
the planet. Bolivia plays its role in that multilateral
arena in the belief that all countries must meet their
commitments equally.
33

S/PV.6849 (Resumption 1)

The International Criminal Court must move
towards the goal of a truly universal jurisdiction. We
believe that war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide must be punished in an exemplary way.
That is a vital aim for those countries among us that
have been victims of such violations. Any individual
or group violating the dignity of people must be held
accountable before humanity. In that regard, Bolivia
wishes to underscore two fundamental points in its
brief statement.
First, in order to achieve our aspiration of true
universal jurisdiction, it must be emphasized that,
unfortunately, even today, 10 years since the adoption
of the Rome Statute, the countries with the largest
military capacity have still not ratified the Statute. If
the countries with the greatest military might, which
moreover control the Security Council, cannot and
do not respect the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court, we are talking of first — and secondclass countries. That violates the principle of equality
among members of the international community.
We also believe that there will never be full
international justice if the United Nations continues
to avoid internal reform. As President Evo Morales
Ayma of Bolivia said in his statement to the General
Assembly a few weeks ago, if the United Nations wants

34

to change the world, it first has to change itself (see
A/67/PV.11). We cannot continue with the existing
archaic structures; they belong to another time and
do not necessarily correspond to the realities of today.
There is no point in 121 countries having acceded to the
Rome Statute in 10 years, if only a handful of Powers
control the Security Council. We should therefore be
resolute in proposing change. We must dismantle those
structures. It is vital that we build a new Council and
a new architecture for multilateral relations. Bolivia
commits its efforts to achieve that goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate. As President, having
convened this debate, I would like to express our
gratitude for the presence of so many countries making
so many statements. I am also grateful for the presence
of Mr. Mochochoko, representing the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, and Judge SangHyun Song, President of the Court. We believe that our
expecations for this debate have indeed been fulfilled.
We hope that this will be the first step in an ongoing
examination of what is potentially an extremely rich
relationship between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

12-55302
