A/66/PV.62

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

62

nd plenary meeting
Monday, 21 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Thomson
(Fiji), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 38
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/369)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.10)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft resolution
A/66/L.10.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): It is an honour for my
country to introduce this year’s draft resolution
(A/66/L.10) on the situation in Afghanistan.
The past year has seen important milestones for
Afghanistan. Germany, as the facilitator, would like to
take this opportunity to highlight the five key messages
of the draft resolution.
First, this year’s draft resolution is about
transition in the field of security. We note with
satisfaction that the transition is unfolding
progressively. Since the announcement of the first
tranche of the transition in July, the Afghan
Government has been taking over security
responsibility for areas covering 25 per cent of the
Afghan population. Details on the second tranche will
be announced soon — 50 per cent of the Afghan
population will then live in transition areas. As we stay

mindful of the continuing volatility of the security
environment — and the many challenges connected to
it — 10 years after the end of the Taliban rule, there is,
for the first time, a clear timeline and a clear
international strategy for the phased but complete
transition of lead security responsibility to the Afghan
National Security Forces, based on clear criteria.
The focus of the draft resolution is on improving
the operational capabilities of the Security Forces, with
an increasing emphasis on training. In the security
sector and elsewhere, one of the keys to sustainable
progress lies in the empowerment of the Afghan people
and institutions. This is where our priority rightly
belongs.
In line with the Kabul commitments, the goal of
the international community remains firmly to continue
to enable such progress in other fields, including
governance, reconstruction and development. It is
ample illustration of Afghan leadership that
Afghanistan will be chairing alone the International
Afghanistan Conference in Bonn, two weeks from
today.
Secondly, this year’s draft resolution is about
long-term commitment by the international community.
Today, the General Assembly will send more than a
renewed message of solidarity. We underline the fact
that Afghanistan can count on the long-term support of
the United Nations and its Member States, much
beyond the target date for transition, at the end of
2014. The core of this year’s draft resolution is
therefore about linking the past 10 years to the next 10

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-60244 (E)

*1160244*

A/66/PV.62

years. International support will be required even after
that. The theme of the Bonn Conference, “From
Transition to Transformation”, underlines that
international resolve.
As the transition proceeds, and for some
considerable time thereafter, the role of the United
Nations in support of Afghanistan will remain pivotal.
My delegation is therefore grateful that the SecretaryGeneral has accepted the invitation to lead the United
Nations delegation at the Bonn Conference.
A rapidly changing environment requires
flexibility and constant adaptation, including from the
United Nations. In the draft resolution, the General
Assembly looks forward to the results of the upcoming
review of the mandated activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and of United
Nations support, as stipulated in Security Council
resolution 1974 (2011). The review will be complex.
But my delegation is certain that it will contribute to
further improving the way we support Afghanistan, in
line with United Nations best practice and in line with
Afghan priorities.
Security considerations will remain one important
aspect of the review. In the light of this year’s fatal
attacks, including against the United Nations, which
we condemn in the strongest terms, the draft resolution
urgently recalls that ensuring the best possible
protection for the women and men working for the
United Nations and for other development and
humanitarian workers must remain our absolute
priority.
It must also be a priority for us not to allow the
transition to divert our attention from our long-term
objectives, be it with regard to democratization, the
rule of law and human rights, or with regard to fighting
poverty or supporting socio-economic development.
The list could go on. It is not a coincidence that, over
the years, the Afghanistan resolution has developed
into a comprehensive, long-term development agenda.
Two important steps have recently been taken. In
the draft resolution, the General Assembly welcomes
both the settlement of the impasse over last year’s
elections and last week’s announcement of an
important new three-year International Monetary Fund
programme. The draft resolution also rightly
emphasizes the role of women. Much has been
achieved. Germany considers it a further strong signal
that the Afghan Government has given assurances that

2

25 per cent of the members of the Afghan delegation at
the Bonn Conference will be women. Also, civil
society as a whole must be heard. After a
comprehensive domestic process led by the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,
two elected civil society representatives, a woman and
a man, will be given a prominent opportunity to
directly address the Conference.
Thirdly, this year’s draft resolution is about
support for the peace and reconciliation process.
Progress in both security and development will not be
achievable — and certainly not be sustainable —
without a comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led
process of political reconciliation and reintegration.
Following the murder of the head of the High
Peace Council, Professor Rabbani, the draft resolution
stresses the need for calm and solidarity in Afghanistan
and the need for all parties to reduce tensions. The
draft also welcomes the important decision by the
Council to split the sanctions regime imposed by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, and
underlines the procedural innovations of the regime
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1988 (2011),
particularly consultations with the Government of
Afghanistan, to underline the fact that the United
Nations is acting in support of an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process, leaving no doubt about the
conditions any participant in the reconciliation process
must abide by.
Fourthly, this year’s draft resolution is about
placing additional emphasis on the regional dimension.
The General Assembly would welcome the recent
Istanbul Conference, where Afghanistan and its
regional partners affirmed their commitment to
promote regional security and cooperation through a
first set of confidence-building measures. In that
context, we look forward to the first follow-up at the
ministerial conference scheduled to be held in Kabul in
June 2012.
The draft resolution before the Assembly
complements regional political cooperation efforts and
places significant emphasis on making better use of the
considerable economic potential of the region. Among
other things, it underlines the benefits of reviving
historic trade routes — with the historic Silk Road as a
potential source of inspiration.

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

Fifthly and finally, the draft resolution reiterates
the interconnected nature of the challenges in
Afghanistan. Justice and the fight against impunity and
corruption remain of systemic importance for the
country’s successful development. The production of,
and trafficking in, illicit drugs continue to undermine
the development of the formal economic sector and
remain an important source of financing for terrorism
and extremism. Strategies to create better prospects for
employment and to reduce poverty are needed more
urgently than ever.
Let me end by emphasizing that the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan and parts of the region
continues to require our strong international attention
and generous support. The General Assembly
recognizes with particular appreciation the heavy
burden that neighbouring countries are continuing to
shoulder by hosting considerable numbers of refugees,
particularly the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan,
and acknowledges their adherence, over decades, to
humanitarian principles.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
gratitude to the many delegations from all regions that
participated actively in the informal consultations.
Their sense of shared responsibility is among the most
important ingredients of this draft resolution. We
therefore suggest to the General Assembly that it adopt,
once again, a consensual draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan.
The special appreciation of the German
delegation goes to my distinguished colleague,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, his deputy, Zahir Faqiri,
Counsellor Youssof Ghafoorzai and their colleagues for
their wonderful cooperation, trust and friendship.
Germany also extends its wholehearted thanks to the
entire United Nations family in Afghanistan and at
Headquarters for their outstanding work.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Once more in this Hall,
we are discussing the situation in Afghanistan: the
cycle of suffering, the immensity of new challenges
and, certainly, the progress we have made thus far. For
the past decade, the world has been extensively
engaged in Afghanistan and in our ongoing struggle for
peace and stability. We come together today to adopt a
draft resolution that will again affirm the support of the
international community for ending a continuing crisis
that has long shaken the world, and also our

11-60244

commitment to help the Afghan people in their difficult
struggle to finally achieve peace and stability.
I thank all who have contributed to shaping the
draft resolution, in particular the German delegation,
headed by His Excellency Ambassador Peter Wittig,
for their leadership and hard work throughout the
process. We appreciate the work of all of his
colleagues, including Ambassador Miguel Berger, and
are grateful to Mr. Elmar Eich for his role in
facilitating the negotiations.
We are leaving behind another year of national
trauma. Regrettably, violence has remained a constant
in the lives of many Afghans, resulting in a significant
loss of life. We have seen indiscriminate attacks on
innocent civilians, targeted assassinations and attempts
to shatter what we have worked so hard to build. In
fact, the terrorist attacks are aimed at breaking our
determination and undermining our national unity and
historical integrity.
Afghans have been the prime victims of
terrorism, but we are not alone. Our friends and
partners have also been hurt and are losing their lives
alongside our people. As the threat of terrorism
originating from our region has become global in
character, the international community has intervened
to stop it. But we have not yet succeeded in ending the
threat. The Taliban, who hijacked Afghanistan for
years, kept their heads down for some time but are now
reappearing with a barbaric and brutal face.
Resuscitated by the continued existence of safe havens
in the region, they continue to hold Afghanistan
hostage, killing our people, destroying the country and
threatening our gains, freedom and way of life.
Despite the recent increase in violent activities,
the Afghan people are determined to continue their
progress. Fragile as the country may seem, substantial
improvements have been made over the past decade.
Afghanistan has risen from the ashes of a State
shattered by decades of conflict, and millions of
Afghans have rebuilt their lives and are moving
forward. Thousands of new schools and universities
have been built, with millions of students enrolled,
nearly half of whom are female. Hundreds of clinics
and hospitals have been established and thousands of
doctors and nurses have been trained. New roads have
been constructed, benefiting travel within Afghanistan
and enhancing partnerships and trade with those in our
region and beyond.

3

A/66/PV.62

Our achievements are not confined to the
economic and social spheres. Good and democratic
governance is being extended to areas where
previously there was none. The rule of law is being
strengthened, and we are working to rid our society of
the cancer of corruption. With the wider participation
of its people in political and social life and a greater
focus on human rights, including women’s rights,
Afghanistan is becoming a home for all.
Not far from the burning memories of the bloody
and destructive power struggle of the 1990s, we drafted
our new Constitution, held two presidential and two
parliamentary elections and now have our national and
local administrations in place. Those achievements
have helped Afghanistan to regain its legitimate place
on the world stage as a responsible member of the
international community.
However, that progress has not been easy. It is a
constant struggle. Terrorism remains the primary threat
and exacerbates all other challenges. The terrorists and
their insolent supporters continue to destroy the
country and prevent us from living in peace and
prosperity. Afghanistan’s enemies wanted to convince
the world that success was not possible and that all
efforts were doomed to failure, but they must
understand that we are not in the Afghanistan of the
1990s. Terrorist acts undermine our daily work, but
they will not force us back to where we were a decade
ago.
As we begin a new decade of international
involvement in Afghanistan, 10 years into the
post-Taliban era, we are confronted with many
questions. Where do we go from here? More
specifically, how can Afghans stand on their own feet
and maintain a stable society through the transition
process, as international forces continue their
withdrawal?
This year marked the historic start of the
transition process by which all Afghans will assume
full responsibility, ownership and leadership.
Transition is about transforming the country from one
that is suffering from violence and instability into a
fully functioning State and a viable society. A
comprehensive transition includes at least six
interlinked issues.
The first is security. Security transition is on
track. We are working with our international partners
to assume full responsibility in all provinces by 2014,

4

or possibly earlier. The gradual drawdown of the
international forces through 2014 is strongly linked to
the training and equipping of Afghan forces and to an
ongoing strategic partnership over the next decade or
more. While the numbers, capabilities and selfconfidence of the Afghan National Security Forces are
growing, transition is not happening in a vacuum;
continued international engagement through recruiting,
training and equipping Afghan forces will be essential
through transition and beyond.
The second key issue is good governance and the
rule of law. Building a better future for Afghanistan
will require a stable, functioning and clean
Government that is capable of turning opportunities
into successes. Actions such as the release of the
National Priority Programme on Law and Justice,
which outlines the justice sector reform strategy for the
next three years, highlight the important focus of
strengthening the rule of law in all provinces and
districts. For transition to be successful, the
Government of Afghanistan must and will continue to
enhance its efforts to improve services for the Afghan
people, strengthen justice and the rule of law and fight
corruption at all levels.
The third issue is social and economic
development. Afghanistan is on its way to a
sustainable, drug-free and fully functional economy.
During the past year, we have been finalizing our
national priority programme within the framework of
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy.
Agricultural development is the top priority, along with
increasing investment in Afghanistan’s rich mineral
resources and rebuilding infrastructure. Social
development is also reflected — for instance in the
10-year National Action Plan for the Women of
Afghanistan — in a continuing focus on education and
health. These programmes will effectively and
efficiently address poverty and inequality, without
duplication of efforts. We urge the international
community to ensure that the provision of development
aid is transparent and accountable and that it is
coordinated with Afghanistan’s priorities.
The fourth issue is reconciliation and
reintegration. Transition is interlinked with the peace
process, which can help put an end to violence and
insecurity. This year, the peace process saw both
significant steps forward and a major setback with the
assassination of Professor Rabbani, head of the High

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

Peace Council. However, despite all attacks, the
Afghan people want the peace process to continue.

efforts for economic development and for social and
political progress will be in vain.

That is just what the Loya Jirga — the traditional
grand assembly, which ended this weekend in Kabul —
calls for. The Loya Jirga brought together 2,200
representatives of Afghans from all ethnic groups,
north and south, east and west, and from all segments
of society — parliamentarians, politicians, tribal
elders, scholars and Afghan refugees — to discuss the
peace process and the strategic partnership agreement
with the United States. It was an inclusive process that
will inform the Government’s position and ensure a
unified Afghan voice. It marked a significant step in
the peace and reconciliation process and was a clear
display of the will of the Afghan people, reaffirming
that Afghanistan is ready to accept and build on a
strategic alliance with the United States as well as
other real friends and partners.

That brings us to the sixth element of transition,
namely, strategic partnerships. We are now finalizing
the strategic partnership document, which will involve
United States support for training and assisting Afghan
forces through 2014 and beyond. We have also signed a
strategic partnership agreement with India, and
negotiations for similar arrangements are under way
with the United Kingdom, France, Australia and the
European Union. The basis for a long-term partnership
has also been established with NATO. Those
partnerships will continue to build on and redefine the
ties we have established with the international
community to guarantee the country’s future success.

The fifth key issue is regional cooperation.
Through a number of initiatives, Afghanistan is
reclaiming our historic role as a trade, transport and
economic hub and, most importantly, as a catalyst for
wider collaboration in the heart of Asia. Earlier this
month, we saw the successful conclusion of the
Istanbul Conference, generously hosted by our brother
country, Turkey. Afghanistan sees the Istanbul process
as a new beginning for comprehensive regional
interconnectedness. We look forward to the first
follow-up ministerial meeting in Kabul next June.
Before Istanbul, we saw the finalization and
implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit
Trade Agreement, after decades of negotiations. That
Agreement represents a tremendous and historic step
forward. In September, 30 high-level delegations from
the region and beyond convened here in New York to
endorse the New Silk Road Initiative. We believe that
vision holds real promise for attracting greater
investment and trade and will provide economic
opportunities for all countries in our wider region.
Security is the basis of regional cooperation
aimed at achieving regional and international peace
and stability. The threat of terrorism comes from the
region. In safe havens beyond our borders, terrorists
find sanctuary, training, broadened logistical support
and strategic guidance for preparing renewed attacks
against Afghanistan and the international community.
Unless the scourge of terrorism is eliminated, all our

11-60244

In December, the Afghan leadership will join the
international community in Bonn to assess progress
and map out a long-term commitment for peace and
security in Afghanistan. The Bonn Conference will
mark a new beginning at the start of a new decade of
the international community’s partnership with
Afghanistan. We thank Germany for its efforts and
leadership in hosting what will certainly become a
milestone in our history.
For Afghanistan, 2014 is not a solid end point
carved in stone. Instead, it stands as a marker along the
way to a new phase of the partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community, with
Afghanistan as a fully sovereign partner. We need to be
realistic in understanding why the peace and prosperity
of Afghanistan is important in an increasingly
interconnected world and a strategically crucial region.
A successful transition that addresses the six
interwoven elements I outlined today will lead us to a
stable, reliable Afghanistan that partners with the
international community in a mutually beneficial way.
We are often presented with a grim picture of
Afghanistan,
one
of
disappointment
and
disengagement. Such scenarios raise doubts about the
possibility of successful transition in Afghanistan. But
we Afghans and the international community share a
different vision. We have a plan for a successful
transition, with all elements and all partners acting in
harmonious accord. We believe that with the support
and goodwill of the Afghan people and the
international community, that plan will succeed.
All of us are here not simply to see how the
situation in Afghanistan will unfold, but to shape it and

5

A/66/PV.62

craft future history. We have a responsibility to act for
success. We cannot simply sit back and wait in fear of
failure in Afghanistan — although there are some out
there who prefer to do so. Let us not insult the future.
Instead, on the basis of the real progress of the past
decade, let us stick to making a successful present.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I
appreciate the invitation to the European Union to
participate in today’s debate.
The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia; and the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the situation in
Afghanistan (A/66/369). Our thanks also go to all
delegations that have participated in the consultations
on draft resolution A/66/L.10, introduced by the
representative of Germany today. We look forward to
once again adopting the draft resolution on Afghanistan
by consensus. We have listened with great attention to
the statement by the Ambassador of Afghanistan.
I would also like to express once more the
European Union’s firm condemnation of the fatal
attack on Professor Rabbani, the Chairman of the High
Peace Council. Professor Rabbani’s legacy can best be
honoured by redoubling reconciliation efforts. We
applaud the Government for committing to precisely
that.
At the outset, let me reiterate how much
importance we attach to United Nations efforts in
Afghanistan. The United Nations work will remain
vital to Afghanistan’s fate for years to come, and that is
why we all have to continue to support it both
politically and financially. The European Union itself
is also in it for the long haul.
In July, a concrete transition began with the
handover of security responsibility from the
International Security Assistance Force to Afghan
forces in seven areas of the country. Results are

6

encouraging, and preparations will soon begin for the
second tranche of security transfers announced by
President Karzai last week at the Loya Jirga. That also
confirms that the Afghan Security Forces continue to
assume more and more responsibility, despite the
difficult context. That should serve to strengthen the
international community’s resolve to contribute to the
transition’s success by effectively training those forces.
The security background will remain difficult for
some time to come, but against it, it is all the more
encouraging that the Kabul Process is in many respects
gaining momentum, as we have seen with the
resumption of the meetings of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board and the progress on the national
priority programmes. Ahead of the Bonn Conference,
that momentum is crucial for bolstering the confidence
of all donors as they seek to do their part in the context
of the Kabul Process.
Still more needs to be done to ensure that public
administration reform and reform of the justice
institutions now receive the attention they deserve as
the backbone of civilian transition. In particular,
independent and professional justice institutions are
indispensable. Afghanistan needs them for a better
security climate, a better investment climate and a
better human rights climate. Legislation will remain
void without the institutions to implement it.
Afghanistan’s commitments to international human
rights conventions are a case in point.
With regard to human rights, let me say that the
rights of women deserve special attention during the
transition and beyond. That is exactly why it is so
important that the Afghan Government has assured that
a representative delegation, including a strong voice
for women, will be present at the conference.
Let me add that progress on some national
priority programmes should not give rise to
complacency. The transition process will be viable only
if all national priority programmes move forward
together. In the area of governance, positive steps such
as the launch of the anticorruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee need to be backed up by
structural measures that will bring down corruption and
bring about more transparency and accountability with
regard to public finances.
There can be no accountability without
parliamentary control. It is encouraging that the
Afghan parliament has now fully resumed its functions.

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

That means getting important legislative work done
and providing the necessary checks and balances when
it comes to State-building in Afghanistan. New
legislation should therefore be submitted for
parliamentary approval. There is room for
improvement in this sphere. We note with satisfaction
that the final authority of the Independent Electoral
Commission in electoral questions has been reaffirmed,
and it is in that context that the European Union stands
ready to support Afghan commitments to further longterm electoral reform.
Of course, we need to look beyond Kabul to the
provinces and districts, to subnational governance. We
need to further strengthen the capacity and
accountability of provincial and municipal institutions.
Only then will the right services be delivered to the
right people in the right way. Also, to get their fair
share of aid, provinces and districts should have a
better connection to the centre. After all, in a
post-transition Afghanistan, funds will increasingly be
channelled through the central Government, in line
with the respective international commitments. That
process needs to be transparent and accountable.
Before I conclude, allow me to reiterate the
importance of the regional context. The neighbouring
countries have a strong stake in and a special
responsibility for a stable and secure Afghanistan.
Building on our ongoing programmes, the European
Union stands ready to throw its weight behind
initiatives that promote regional integration and
cooperation.
The recent Istanbul Conference was a good step
forward towards a regional political process, owned by
Afghanistan and its neighbours, to help bring an end to
conflict in Afghanistan. We hope that the process will
be given extra momentum at the Bonn Conference and
we look forward to the ministerial meeting in Kabul
next year as a follow-up to the Istanbul Conference. In
addition, I would like to highlight the New Silk Road
Initiative, as it offers a vision for promising economic
cooperation from which Afghanistan and its neighbours
could benefit greatly.
To end our statement, the Afghan people need to
see concrete improvements in their lives and
livelihoods, and we all need to play our part in that.
With that in our minds and hearts, I can assure
Afghanistan of the European Union’s long-term
commitment and partnership.

11-60244

Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): It is
my honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) —
the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of Belarus, the
Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the
Russian Federation and the Republic of Tajikistan. The
member States of the CSTO support the rebuilding of
Afghanistan as a peaceful, stable, independent and
neutral State with a stable economy, free of terrorism
and drug crime.
Unfortunately, Afghanistan today continues to
face serious threats in the security sphere. Extremists
from the Taliban and Al-Qaida are increasing their
activities across the country. The number of murders
and kidnappings of Afghan civil servants, ordinary
people and international staff is increasing. We are
particularly concerned that terrorist activity is spilling
over from Afghanistan into neighbouring Central Asian
States members of CSTO. Drug crime also continues to
be a threat.
CSTO member States believe that effective
settlement of the situation in Afghanistan and the
resolution of the serious challenges facing the
Government of the country will be impossible without
an integrated approach on the part of the international
community, under the auspices of the United Nations.
We believe it is wise to delegate greater selfdependence to the Afghan Government in resolving
internal issues, particularly through creating the
conditions for the transfer to it of responsibility for
security on the territory of their country. We welcome
the gradual transfer to the Afghan Security Forces of
responsibility for security in the country in the
framework of the Kabul Process.
However, the withdrawal of international forces
must be accompanied by adequate efforts to build the
capacities of Afghan force structure and must
correspond to the real situation in the country. In that
connection, we believe that the withdrawal of the
International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan will be possible only after it has submitted
a report to the Security Council on the fulfilment of its
mandate from the Council. We are disturbed by the
possible consequences of implementing plans for longterm support for a military presence in Afghanistan
after 2014.
Instead, we propose considering jointly how to
establish neutral status for Afghanistan. Needless to

7

A/66/PV.62

say, the initiative for this must come from the Afghan
people themselves. Moreover, we are not talking about
the immediate future but about a time when the
stabilization efforts in Afghanistan are completed. If
neutrality is established as a future objective now,
however, it could facilitate the dialogue on
reconciliation. We believe it is important to show a
focused and balanced approach to arriving at a national
reconciliation plan. It should be based on three wellknown principles, namely, an end to armed resistance,
recognition of the Afghan Constitution and the
severance of ties to Al-Qaida and other terrorist
organizations. Meeting these criteria remains a
prerequisite for delisting those on the sanctions
regime’s Taliban list.
A peaceful and democratic future for Afghanistan
cannot be achieved without resolving the issue of the
illegal production of, and trade in, drugs. It is evident
to us that the drug traffic emanating from Afghanistan
is a threat to international peace and stability, as stated
in Security Council resolutions 1943 (2010), 1974
(2011) and 2011 (2011). In our view, the foreign
military presence in Afghanistan, together with the
Afghan army and police force, can and should be
involved more actively in combating drug production
there, particularly since they have assumed
responsibility for security issues in Afghanistan. Our
offers of real-time cooperation in that area with NATO
partners still stand.
One of the most important issues for the
Collective Security Treaty Organization in that area is
implementing practical cooperation between partner
nations in combating security challenges and threats
emanating from Afghanistan, especially those related
to drugs and terrorism. The question of Afghanistan is
a perennial item for discussion at CSTO summits and
at meetings of its governing bodies. The CSTO Council
of Foreign Ministers has a working group on
Afghanistan, within which it analyses the progress and
prospects of the Afghanistan situation, discusses issues
relating to how to promote a settlement in Afghanistan
and develops appropriate recommendations for the
CSTO governing bodies. A testament to the importance
of such efforts by CSTO was the declaration adopted in
February by the heads of CSTO member States on the
issue of the drug threat from Afghanistan. That
document was CSTO’s first major initiative on
Afghanistan during Belarus’s chairmanship.

8

The importance for the United Nations of
developing practical coordination with CSTO in the
fight against drug trafficking was cited as one of the
main priorities for cooperation between the two
organizations by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in his
statement at an expanded meeting of the CSTO
Permanent Council on 22 April. The subject was
further developed during consultations between the
Secretary-General of CSTO and the United Nations
leadership held in New York in September.
We believe that success in combating illicit
Afghan drug trafficking, which represents a threat to
international peace and stability, can be achieved in a
truly effective manner only through the combined
efforts of every State and relevant international
organization. It is precisely for that reason that CSTO
has established, and continues to maintain, close
working ties in that area with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), is taking
steps to work with the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Eurasian Economic Community
and is actively looking for ways to cooperate in an
operational manner with NATO. A good example of
such effective cooperation on security issues in the
Central Asian region within that framework of support
is CSTO member States’ provision of transit rights for
supplies for the International Security Assistance Force
in Afghanistan passing through their territories.
An important element of our joint work in halting
Afghan drug trafficking has been the implementation
of the 2008-2011 plan adopted in 2008 by CSTO
member States on collective action to combat the
illegal trade in narcotic and psychotropic substances
and their precursors. The organization’s chief
coordinating centre for anti-drug efforts is the CSTO
member States’ Coordinating Council for combating
illicit drug trafficking. That body’s genuine
contribution to the fight against the drug threat was
affirmed by the signing of a memorandum of
coordination and cooperation with the committee of the
heads of the law enforcement divisions of the Council
of Heads of Customs Services of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the Eurasian Group on
Combating Money Laundering and Financing of
Terrorism.
The most effective instrument within the CSTO
for closing off channels through which drugs can enter
the territory of CSTO member States and of preventing
their transit is the regional anti-drug Operation Kanal,

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

which by a decision of the CSTO Collective Security
Council in 2008 was given permanent operational
status. Its operations are conducted regularly, cover all
CSTO States and have enabled the accumulation of
valuable experience in organizing the collective fight
against drug trafficking.
During the active phase of Kanal’s operations in
2010, more than 90,000 employees of such bodies were
involved. Representatives of a range of interested
States and international organizations regularly
participate in Kanal operations as observers. These
include the appropriate bodies from Azerbaijan,
Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Venezuela, Italy, Iran, China,
Latvia, Lithuania, Pakistan, Poland, Syria, the United
States, Turkey, Ukraine and Estonia, as well as the
OSCE, the European Police Office, the Eurasian Group
on Combating Money Laundering and Financing of
Terrorism, and the Committee of the heads of the law
enforcement divisions of the CIS Council of Heads of
Customs Services. In 2010 alone, during two phases of
the operation against illegal trafficking, we seized
about eight tons of drugs, more than 40 tons of
precursors and about 1,600 firearms. In June, as part of
Operation Kanal 2011, coordinated by Belarusian
special organs, we carried out a local anti-drug
operation, Kanal West, in which corresponding bodies
from Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland and Ukraine took part. The operation resulted
in the confiscation of more than three tons of drugs, the
investigation of more than 3,000 drug crimes and the
seizure of more than 300 firearms. CSTO member
States are now preparing for the Kanal 2011 regional
drug operation in December.
The role of the United Nations in resolving the
situation in Afghanistan, in the context of a drawdown
of international forces there, will clearly grow. We
believe that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) should continue to coordinate
international civilian efforts to stabilize the situation in
Afghanistan. We expect that UNAMA will keep its
central coordinating role in international efforts to
stabilize Afghanistan, with an emphasis on increasing
the effectiveness of international assistance; that the
peacebuilding component will be strengthened, with an
emphasis on assisting Afghan institution-building; and
that the Mission will continue to use its good offices in
the reconciliation process, but only at the request of the
Afghan Government.

We have a positive view of the results of the
Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, which affirmed
the priority role played in the region by organizations
such as CSTO in regional efforts to resolve the
situation in Afghanistan, and the counterproductiveness
of attempts to establish new bodies or mechanisms in
that area.
Mr. de Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
year 2011 marks the tenth anniversary of the
commitment of the international community with
Afghanistan. From the beginning, Spain has been part
of that commitment, and for a number of years has
been making a significant military and civil
contribution to the stabilization and reconstruction of
that country.
We are paying a high price for that. Ninety-eight
Spanish soldiers have lost their lives in Afghanistan.
The most recent of them, Sergeant Joaquin Moya
Espejo, died 15 days ago during a training mission
with the Afghanistan National Army. I would like to
pay my deepest homage to those Spanish soldiers and
to those of the Afghan Security Forces and from other
countries who also have lost their lives.
In spite of those sad events, Spain is firmly
committed to the promotion of development in
Afghanistan. We have already disbursed €195 million
of the total €220 million we committed to for the
period 2006-2011. Our development cooperation has
been focused on the province of Badghis, the country’s
second poorest province, which lacks the most basic
infrastructure, namely, running water, sanitation,
electricity and roads. Infrastructure, basic services and
the protection and empowerment of women have been
the priority areas of our cooperation. We have built
160 kilometres of roads, an airfield, seven rural clinics,
three institutes of secondary education — one of them
for girls — and six elementary schools.
We have placed priority on the principle of
Afghanization in managing cooperation programmes
and projects. Since the beginning, we have worked
with national and provincial authorities, taking into
account their strategies and priorities. We have tried, as
much as possible, to support the transfer of knowledge
to local personnel employed in projects. The results
have been good. Virtually all projects are being
managed by Afghans.
the

11-60244

Spain also contributes to the military efforts of
international community in Afghanistan by

9

A/66/PV.62

participating in NATO’s International Security
Assistance Force in accordance with the Security
Council mandate. At present, more than 1,500 Spanish
soldiers are deployed in Afghanistan, assigned mainly
to the provinces of Badghis and Herat, at the Regional
Command West headquarters. We are responsible for
the provincial reconstruction team in Qala-e-Naw, the
capital of Badghis. Furthermore, there are
approximately 50 Spanish Civil Guards training the
Afghan National Police in the provinces of Badghis
and Mazar-e-Sharif.
Spain supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government in the transition, both in terms of security
and of the civilian, governance and development
efforts that underpin it. Our common objective is for
the transition to be irreversible and sustainable. To that
end, additional efforts are needed in the area of the rule
of law, including the fight against corruption and
support for human rights, with special attention
accorded to women and children.
We are satisfied with the way that the transition is
progressing. We hope to start the transfer of security
responsibility to Afghan authorities in two districts in
the province of Badghis, namely, Qala-e-Naw and Ab-e
Kamari, at the beginning of 2012. As is well known,
the transition process will be completed by 2014. In
any case, Spain’s commitment to provide expert
advice, training and support to the Afghan Security
Forces will also continue after that date.
With regard to the civilian dimension of the
transition, as I have just mentioned, we are ready to
undertake the transfer of the projects we have
developed in our area of responsibility as the
provincial reconstruction team in Qala-e-Naw. We will
do so in a coordinated manner in the transfer of
responsibilities in the area of security. The vast
majority of projects are already being managed by
Afghan personnel. Once the transfer of projects is
finalized, the form that our technical and financial
assistance will take in the maintenance of the projects
will have to be defined in concert with the Afghan
authorities.
Without reconciliation there cannot be peace and
stability in Afghanistan. We are aware of the
difficulties and we pay homage to Professor Rabbani.
But we must continue efforts along those lines. To do
so, it is absolutely necessary that the collaboration

10

between Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries be
maintained.
Reintegration is equally essential. Spain is
contributing €10 million to the Afghan Peace and
Reintegration Trust Fund. Baghdis province, where we
lead the provincial reconstruction team in Qala-e-Naw,
is one of the Afghan provinces with the best results.
Almost 40 per cent of the country’s ex-combatants
have been reintegrated there. However, the process is
still fragile, and could easily be reversed if the
necessary resources are not allocated to maintain it.
It is obvious to everyone that the regional
perspective is crucial for security and stability in
Afghanistan, and therefore also for the country’s
development and prosperity.
We commend the results of the Istanbul
Conference and are encouraged by the positive attitude
shown by neighbouring and regional countries,
expressed in the encouraging confidence-building
measures adopted to reinforce security in the region.
We trust that the Istanbul Process will continue
successfully with the ministerial meeting to be held in
Kabul next June.
The Bonn Conference was one of the most
important meetings with regard to Afghanistan over the
past decade. We should convey a clear message of
long-term commitment to the people and the
Government of Afghanistan. Afghanistan will continue
to need assistance from the international community,
but the future of Afghanistan depends on the Afghan
people and Government. In that regard, it is essential
that they too make progress in the full playing out of
the so-called Kabul Process.
Of course, we also attach great importance to the
role of the European Union in this entire process. We
fully associate ourselves with the statement made by
the head of its delegation. In that regard, Spain firmly
supports the mandate given last 14 November to High
Representative Ashton to negotiate a broad partnership
and development agreement between the European
Union and Afghanistan, which will mark and guide the
relationship between them in the years ahead.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate
Germany for having once again facilitated the
negotiation of the annual General Assembly draft
resolution on Afghanistan. We know that it has not
been an easy task. For that reason, I also extend my

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

congratulations to all the delegations that have actively
participated with a constructive spirit, and in particular
to the delegation of Afghanistan for its highmindedness.
We have become a sponsor of draft resolution
A/66/L.10, which was introduced at the beginning of
the debate. We are confident that it will once again be
adopted by consensus, as it has been on past occasions.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to again co-sponsor the General
Assembly’s
draft
resolution
on
Afghanistan
(A/66/L.10). We strongly support the pledge contained
in the draft resolution that the United Nations
community will continue to support the efforts of the
Government and the people of Afghanistan as they
rebuild a stable, self-sufficient State, free of terrorism.
We recognize and support the growing Afghan
ownership of the reconstruction and development
efforts and welcome the draft resolution’s endorsement
of the Afghan Government’s objective to have the
Afghan National Security Forces themselves take over
lead security responsibility by the end of 2014.
As the Australian Prime Minister has said on a
number of occasions — most recently in a statement on
Afghanistan to the Australian Parliament yesterday —
Australia will remain engaged in the country through
this decade at least. Following the conclusion of the
transition in 2014, we will continue to provide civilian
and development assistance as required and training
and other defence cooperation, as part of an
international strategy designed to ensure that a
functioning Afghan State is able to assume
responsibility for preventing the country from again
becoming a safe haven for terrorists.
Since last October’s resolution 65/8, we have
seen real progress in the implementation of the
transition process. We welcome the resolution’s
highlighting of the significance of that process and its
recognition of the important work that remains to be
done by the international community and the Afghan
Government in supporting responsible transition.
In March, President Karzai announced the first
tranche of Afghan districts and provinces that will start
transition to Afghan-led security responsibility. As
security conditions improve, 2012 will see Afghan
authorities take on lead responsibility in more
provinces and districts. The Afghan Government is
expected to announce the second tranche of provinces

11-60244

for transition soon. By the time transition in the second
tranche is completed, Afghan National Security Forces
will have lead responsibility for about half of the
country’s people. Australia will continue its mission of
support for training and transition as that process
unfolds.
In recent months, Australian Prime Minister
Gillard, Defence Minister Smith and the Chief of our
Defence Force all visited Afghanistan. Their visits,
which focused on Australia’s area of engagement in
Uruzgan province, where two thirds of our 1,550
military forces are located, reconfirmed the Australian
Government’s view that the international community is
basically on track to achieve nationwide transition to
national security-led responsibility by the end of 2014.
In that connection, security conditions on the ground
obviously remain critical. For its part, Australia will
keep under consideration a continued Australian
Special Forces presence beyond 2014 to assist
Afghanistan’s lead forces, should the country decide
that that would be useful. We commend the Afghan
Government for its leadership and pledge our
continued support for a sustainable, credible and
irreversible transition process.
The international community will shortly come
together for the International Conference on
Afghanistan in Bonn, at which the Afghan Government
will outline its vision for the future of Afghanistan. We
welcome the draft resolution’s recognition of the
importance of that meeting to further define the key
issues of the civilian aspects of the transition, serious
long-term commitment by the international community,
and support of the political process.
In Bonn, we need to demonstrate a robust and
coordinated approach to building a stable and secure
Afghanistan, an Afghanistan with positive economic
opportunities. As security transition proceeds, now is
the time for Afghanistan’s supporters — all of us — to
identify the ways in which we will provide practical,
long-term support after the conclusion of transition. A
clear and serious commitment by the international
community to supporting Afghanistan’s security and
development beyond 2014 will represent a powerful
message of solidarity. We call on all participants at the
Bonn Conference to work towards that outcome.
Australia welcomes the draft resolution’s
recognition of the commitment made by the “Heart of
Asia” Summit participants at the Istanbul Conference

11

A/66/PV.62

to promote regional security and cooperation through
confidence-building measures. Constructive engagement
by Afghanistan’s neighbours is obviously critical to the
prospects of a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan and is indispensable, in turn, for the
broader region.
We
value
Turkey’s
contribution.
The
effectiveness of the Istanbul Conference in delivering
real security and cooperation gains for Afghanistan and
its neighbours will depend on the continued
commitment of those involved. We urge all “Heart of
Asia” partners to build upon that positive foundation,
and we look forward to an update on progress at the
ministerial meeting in Kabul in mid-2012.
Amid that progress, Australia also welcomes the
draft resolution’s clear-eyed statement of the many
challenges that remain ahead. One of the key
challenges is improving standards of governance and
development. This year, Australia’s total development
assistance to Afghanistan will be approximately
$165 million, a 34 per cent increase over last year.
Afghanistan is now the fourth largest recipient of
Australian aid, and a significant level of assistance will
continue.
The goal of our assistance is to strengthen the
capacity of Afghan institutions themselves to govern
effectively and provide basic services. We are pleased
to note the steady improvement in standards of
governance and development, including through our
efforts in Uruzgan province, where we lead the
provincial reconstruction team. A key part of our
strategy is to build stronger linkages between the
provincial government in Uruzgan and the national
Government, an essential means of ensuring that the
modest gains in governance standards become
entrenched and then advance as transition continues.
Good governance depends on the capacity of the
women and men charged with the responsibility of
building Afghanistan’s future. To build that capacity,
Australia provides targeted training and support,
including scholarships, to key ministries, including
agriculture, health, education, rural rehabilitation and
development. That approach has led to the creation of
an innovative programme where Australia enabled 60
Afghan master teacher trainers to train in Malaysia.
Improving the participation of women across all
aspects of community and public life in Afghanistan
remains vital. We also look forward to the Afghan

12

Government’s continued efforts to combat corruption
and improve governance, including at the subnational
level.
We obviously recognize that the conflict in
Afghanistan cannot be resolved by military means
alone, although guaranteeing security remains
fundamental. We welcome the draft resolution’s call to
all relevant States to remain engaged in the Afghan-led
peace process. The assassination of Professor Rabbani,
which was deeply shocking, was part of a terror
campaign that is very worrying and is being
deliberately designed to derail the transition; we must
not let it do so. Australia takes this opportunity to
reaffirm our ongoing support for the Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation process and for the successful
reintegration of former fighters into Afghan society.
Supporting Afghanistan’s fledgling democracy
will also be a critical element of a successful transition.
The next presidential elections, to be held in 2014, will
be a test of Afghanistan’s democratic institutions and
processes. It is important that the role of the
Independent
Electoral
Commission
is
being
consolidated, but continued electoral reform remains
vital. Australia will give increased priority to working
with the Afghan Government and international partners
to continue electoral reform and support successful and
transparent presidential elections in 2014 and
parliamentary elections in 2015. This support will
include training of local Afghan female election
observers, in order to increase women’s participation in
the electoral process.
The Australian Government welcomes the draft
resolution’s recognition of the key role of United
Nations agencies in coordinating humanitarian and
development assistance in Afghanistan. Fragmentation
of efforts remains a problem, and Australia supports
the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to improve aid coherence
within the international community and to encourage
longer-term commitment to development. We ourselves
are committed to working closely with donors and the
Afghan Government to improve the productive
capacity of the Afghan economy, which includes
support for capacity-building in the mining and
agriculture sectors.
The President took the Chair.
In conclusion, I would like to express the
Australian Government’s appreciation for the ongoing

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

leadership demonstrated by the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Staffan de Mistura, and the
dedication and sacrifice of UNAMA personnel who
work in Afghanistan. Australia supports all efforts to
ensure that those who work in support of Afghanistan’s
future are able to do so with the necessary security to
complete their difficult but indispensable tasks. We
will continue to work with the Secretary-General and
Member States to ensure that the transition to Afghan
leadership in security is durable, credible and
irreversible.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): While Italy aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union, I would like to make a few remarks in
my national capacity.
We welcome the draft resolution on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/66/L.10) and support its adoption by
consensus. In doing so, we confirm our appreciation of
the long-term commitment of the United Nations to
working with the Government and people of
Afghanistan, our full support for the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
which has been carried out in a difficult situation, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for promoting a more coherent
civilian engagement.
Italy looks forward to the upcoming Bonn
Conference, where the international community will
reaffirm its partnership with Afghanistan on a basis of
credible mutual commitment. Over the past 10 years,
Afghanistan has improved its standards in several
domains, from human rights to social services and
from institutional capacity to its security forces. But
the results achieved so far should not lead us into
complacency, since the path to a stable and prosperous
country still requires sustained common efforts and
engagement. The international community must
therefore not let Afghanistan down after 2014 in the
areas of security and development.
I would like to make two comments. First, we
remain persuaded of the link between long-term
international engagement and better governance,
including improved budget execution capacity and a
more effective connection between the centre and the
provinces. In fact, we believe that either they progress
in parallel, consistent with the Kabul Process, or no
advancement will be real or sustainable. Better
governance and the transparent allocation of

11-60244

international resources are necessary to allow our
cooperation to progress, even after 2014.
Secondly, we agree that there is a need to
enhance our common efforts to establish a fair,
transparent and effective justice system by
implementing
the
relevant
national
priority
programmes in a timely and coordinated manner. The
democratic fabric of the country has already showed
encouraging signs of progress towards the
consolidation of a rule-of-law system. Italy will
continue to support Afghanistan in that endeavour.
An Afghan-led process of reconciliation remains
key. It has to be based on national consensus, with the
involvement of all ethnic minorities and civil society,
as well as on agreed principles, with the support of the
regional stakeholders. We stand ready to support that
process,
including
through
the
reintegration
programme.
The role of regional stakeholders in contributing
to the stabilization of Afghanistan can hardly be
overestimated. We hope that a new climate in the
region will pave the way to enhanced dialogue and
increased confidence-building. Trust is the basic value
we need to build as the driving factor for a successful
strategy of engagement and cooperation. Only a
reinvigorated regional and comprehensive strategy can
overcome the old zero-sum games and promote a new
win-win approach for the benefit of Afghanistan and
the entire region. We fully endorse regional ownership,
and we therefore support the Istanbul Process of
political cooperation inaugurated on 2 November. In
that connection, we encourage the implementation of
the agreed confidence-building measures and look
forward to the follow-up process.
Regional cooperation cannot be limited to the
domains of politics and security, however. The
economic dimension should also proceed in a
synchronized way. That is why Italy supports the
vision of a New Silk Road to reconnect Eurasia along
historical trade routes.
Let me conclude by simply reiterating how
meaningful this draft resolution is. It underlines that
we are not abandoning Afghanistan to its fate. Through
it, we reaffirm a long-term commitment to peace and
prosperity for its people.
Mr. Raza Tarar (Pakistan): The Pakistan
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for convening

13

A/66/PV.62

this important meeting, which provides an annual
opportunity for the General Assembly to review the
progress towards peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan. The multiple challenges in Afghanistan
require collective efforts. Neither Afghanistan nor any
of its neighbours can address those challenges alone.
The active engagement of the United Nations and its
Member States is essential for Afghanistan’s peace and
prosperity. We hope that today’s annual debate and the
adoption of draft resolution A/66/L.10 will make it
easier for us all to navigate the difficult path before us.
The international community has now been
engaged in a collective endeavour for peace and
prosperity in Afghanistan for a decade. Last year,
important conferences in London and Kabul generated
the optimism associated with having a destination in
sight by charting a way forward. The process of
transition envisaged at those conferences is critical for
Afghanistan’s future. As the Afghan Government
assumes greater responsibilities in the areas of security,
governance and economic and social development, it
will need all possible support and assistance. The
implementation of the Kabul Process will require the
positive and sustained engagement of the international
community, with appropriate sequencing and
coordination. It is our sincere hope that all parties will
fulfil their respective roles.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on
Afghanistan, contained in document A/66/369,
highlights many positive developments in the context
of transition. The report points out, rightly, that
development, governance and the rule of law are
crucial for an irreversible transition process. The report
stresses the need for maintaining the current political
and financial interest in transition in order to set the
country on a sustainable course. It also underlines the
value of long-term international support and privatesector investment in facilitating the transition. Those
are valid observations, which merit serious attention.
The report, while noting security challenges in
Afghanistan, rightly underlines the importance of
peace, reconciliation and reintegration in the context of
security.
In a country suffering from four decades of war,
the vexing question of security cannot be resolved by
imposing another war. Military action alone cannot
solve Afghanistan’s problems. A more comprehensive
approach, under complete Afghan ownership, is
essential. Pakistan supports an inclusive and Afghan-

14

led reconciliation process to bring the opposition
groups into the political mainstream.
As underlined in the Secretary-General’s report, a
reconciliation process requires constructive dialogue,
and not politics distorted by mistrust, intimidation, fear
or revenge. Reconciliation under threat of coercion or
retribution is ephemeral at best. The process must be
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. As the brave and
resilient people of Afghanistan move forward in
reconciliation, it is our hope that the United Nations,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other
relevant international organizations will continue to be
their willing partners.
Pakistan has always emphasized the importance
of regional unity in dealing with challenges of security
and development in Afghanistan. In that regard, the
immediate neighbours of Afghanistan have a special
role in its stability. Pakistan is engaged with other
countries in a number of important regional initiatives
on Afghanistan. Our initiatives aim at greater regional
connectivity, so as to promote economic and
commercial cooperation and root out narcotics,
terrorism and extremism.
Bilateral cooperation between Pakistan and
Afghanistan spans the entire spectrum of political,
economic and cultural relations. There is continuous
dialogue and a regular exchange of visits at the highest
levels. Pakistan is engaged in several reconstruction
and development projects in Afghanistan, including the
construction of hospitals, roads and educational
institutions. Last year, Pakistan doubled the number of
scholarships offered to Afghan students for higher
education. With new enrolments under the extended
scholarships programme, the number of Afghan
students in our colleges and universities has increased
appreciably. Their fields of study include medicine,
engineering,
business,
agriculture,
information
technology and social sciences.
In the area of security, Pakistan has always
sought closer engagement with Afghanistan and its
international partners on real issues, those that lie
beyond polemics. A viable institutional forum for our
security and intelligence cooperation is the Tripartite
Commission, which also includes the United States and
the International Security Assistance Force. We expect
the Tripartite Commission to become a solid channel
for security and intelligence cooperation. We must
avoid the blame game and use the Tripartite

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

Commission and other bilateral forums for meaningful
exchanges. For our part, we avoid the blame game,
even when militants cross over from the other side and
attack our troops and innocent civilians. The
interdiction of illegal cross-border movement is vital to
efforts to counter terrorism, drug trafficking and
commercial smuggling. That is a joint responsibility
that needs to be discharged more vigorously. Pakistan
has established over 1,000 posts along our border with
Afghanistan. More than 120,000 Pakistani troops are
deployed on our side of the border, at considerable
financial cost. That needs to be matched on the other
side of the international border.
The cultivation and production of narcotics and
illicit drugs, as well as their trade, are a menace, not
only for Afghanistan but also for the rest of the world.
The nexus between drug trafficking and terrorism is
mutually reinforcing. We need to pay more attention to
that disease, which ironically has worsened recently
despite strong international presence.
Pakistan has housed millions of Afghan refugees
for more than 30 years. We still host 1.7 million
registered and nearly 1 million unregistered refugees
inside Pakistan. The economic, social and security
costs incurred by Pakistan are incalculable. During the
past 10 years, Pakistan’s average annual budget for
Afghan refugees has nearly doubled in proportion to
international assistance, despite a decrease in the
number of refugees. After 10 years of internationally
assisted State- and institution-building in Afghanistan,
that trend should be reversed and more refugees should
be repatriated. We are highlighting this issue in order
to focus greater attention of the international
community on Afghan refugees and on their
sustenance.
For Pakistanis, all Afghan refugees are brothers
and sisters. We remain committed to their safe and
dignified return. We can say with some justifiable pride
that not a single Afghan refugee has ever been forced
to return to Afghanistan.
Pakistan greatly values the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The United Nations has an important role in
coordinating a comprehensive international effort in
Afghanistan. We hope that UNAMA will be able to
play a more meaningful role after the ongoing review
of its mandate.

11-60244

I will conclude by highlighting Pakistan’s
commitment to and support for a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. No other country has suffered more than
Pakistan from the conflict and instability in
Afghanistan. It has impacted our social and economic
fibre. The people of Pakistan share the sorrow and
grief of their Afghan brethren. More than anyone else,
we want this sad chapter of Afghan history to end, for
the mutual benefit of our peoples.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to say that despite
the great efforts made by the international community
over the past years to achieve security and stability in
Afghanistan, that country still faces challenges
resulting from the continued violence and insecurity
that have inflicted severe damage on all aspects of life
in Afghanistan as well as on its infrastructure,
including transport, communications, electricity, water,
education, health and other services. The United Arab
Emirates, which supports the draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan (A/66/L.10), is concerned
about the ongoing insecurity and instability in
Afghanistan and the ensuing increasing loss of life
among civilians, including international humanitarian
aid workers.
We affirm that the primary responsibility for
putting an end to that violence lies with the Afghan
parties, who must take concrete steps to incorporate
universal human rights in their policies and practices,
as well as provide the necessary protection to civilians.
In that context, we renew our support for international
efforts aimed at establishing security, peace and
stability in Afghanistan. We also extend our support to
the Kabul Process on handing over power to the
Afghan leadership in order to enable the Government
of Afghanistan to shoulder its national responsibilities,
particularly in the areas of governance, territorial
sovereignty and security and in achieving economic
and social development. We also affirm that long-term
stability, progress and development in Afghanistan can
be achieved only through dialogue and inclusive
reconciliation among all parties in the country.
In that regard, we support the good offices of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Mission of Norway and the Joint Afghan-Pakistan
Committee for reconciliation and peace.
Events in Afghanistan have proved that regional
efforts play a vital and permanent role in promoting

15

A/66/PV.62

peace, security, reintegration and stability in
Afghanistan. We therefore welcome the positive
outcome of the Istanbul Conference held on
2 November, including the agreement reached on a
comprehensive package
of
confidence-building
measures and multilateral cooperation in areas such as
security, reconstruction and health and in countering
terrorism, extremism and the production and
trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan. We also look
forward to a successful outcome for the international
Conference on Afghanistan scheduled to be held in
Bonn this coming December.
My country has stood by the Afghan people from
the very onset of their crisis and has provided distinct
political and economic support towards efforts aimed
at rebuilding that country and strengthening its security
and stability. We are keen on furthering our
contributions to Afghanistan, reinforced over the past
10 years within the framework of the efforts of the
international community aimed at implementing relief
and
humanitarian
assistance
programmes
in
Afghanistan.
The United Arab Emirates will also continue its
support for the implementation of infrastructure
projects and other vital development projects and
programmes, including the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of its institutional, health, agricultural,
social and security sectors. We also extend our support
for the projects to revitalize Afghanistan’s national
economy in order to restore security and stability in all
parts of that country, to reduce the suffering of its
people and improve all aspects of their life.
The total contributions of my Government to
Afghanistan to advance its economy amounts to
approximately $1.5 billion, in addition to private
assistance from humanitarian organizations such as the
Sheikh Khalifa Foundation, which provided, in
collaboration with the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, an estimated contribution of $50 million
earmarked for the immunization programme for
Afghani children. My country also announced in
August a grant of $250 million to be managed by the
Abu Dhabi Fund for Development for development
projects in Afghanistan, particularly in the areas of
providing housing for widows, orphans and the
disabled, as well as the rehabilitation of Kabul and
other provinces. That is in addition to the other
contributions made directly by the United Arab
Emirates since 2007 to support international efforts

16

aimed at reconstruction and providing development
assistance to the Afghani people. We also participated
in the implementation of Government and nongovernmental projects, including the construction of
roads, the establishment of training centres and the
removal of landmines in Kandahar, which is expected
to be completed within four years at a cost of
$28 million.
The United Arab Emirates, which believes that
security and stability in Afghanistan is closely linked
to regional security, especially that of the Arab Gulf
region, strongly condemns all terrorist attacks in
Afghanistan, including those that targeted elements
from international forces and humanitarian and
diplomatic missions. We affirm that we will continue
our efforts, in cooperation with other State partners, to
support Afghanistan’s national programmes in order to
implement a comprehensive strategy of reforms and
security training to combat the activities of armed
groups, acts of terrorism, extremism and militancy and
the production and trafficking of drugs.
In conclusion, we call for a stronger role for the
United Nations in Afghanistan, including through
efforts to support all development sectors in that
country, so as to enable it to consolidate peace,
development and stability in all regions and to restore
its natural standing at the regional and international
levels.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Turkey is pleased to
sponsor the draft resolution before us today on the
situation in Afghanistan (A/66/L.10). The draft
resolution recognizes the progress made by
Afghanistan and emphasizes the remaining challenges
ahead of us. We believe that its adoption by consensus
will reflect the international community’s continuing
commitment to Afghanistan.
Let me also take this opportunity to express our
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for the
dedicated and outstanding work carried out by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
Turkey shares the views expressed by the
observer of the European Union. Afghanistan has come
a long way since the General Assembly last debated
this topic. The Afghan Government is showing strong
political will in taking forward Afghan ownership. We
support its efforts. Afghanistan’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity are of the utmost importance for the

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

country to plan its future. In that respect, we are
pleased to see that the Afghan National Security Forces
continue to assume increasing responsibility and
accountability for the sovereignty and long-term
stability of their country.
Despite the progress, however, the remaining
challenges are enormous and complex. Lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan ultimately require unity
and political reconciliation at home and solidarity and
sound cooperation in the region. To that effect, Turkey
actively supports regional cooperation with a view to
helping Afghanistan achieve a long-term political,
security and economic vision. In the interest of time, I
will confine my remarks to Turkey’s recent initiatives.
On 2 November, Turkey hosted an important
regional conference on Afghanistan, namely, the
Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan: Security and
Cooperation in the Heart of Asia. The Istanbul
Conference provided a unique opportunity for regional
countries to recognize Afghanistan’s role as the land
bridge in the heart of Asia, connecting South Asia,
Central Asia, Eurasia and the Middle East, and to
reaffirm their strong commitment to a secure, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan in a secure and stable
region.
In Istanbul, parties adopted a comprehensive
document, entitled “Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan”, which goes well beyond previous
documents by setting out regional ownership. It
constitutes a welcome milestone. The document
stipulates a set of applicable principles and confidencebuilding measures as an expression of solidarity and
support for Afghanistan. The confidence-building
measures range from security to reconstruction and
from health to the fight against terrorism and drug
trafficking.
Regional ownership played a crucial role in the
success of the Conference. In Istanbul, regional
countries reiterated their resolve to combat common
challenges facing the region and to subscribe to a new
mindset of regional cooperation in the heart of Asia.
Now it is equally important that Afghanistan and its
regional partners actively work to implement the
confidence-building measures within the framework set
out in the Istanbul Process. We therefore look forward
to the ministerial-level follow-up meeting that will take
place in Kabul in June 2012.

11-60244

Right before the Istanbul Conference, Turkey
hosted the sixth trilateral meeting between Turkey,
Afghanistan and Pakistan in Istanbul. The meeting
welcomed the joint statement of the three Presidents,
which underscored the crucial importance of the
Trilateral Ankara Summit Process as a comprehensive
platform for dialogue and cooperation and reiterated
their determination to elaborate on that cooperation in
all relevant fields of joint interest.
Before the end of the year, we have yet another
important event on our calendar. On 5 December, we
will meet in Bonn to discuss and to define the longterm commitment of the international community to
Afghanistan. Afghanistan’s long-term stability and
sustainable development require the support and
cooperation of the international community well
beyond 2014. Therefore, the Bonn meeting will be an
opportunity for the international community to assure
Afghanistan that 2014 is not the date of its exit and the
end of its commitment.
We recognize that significant challenges and
threats remain in Afghanistan. However, we are
confident that Afghanistan’s stability and social and
political harmony will grow stronger in the future. For
its part, Turkey will continue to provide assistance for
the peace, prosperity and security of the brotherly
Afghan people.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude for this opportunity to address the General
Assembly on the situation in Afghanistan. We are
pleased to sponsor the draft resolution before us
(A/66/L.10). Given the challenging situation that
Afghanistan faces today, it is of particular importance
to demonstrate the unity of the international
community in supporting Afghanistan by adopting the
draft resolution by consensus. Sincere appreciation is
due to our colleagues of the German delegation, who
ably led the consultations on the draft resolution.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my sincere appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
his statement this morning.
The draft resolution comprehensively addresses
the situation in Afghanistan. The issues expressed in it
are mutually interlinked and must be addressed through
determined efforts under Afghan ownership and
leadership, with the continuing support of the
international community.

17

A/66/PV.62

For the long-term stability of Afghanistan, we
must accelerate regional cooperation among its
neighbours. In that regard, Japan welcomes the
Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan of 2 November. It
is essential that Afghanistan and the international
community, in particular regional partners, establish a
stable and cooperative relationship based on mutual
trust, with an eye towards the sustainable development
of the country.
We expect further progress during the Bonn
Conference in December, where the civil aspects of the
transition, the long-term commitment of the
international community in Afghanistan and within the
region, and support of the political process will be
further defined.
Japan welcomes the transition of the security
responsibility that officially started in July, and looks
forward to further progress in that process. For peace
and security in Afghanistan, it is indispensable that a
smooth transition be conducted by strengthening the
capacity of the Afghan security forces. Japan continues
to play its role in achieving that objective through its
assistance to the Afghan police.
Transition and sustainable security are interlinked
with the political process. In that regard, continuing
efforts towards reconciliation and reintegration are
critical, even after the tragic loss of Professor Rabbani,
who spearheaded that process. It is important that all of
Afghanistan’s leaders stand together in solidarity and
demonstrate their resolve to work in support of peace,
reconciliation and national unity.
Supporting the Afghan-led political process must
remain a priority of international and regional partners.
Japan is determined to continue its support to advance
the country’s reintegration programme.
Coordination and prioritization are important as
we address the various challenges confronting
Afghanistan, as expressed in the draft resolution. We
welcome the central role played by the Joint
Coordination and Management Board in coordinating
international
assistance
and
reconstruction
programmes. We look forward to the next round of the
Board prior to the Bonn Conference. We also underline
the need for the continued development and
implementation of the national priority programmes
and look forward to the presentation of the remaining
programmes.

18

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
determination to exert our fullest efforts, together with
all international partners, towards the reconstruction
and stability of Afghanistan.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Over the
past decade, we have witnessed a number of significant
advances in Afghanistan. My delegation attributes
Afghanistan’s achievements to the steadfastness of the
Afghan people as well as the sustained commitment of
the international community to the Afghan peace
process. In that regard, my delegation pays tribute to
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
participating members of the International Security
Assistance Force and other international agencies, as
well as civil society, all of which are playing
indispensable roles in building a peaceful and
democratic Afghanistan.
Despite some encouraging developments, a host
of daunting challenges lie ahead on the path to building
a durable and sustainable peace in Afghanistan. I
would like to elaborate on those challenges that
deserve the highest priority and the most urgent
response from the United Nations and the international
community.
First, at the forefront of our concerns is the
continuing insecurity caused by violence and terrorism,
as well as the associated rise in civilian deaths and
injuries. In that regard, we are deeply saddened and
disheartened by the tragic assassination in September
of Professor Burhanuddin Rabbani, who was head of
the High Peace Council. Continued violence is not only
a threat to Afghanistan’s overall national security, but
also has a serious negative impact on regional peace
and security. In particular, for a successful and smooth
transition process leading up to 2014 and beyond, this
problem needs to be effectively and urgently
addressed.
To deal with this insecurity, the Afghan National
Security Forces should be further strengthened, and
coordination between the central and provincial levels
of Government should be enhanced. In addition, close
working cooperation between Afghanistan and its
bordering countries is indispensable to the lasting
stability of Afghanistan. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Istanbul Process on Regional Security
and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan,
adopted at the Istanbul Conference earlier this month.
In addition, we are eager to see further progress in

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

reconciliation and reintegration efforts. My delegation
looks forward to the Bonn Conference in December,
which we believe will be a timely opportunity to assess
the transition and further facilitate the reconciliation
process.

national reconstruction process. In this vein, the
Republic of Korea became a sponsor of the draft
resolution to add its resounding support to this
international collaboration to stabilize and strengthen
Afghanistan and its people.

Secondly, another serious concern is criminal
drug trafficking and the associated corruption. In that
connection, my delegation welcomes the efforts made
by Afghan authorities to reduce the production of
narcotics. However, we are concerned that Afghanistan
remains by far the largest source of illicit opium and
heroin traded globally, as noted in the report of the
Secretary-General (A/66/369). We call on the Afghan
Government, in cooperation with the international
community, and in particular with its neighbours, to
strengthen its efforts to eradicate narcotics. At the same
time, rural development projects are needed so that
people in rural areas have viable economic alternatives
to the cultivation of opium.

The transition process should not mean the end of
the international engagement in Afghanistan. The
stability and reconstruction of Afghanistan cannot be
achieved without the long-term engagement of the
international community beyond 2014. As such, the
sustained support of the international community is
vital to the success of the Afghan peace process and
reconstruction. My delegation reiterates its firm
willingness to engage in close cooperation with the
international community and Afghanistan. We are
convinced that Afghanistan, with its brilliant historical
and cultural heritage, will, and must, persevere in
facing its multiple current domestic and foreign
challenges and transform itself into a prosperous,
secure and democratic country in all respects.

Thirdly, we remain deeply concerned about the
violations and abuses against children and women,
such as the use of children for terrorist attacks,
coordinated attacks against girls and schools to prevent
access to education, and sexual violence against
children. In that regard, my delegation appreciates the
work of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, including its countryspecific conclusion on Afghanistan, contained in
document S/AC.51/2011/3, and looks forward to the
full implementation of the Working Group’s
recommendations.
The Republic of Korea has been a staunch
supporter of the reconstruction, development and
stability of Afghanistan. Since 2002, the Korean
Government has provided military personnel to support
stability and reconstruction in Afghanistan. In
particular, Korea has been actively supporting
Afghanistan’s capacity-building since setting up a
provincial reconstruction team base in Parwan province
last year. Moreover, the Korean Government will
continue to support the capacity-building of the Afghan
National Security Forces, as well as Afghanistan’s
economic and social development, in the years to
come.
Against that backdrop, my delegation welcomes
today’s draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan,
which represents the political will of all Member States
that support the Afghan people in their political and

11-60244

Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian):
Mr. President, I should like to thank you for having
convened this meeting of the General Assembly.
Tajikistan endorses the statement made earlier in this
meeting by the representative of the Republic of
Belarus on behalf of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.
Tajikistan was pleased to become a sponsor of
draft resolution A/66/L.10 on the situation in
Afghanistan. We hope that today, as in previous years,
the General Assembly will adopt it by consensus. I
should like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to the delegation of the Federal Republic of
Germany for its role and mediation during discussions
on the draft resolution.
Tajikistan cannot but be concerned about the
situation in neighbouring Afghanistan, to which it is
linked by multiple historical and cultural ties. Our
Governments are committed to further strengthening
our good-neighbourly relations and to developing and
deepening mutually beneficial bilateral cooperation in
various areas.
Today Afghanistan is going through a fateful
stage in its modern history. While on the one hand we
have seen a certain degree of success in antiterrorist
activity on the part of Government and international
security forces, on the other hand the forces of
destruction are seeking to undermine the establishment

19

A/66/PV.62

of peace and stability and to plunge the country back
into full-scale civil war.
Tajikistan supports the international strategy for a
comprehensive settlement and post-conflict recovery in
Afghanistan. In that context, we fully support the
Afghan Government’s efforts to achieve the goal of
national reconciliation. We welcome the efforts of the
international community, particularly the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
International Security Assistance Force, to establish
durable peace and stability in this long-suffering
country.
We believe an important factor in that regard is to
involve Afghanistan in the regional integration process
through economic and trade cooperation with
neighbouring States. In that connection, I would like to
highlight the role of the Dushanbe quartet, which
consists of Afghanistan, Pakistan, Russia and Tajikistan
and which is increasing its efforts to improve regional
commercial and economic cooperation, combat the
threats posed by terrorism, drugs and organized crime,
and to develop human resources for Afghanistan’s
military and civilian needs. The third quadrilateral
meeting of heads of Government was held in Dushanbe
on 2 September.
My country has done its part in the process of
establishing sustainable peace and stability in
Afghanistan. In view of the need to develop human
resources for Afghanistan’s law enforcement and
military structures and to train professional specialists,
we have provided opportunities in Tajikistan’s training
centres for border guards and law enforcement and
security personnel, in particular at the regional college
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.
In addition, Tajikistan is contributing actively to
training professionals for Afghanistan’s civilian needs.
Today, we propose to establish in our country a multipurpose vocational training centre for training
specialists for Afghanistan’s economic needs. We hope
that the international community will provide the
support needed to carry out that project. There is no
question that our shared language will help in the
process of training Afghan specialists in Tajikistan.
While the fight against drugs, terrorism and
organized crime requires the use of armed force, such
threats cannot be addressed through force alone. To
achieve a peaceful society, it is essential to restore the

20

country’s economy, agriculture and infrastructure. In
that regard, Tajikistan emphasizes the importance of
exploiting Afghanistan’s economic potential and
enormous natural resources. That will be an important
factor in resolving the multiple problems of a country
that has been ravaged by war for so many years.
An important factor in ensuring Afghanistan’s
sustainable social and economic development will be
to involve it in the regional integration process through
economic and trade cooperation with neighbouring
States. The issue of Afghanistan’s future post-conflict
economic recovery has been included on the agenda of
the forthcoming fifth Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on 26 and
27 March 2012 in Dushanbe. We are certain that the
Conference will make a significant contribution in that
area.
Tajikistan believes strongly in the importance of
implementing commercial and communications
projects that can promote the development of
interregional economic ties. Tajikistan supports the
development and implementation of infrastructure
projects in the areas of communication and transport,
both in Afghanistan and the region in general. Today
Tajikistan and Afghanistan are connected by five
automobile bridges crossing the border along the Panj
River. Construction began not long ago on a new
bridge in the Shurabad district, and two other bridges
at Kokul and Aivadzh are in the planning stage.
A railway project — between Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan and Afghanistan, with a connection to an
existing branch between Uzbekistan and Afghanistan,
as well as two prospective branches between Iran and
Afghanistan and Turkmenistan and Afghanistan — has
been evaluated by international experts and is awaiting
implementation. The railroad will become a transit
trunk route of regional significance that should
promote regional trade and economic development in
our neighbour Afghanistan.
In the current circumstances, energy will be of
key importance in restoring Afghanistan’s ruined
economy. The existing hydroelectric power stations in
my country, as well as those under construction, are
capable not only of satisfying Afghanistan’s needs for
environmentally clean and inexpensive electrical
power but also of supporting broad-scale development
of its agriculture through the restoration and
improvement of the country’s irrigation system. In that

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

context, I would like to note the particular significance
of the construction of electrical power lines across
Afghanistan. At the end of October, we put into
operation a 220-kilovolt transmission line from the
Tajik Sangtuda 1 hydroelectric plant to the Afghan city
of Puli Khumri. The KASA-1000 project is aimed at
addressing the problem of energy shortages in
Afghanistan and Pakistan through exploitation of the
hydroelectric energy potential of the countries of
Central Asia.
We support the laying of a gas pipeline across
Afghanistan from Turkmenistan to Tajikistan and
Pakistan. In addition to supplying the natural gas needs
of countries in the region, it will create a stable source
of revenue for Afghanistan. Thanks to its favourable
geographical location, Afghanistan is capable of
playing an important role in regional integration
processes. In today’s globalized world, the importance
of Afghanistan’s geographical position as a crossroads
between the various regions of the Asian continent can
only grow.
Establishing peace and security in Afghanistan
will depend to a significant degree on broad and
effective international and regional cooperation and on
the genuine and unwavering efforts of the international
community to achieve goals that meet the hopes and
aspirations of the Afghan people. We hope that the
draft resolution to be adopted by the Assembly today
will serve those worthy goals.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join other Member States in
sponsoring the draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan (A/66/L.10). The draft resolution
recognizes the progress made by the Afghan people in
building a stronger Afghanistan and acknowledges that
much important work remains.
We commend the significant contributions of the
United Nations to Afghanistan, noting especially the
crucial roles played by the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura, and the staff
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and other United Nations agencies on the
ground. We also salute the brave and dedicated work of
the Afghan security forces and the International
Security Assistance Force in helping to build a more
secure Afghanistan.
This year has been an important period of
transition for Afghanistan, as the international

11-60244

community
looks
to
transfer
lead
security
responsibility to the Government of Afghanistan by
2014. In the lead-up to 2014 we have seen that
economic, political and security progress in the region
will be mutually reinforcing, and that the international
community has a stake in supporting ongoing efforts
by Afghans and their neighbours to further that
progress.
The
United
States
strongly
supports
Afghanistan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
remains committed to a long-term partnership with
Afghanistan. As part of that commitment, Secretary of
State Clinton joined Afghan Foreign Minister Rassoul
and German Foreign Minister Westerwelle to co-chair
a ministerial meeting on the New Silk Road Initiative,
in support of the creation of a web of economic and
transit connections across South and Central Asia with
a central hub in Afghanistan. The idea behind the New
Silk Road vision is to support the development of a
sustainable Afghan and regional economy that
encourages economic development and the long-term
stabilization of the region. It is a shared commitment to
promote private-sector investment, to increase regional
trade and transit and to foster a network of linkages
throughout the region.
We commend the region for having the foresight
to recognize that economic development takes root
where there is security and stability. On 2 November,
in Istanbul, Afghanistan and Turkey co-chaired a
Conference on security and cooperation in the heart of
Asia. That Conference produced a declaration of strong
regional support for Afghanistan and was welcomed by
key international supporters. Afghanistan’s neighbours
and near-neighbours have spoken in one voice to
assure Afghanistan of their support for an Afghan-led
reconciliation process and the ongoing transition of
responsibility for security to Afghan national security
forces. They endorse the principles that are needed to
guide peace and reconciliation, including renouncing
violence, cutting links with terrorist groups and abiding
by the Afghan Constitution. They also recognize the
importance of long-term and sustained international
support to Afghanistan. The next series of meetings
will be in Kabul, and we fully support the Istanbul
Process.
Finally, we look forward to the Bonn meeting on
5 December. That meeting will be an opportunity for
the international community to match the clarity of the
regional commitments made at Istanbul by becoming

21

A/66/PV.62

more concrete and specific about
international support for Afghanistan.

long-term

We know that there are great challenges ahead,
but the work of the Afghan people, the international
community and the United Nations can lay the
foundation for a better, more stable and prosperous
future.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to express India’s appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this discussion on a
subject of great significance for us, our region and the
world. I also commend the German delegation for
coordinating intergovernmental negotiations in an
excellent manner, which has led us to the annual draft
resolution on the situation in Afghanistan (A/66/L.10).
As we have been doing for the past several years, we
are happy to sponsor this draft resolution, which is
traditionally adopted by consensus.
There
have
been
significant
political
developments during the past year. As the NATO
International Security Assistance Force prepares to
draw down its combat role in Afghanistan by the end of
2014, the efforts of the international community are
increasingly focused on providing Afghanistan a
helping hand to assist it in the transition and beyond.
It is important that the transition be Afghanowned, that it be planned and implemented in a
systematic manner that takes into account the realities
on the ground, that it be multifaceted, that it ensure the
protection and promotion of the human rights of all
Afghans, and that it leads to strengthening the Afghan
State and its institutions. We need concerted
international and regional efforts aimed at laying the
foundations of lasting peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Sustained and tangible progress on
security, governance and development issues is the key
for peace, progress and stability in Afghanistan. We
need accelerated progress on economic cooperation
that is simultaneous with political, security and other
confidence-building measures in order to ensure peace
and stability for Afghanistan and through it for the
entire region.
First and foremost, Afghanistan needs assistance
and support to build its capacity to tackle the critical
challenges of terrorism, including suicide terrorism, the
religious extremism that fuels it, and the drug
trafficking that sustains it. We are seriously concerned
that there has been no let-up in terrorist violence. The

22

tragic assassination last September of Professor
Burhanuddin Rabbani, Chairman of the High Peace
Council and former President of Afghanistan, and that
of other senior Afghan leaders, including President
Karzai’s brother, the late Ahmed Wali Karzai, are a
grim reminder of the overall deteriorating security
environment in the country.
The continuing resilience of insurgents and their
ability to target areas otherwise considered safe and
secure indicates that the security gains are still tenuous.
The latest report of the Secretary-General (A/66/369)
notes that the average monthly number of security
incidents rose 39 per cent as compared to the same
period in 2010.
As we have repeatedly highlighted, terrorism
finds sustenance and support from a dangerous mix of
ideologies and ambitions supported by training and
operations across the region, with suicide terrorism as
its main technique and targets that are not limited to
Afghanistan. We need concerted action to isolate and
root out that whole nexus of terrorism, which includes
elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba and
other terrorist and extremist groups that operate from
within and beyond Afghan borders. Those groups are
ideologically and operationally fused, and their bonds
have strengthened over the years. We need resolute
determination and political will to deal firmly with safe
havens for terrorist groups outside Afghanistan’s
borders.
Our vision for the transition period must also take
into account the conditions on the ground and the
capacity of Afghanistan’s security forces to preserve
their sovereignty and independence and the integrity of
their nation. We support further strengthening of the
Afghan National Security Forces, which must go handin-hand with enhancement of their operational
capabilities along with sufficient additional enabling
support.
India fully supports an inclusive and transparent
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process of reconciliation,
accompanied by an inclusive political process and
intra-Afghan dialogue that promotes the renunciation
of violence and severs ties to terrorist groups, while
abiding by the Afghan Constitution with its protections
for human rights, including the rights of women.
India has age-old historical, cultural and
economic ties with neighbouring Afghanistan, as well
as shared civilizational links. During the past decade,

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

our relationship has been renewed and consolidated by
our contribution to the rebuilding and reconstruction of
Afghanistan. India believes in a strong, independent,
sovereign, stable, united, democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan, at peace with itself and its neighbours.
Recent history has shown that an end to Afghanistan’s
suffering requires an end to external interference in its
internal affairs.
Besides security, we also need concomitant
progress on the developmental front. That also implies
greater
coherence,
coordination
and
further
streamlining of development-related efforts by the
international community, including the alignment of
assistance with Afghan national priorities. It is for that
reason that, as a developing neighbour itself, India has
pledged up to $2 billion in development and
humanitarian assistance, and that we recently signed a
comprehensive strategic partnership agreement with
Afghanistan looking at 2014 and beyond. The
agreement creates an institutional framework for our
future cooperation in the spheres of politics and
security, trade and economics, capacity-building and
education, along with social and cultural cooperation,
as well as civil society and people-to-people relations.
Afghanistan’s growth strategy is built upon the
country’s comparative advantage of abundant natural
resources and its strategic geographic location. Those
would have to be the building blocks of our vision for
Afghanistan as a hub linking the Middle East, West
Asia, Central Asia and South Asia through trade and
transit routes, railways and highways, energy pipelines
and electricity networks, and economic projects and
cross-investments. Such cooperation would not be only
between Governments but would have civil society and
business as stakeholders.
Today our investments in Afghanistan require a
framework of regional collaboration for their success.
The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), of which Afghanistan is a full member, is an
important vehicle for regional economic cooperation
within the South Asian region. From our vantage point
in the SAARC region, we would like to highlight the
potential of the dynamic SAARC market, which is over
$1.5 billion, and the Indian economy, which is over
$1.5 trillion, growing at a rate of 8 per cent per annum.
Cooperation linking our region with Central Asia
through Afghanistan could be a critical confidencebuilding measure.

11-60244

The greatest need today is for the Afghan people
to have peace and stability. They deserve to live in
peace and to decide their future themselves, without
outside interference, coercion or intimidation. All
countries of the region must work to facilitate that. It is
in that context that India participated in the recently
held Istanbul Regional Conference and will participate
in the forthcoming Conference in Bonn, so as to
contribute to international and regional initiatives to
support Afghanistan’s efforts at nation-building. India
calls upon the international community to make a longterm commitment to Afghanistan over the next decade.
India appreciates and supports the good work
being done by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. India will stand by the people of
Afghanistan as they prepare to assume responsibility
for their governance and security after the withdrawal
of international forces in 2014. The international
community as a whole needs to work with renewed
vigour and unity of purpose towards strengthening the
efforts of the Afghan Government to find solutions that
are inclusive and led by the Afghan people themselves.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to start by expressing our gratitude to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, whose service in
Afghanistan will come to an end by the end of this
year. His dedication to helping to strengthen peace and
stability in Afghanistan is praiseworthy.
We are very glad for the progress achieved by our
brotherly neighbour, Afghanistan, in all areas,
including achievements on Afghan-led political and
security issues. However, there are still clouds on the
horizon. First and foremost, there are the whispers of a
long-term presence of foreign forces in Afghanistan.
We welcome the withdrawal of United States and other
coalition forces. We strongly believe that any longterm military presence and the establishment of
permanent military bases in Afghanistan are to be
avoided.
Foreign forces entered Afghanistan in the name
of countering terrorism and establishing peace and
security. Ten years have passed since then. According
to many official reports, there has been an increase in
the degree of insecurity this year compared to the
situation last year. That is a clear indication that the
presence of foreign troops does not necessarily

23

A/66/PV.62

contribute to solving the problem of security in
Afghanistan. Rather, it may exacerbate the violence
and further add to the disenchantment of the people.
Therefore, a longer presence of foreign military forces,
in whatever form and under whatever justification,
would not bring peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Rather, it would provide a breeding ground for the
terrorists and extremist groups to further continue their
operations.
The other issue is the continued increase in the
cultivation of narcotic drugs, which is still the most
serious challenge, not only for Afghanistan but also for
transit and destination countries. That menace has
hindered Afghanistan’s development and has put at risk
Afghanistan’s social cohesion and that of its
neighbours. Moreover, narcotic drugs, as the financial
source of terrorism in Afghanistan, nurture another
breeding ground for terrorists, extremists and illegal
groups that attempt to destabilize the Afghan
Government.
According to the 2011 Afghanistan Opium
Survey, released on 11 October by the Afghan Ministry
of Counter Narcotics and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, opium poppy cultivation in
Afghanistan reached 131,000 hectares in 2011, 7 per
cent higher than in 2010, due to insecurity and high
prices. The Survey sends a strong message that the
international community cannot afford to be lethargic
in the face of that problem. A strong commitment is
needed from both Afghanistan and international
partners to curb this menace.
For decades, Iran has been at the forefront of a
full-scale war against narcotic drug smuggling.
Thousands of Iranian law enforcement personnel have
lost their lives or been injured, and billions of dollars
have been spent to combat drug traffickers. We have
shouldered a great burden in that fight, and we once
again strongly call on the international community
urgently to take firm and concrete steps in that regard.
Yet another issue is the long-standing problem of
Afghan refugees. We have hosted on average 3 million
Afghan nationals over the past three decades. At
present, more than 1 million Afghan refugees are
registered in Iran, and an even greater number of
unregistered Afghans are also living in our country. For
all these years, Afghan nationals have continued to
enjoy Iran’s educational and welfare facilities, among
other things, and to benefit from the same subsidies

24

that our own people receive. We once again urge the
international community to continue to strengthen and
expedite its efforts to create conditions conducive to
the sustainable repatriation of refugees and their full
rehabilitation and reintegration into their homeland.
With regard to regional cooperation, we have
continued our talks with Afghan authorities, on a
bilateral, trilateral and regional basis, in order to
further strengthen our cooperation. We have especially
focused on increasing our coordination in security
matters, counter-narcotics efforts, illegal immigration
and the completion of developmental projects,
including building roads and railways — and we have
been able to show many good results. For example, in
the matter of railroads, we will soon witness the
completion of a railway network in the region, which
will connect the landlocked Central Asian countries
and Afghanistan to the port city of Bandar-Abbas on
the Persian Gulf. Connecting Afghanistan to railway
systems in Central Asia would greatly facilitate Afghan
economic integration in the region.
In the trilateral summit meeting held in Tehran in
June, the Presidents of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan
agreed to join forces in combating militancy. All sides
stressed their commitment to efforts aimed at
eliminating extremism, militancy and terrorism and
their rejection of foreign interference, which is in
blatant opposition to the spirit of Islam, the peaceful
cultural traditions of the region and its peoples’
interests. The Iranian Defence Minister also visited
Afghanistan during the same month. A number of
projects have already been finished and some new
agreements have been reached. We look forward to
more agreements on a bilateral, trilateral and
multilateral basis.
Earlier this month we held the Istanbul meeting,
and we are expecting the Bonn meeting early next
month. The Istanbul Conference was an opportunity for
neighbouring countries and international partners to
exchange views on how to move forward on creating a
stable and prosperous Afghan-led process. We hope
that the upcoming meeting in Bonn will be another
occasion to discuss in a sincere manner ways to
develop measures aimed at addressing common
challenges in political and security issues and to
elaborate further ways to eliminate extremism,
militancy, terrorism and drug trafficking, as well as to
pave the way for greater economic prosperity for
Afghanistan, with the active participation of all the

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

neighbouring and regional countries, in line with the
wishes of the Afghan people.
In order to be successful, any initiative that
emerges from the Bonn Conference, including the New
Silk Road Initiative, should strengthen trust between
Afghanistan and its neighbours through active
engagement,
interaction
and
partnerships.
Afghanistan’s neighbours share critical interests in that
country’s security and long-term stability, and play
their role in promoting Afghanistan’s socio-economic
development. Obviously, a stable and flourishing
Afghanistan would be ideal for its neighbours and the
wider region. The continuing engagement between
Afghanistan and its neighbours and regional partners in
the areas of trade, economic development and
infrastructure development must therefore be
supported. We should also emphasize the central role
of the United Nations in coordinating international
efforts in Afghanistan, which is of paramount
importance and enjoys our full support.
Let me conclude by expressing our hope for a
better and more prosperous future for Afghanistan. As
in the past, we extend our full support to the people
and Government of Afghanistan in achieving security,
stability
and
comprehensive
and
sustainable
development for the country.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the delegations of Germany and
Afghanistan for their commitment and energy in
steering the negotiations of today’s draft resolution on
Afghanistan (A/66/L.10). The United Kingdom is
pleased to sponsor the draft resolution.
I will focus on four issues today, namely, security
transition, peace and reconciliation, the forthcoming
Bonn Conference, and regional cooperation.
First, we look forward to the forthcoming
announcement of the second set of provinces and cities
to begin security transition. Our aim is for a gradual,
condition-based transfer of security roles from the
International Security Assistance Force to the Afghan
National Security Forces. That will result in the Afghan
National Security Forces assuming lead security
responsibility in all provinces by the end of 2014.
Already, transition is proving successful in the first
tranche of areas, including in Lashkar Gah, where we
have seen notable progress. The Afghan National
Security Forces are getting stronger by the day and are
already demonstrating their effectiveness in providing

11-60244

security in transitioned areas. The second tranche of
transition will mean an Afghan security lead over
nearly half the population of the country.
The second issue is peace and reconciliation in
Afghanistan. Last week we saw over 2,000 delegates
attend the traditional Loya Jirga in Kabul. We welcome
the inclusivity of the Loya Jirga and its strong support
for Afghan-led reconciliation and the peace process.
That is particularly important in the wake of Professor
Rabbani’s tragic assassination, which was condemned
by the Jirga. We welcome efforts by the Government of
Afghanistan to make clear that the work of the High
Peace Council will not be stopped by violence.
President Karzai has shown that he is ready to engage
with those elements of the insurgency that are
genuinely willing to work towards a stable, secure and
prosperous Afghanistan. I emphasize the United
Kingdom’s readiness to support that work.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom looks forward to the
Bonn Conference, which will provide an opportunity
for the international community to once again align
behind the security and development priorities of the
Government of Afghanistan and to reinvigorate the
Kabul Process. We continue to see that Process as the
critical path to a prosperous and peaceful Afghanistan.
The Bonn Conference will also be an opportunity for
the international community to reiterate its support for
an Afghan-led political process and to solidify its longterm commitment to Afghanistan. In that regard, we
welcome the decision of the International Monetary
Fund to approve a new three-year extended credit
facility to the Government of Afghanistan.
The fourth issue is regional cooperation. Just as a
successful political settlement in Afghanistan depends
on the support of all sections of its people,
Afghanistan’s future stability requires the cooperation
of its neighbours. The United Kingdom therefore
commends the outcomes of the Istanbul Conference. It
is crucial that Afghanistan and its regional partners
actively work to maintain the momentum of the
Istanbul Process, because a stable and secure
Afghanistan is in the interest of the entire region.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance
that the United Kingdom attaches to its bilateral
relationship with Afghanistan. That partnership will
endure long after the completion of transition. We will
continue to have a strong relationship with Afghanistan
based on diplomacy, trade, aid and development. We

25

A/66/PV.62

will continue to support the Afghan Government and
the Afghan National Security Forces through training
and mentoring. We are pleased that today’s draft
resolution is another signal of the international
community’s enduring commitment to Afghanistan.
Mr. Kethergany (Malaysia): Allow me, at the
outset, to extend my delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation in
Afghanistan contained in document A/66/369. The
report provides a comprehensive description of the
current situation in Afghanistan, and we take note of its
valuable observations on possible courses of action.
My delegation also extends its appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Staffan de Mistura, as well as to the
members of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for their dedication in
carrying out their duties under the challenging situation
prevailing in the country.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express its deep condolences to the Government and
people of Afghanistan on the passing of the High Peace
Council Chairman and former President Professor
Burhanuddin Rabbani, who was assassinated in
September in Kabul. My delegation would also like to
share our thoughts and feelings with the families of
those who perished in the attack on the UNAMA office
in Mazar-e-Sharif in April.
Ten years ago, Afghanistan was at an important
turning point when the Security Council authorized the
creation of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) to assist the then Afghan Interim Authority.
Today, Afghanistan is again at a turning point, with the
transfer of security responsibilities from ISAF to the
Afghan National Security Forces against the backdrop
of the precarious security situation in Afghanistan.
We are concerned about the increasing rate and
number of civilian casualties in recent months. While
we strongly condemn the deliberate targeting of
civilians by anti-Government elements, we are equally
disturbed by the incidents of Afghan civilians being
killed in air strikes and night raids conducted by the
NATO-led ISAF forces. Malaysia abhors such
incidents, as they will only fuel anger in the Afghan
people towards ISAF, making it more difficult to win
their hearts and minds.
The battle to win hearts and minds is one that
Malaysia is familiar with, given our own experience in

26

dealing with armed insurgencies during the formative
years of our nationhood. In a genuine spirit of sharing
our experiences, we accepted the invitation of the
Afghan Government to participate in ISAF. In July
2010, Malaysia contributed a 40-member medical
contingent to Bamyan province to provide medical and
health-care services to the local population. The
contribution of the Malaysian contingent has been
recognized not only by its ISAF partners but also by
the local populace as a provider of innovative healthcare solutions that take into consideration local
socio-religious sensitivities.
The Malaysian doctors successfully designed and
constructed an inexpensive water filtration system in
schools and villages, meeting local concerns that
chlorination filtration methods might not be halal, or
religiously permissible. The Malaysian medical team
has also enlisted the assistance of provincial heads, or
grand mullahs, to encourage locals to come forward in
the blood donation drives to save lives.
The value that Malaysia places on winning the
hearts and minds of the Afghan people cannot be
underestimated. Within the context of the utmost
respect for the country’s democracy and constitution,
as well as for non-violence and the rights of all Afghan
people, my delegation supports the reconciliation and
reintegration process undertaken by the Afghan
Government.
My delegation strongly believes that human
capacity-building constitutes an important building
block in the nation-building process. It is also the most
practical way forward for Afghanistan to achieve
greater and more sustainable growth and development.
In that regard, Malaysia is committed to continuing to
provide technical assistance to Afghanistan under our
various technical cooperation programmes, including
the Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme, and
the Malaysian Defence Cooperation Programme. Under
the Third Country Training Programme and the
Malaysia-Australia Education Project for Afghanistan,
we have facilitated the training of trainers for Afghan
lecturers and teachers at the Language Institute in
Kuala Lumpur.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation fully endorses the
conclusions of the statement made by the
representative of the Republic of Belarus on behalf of

11-60244

A/66/PV.62

the States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.
The Russian Federation actively participated in
the negotiations on, and supports, draft resolution
A/66/L.10, on the situation in Afghanistan. The draft
focuses on comprehensively setting out the collective
approach of the international community to finding an
effective and long-term solution to the Afghan issue.
That task is receiving priority attention today.
The international conferences in Istanbul and Bonn
will develop the efforts to achieve the aims and tasks
of the Kabul Process, in the interest of establishing a
system for the transfer of responsibility for security to
the Afghan authorities. In the long run, such efforts
will provide a concrete basis for the development of a
democratic process in Afghanistan, for its social and
economic recovery and for the establishment of that
friendly country as a peaceful, independent, prosperous
and neutral State free of the threats of terrorism and
drugs. We are ready to cooperate in that effort.
However, we face many difficulties. We need to
eliminate the terrorist and extremist threats that
continue in various regions of Afghanistan. Such
threats seriously undermine efforts for national
reconciliation, without which it will not be possible to
stabilize the situation in Afghanistan. We are far from
completing the work of training functioning Afghan
forces that can ensure the rule of law throughout the
country, protect the State borders and prevent drug
crimes. We call on the countries with a military
presence to step up their efforts in that area, with the
understanding that the United Nations has the central
coordinating role for stabilization efforts.
National reconciliation is an important aspect of
the settlement process. It must be achieved under the
leadership of legally elected Afghan authorities. The
insurgents must meet three important conditions,
namely, recognizing the Constitution, breaking ties
with Al-Qaida and other terrorist and extremist
organizations, and agreeing to disarm. Meeting those
criteria is essential for delisting from the sanctions list.
The Security Council sanctions are an important
counter-terrorism instrument.
We are concerned about civilian deaths. We note
the efforts of countries with a military presence to
minimize civilian deaths, and we expect their greater
effectiveness for overall progress and normalization of
the situation.

11-60244

We call on the Government of Afghanistan and
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to
more resolutely fight the Afghan drug industry. No one
can question the fact that the drug trade is one of the
main sources of funding for terrorist activities on
Afghan territory and has become a threat to
international security. The danger of narcotics must be
fought in all its aspects. We must eliminate cultivation,
reduce consumption, and prevent drug barons from
accessing precursors and place them on the sanctions
list.
Taking into account the fact that ISAF carries out
its duties in Afghanistan as mandated by the Security
Council, we believe it important to deal with the threat
of terrorist and extremist activities in neighbouring
countries, guaranteeing the restoration of peace and
ensuring stability in the entire region. We believe that
the international military presence must be temporary.
International troops must leave Afghanistan once ISAF
has reported to the Security Council on the completion
of the mandate that sanctioned their deployment to
Afghanistan.
One of the main ways to normalize the situation
in Afghanistan is through regional organizations,
among which the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) has an essential role. Its unconditional priority
is to ensure the necessary conditions for secure and
stable development of participating States and to
protect people from any threat or risk in the current
context of resolving the situation in Afghanistan and its
surrounding region.
In recent years, SCO has actively cooperated with
Kabul. Representatives of Afghanistan regularly
participate in SCO meetings at the head of State level
and in political forums on regional security. An
SCO-Afghanistan contact group has been set up to
coordinate interaction. We are currently considering
granting Kabul’s request for observer status with SCO.
We are focusing on joint efforts to fight terrorism,
illegal drug trafficking and organized crime. The States
members of SCO are providing active support to the
Afghan people in addressing their social and economic
problems. SCO has shown that it is an effective forum
for coordination and dialogue in seeking collective
ways to normalize the situation in Afghanistan. Russia
looks forward to continuing international cooperation
with Afghanistan, including through the resources of
SCO.

27

A/66/PV.62

In conclusion, I would like to stress again that the
long-term stabilization of the situation in Afghanistan
and a real resolution of the problems will be impossible
without a comprehensive approach on the part of the
international community and a gradual transfer of
responsibilities to Afghan authorities. For our part, we
will continue to do all we can to coordinate the efforts
of all States and international organizations in the
interests of the Afghan people and of building peace
and stability in Afghanistan and the region as a whole,
while preserving the central coordinating role of the
United Nations.

become additional sponsors: Albania, Andorra,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Cambodia, Chad, China,
Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Eritrea, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lesotho, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mongolia, Montenegro, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Peru, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu and Viet Nam.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.10?

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/66/L.10.

Draft resolution A/66/L.10 was adopted (resolution
66/13).

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 38?

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to inform the Assembly that since draft resolution
A/66/L.10 was issued, the following countries have

28

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

11-60244
