S/PV.7939

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7939th meeting

Monday, 15 May 2017, 7.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
China
Egypt
Ethiopia
France
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
Russian Federation
Senegal
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Clay
Ms. Sison

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Special report of the Secretary-General on the review of the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (S/2017/293)
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2017/312)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-13603 (E)
*1713603*

S/PV.7939

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 7.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
review of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (S/2017/293)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2017/312)
The President (spoke in Spanish). In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Sudan and
South Sudan to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/412, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/293, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei, as well as to document S/2017/312, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2352 (2017).
2/9

15/05/2017

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): We welcome
the Security Council’s decision today to extend for
another six months the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). That was
the right decision. UNISFA provides critical security
to the Abyei Area and helps communities that live and
travel through Abyei to prevent and mitigate violence.
We are grateful to Ethiopia for the very significant role
it plays in maintaining peace and security in Abyei.
The United States fully concurs with the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that the conflict over Abyei is a
political problem that requires a political solution. As
we all discussed here in the Chamber during the April
briefing on peacekeeping (see S/PV.7926), when the
security Council considers whether a peacekeeping
operation is the right tool for us to use in the maintenance
of peace and security, we must consider whether the
mission supports a political solution.
In reviewing the mandate of UNISFA, the United
States carefully considered whether the mission was
appropriately aligned with the will of the parties and
the current security situation in Abyei. Regrettably,
since 2011 the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan have consistently lacked commitment to engage
in the work necessary to resolve Abyei’s final status
and to establish the interim measures previously agreed
to by the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan
to jointly administer and police the Abyei Area. In
addition, the Sudan and South Sudan continue to place
restrictions on UNISFA, thereby inhibiting its ability to
carry out the very mandate both States requested.
When we took the decision to authorize UNISFA,
and when we subsequently added tasks in support of
the joint border monitoring mission, there was a clear
commitment from both the Sudan and South Sudan
to carry out certain steps and a request for the United
Nations to support their efforts. While UNISFA has done
its part, the Sudan and South Sudan have not taken the
necessary steps to fully operationalize the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM).
We continue to support the JBVMM concept, but five
years of obstacles to the deployment of the mission is
enough. Until the parties remove the obstacles and take
the steps towards making the Mechanism effective,
UNISFA will not be able to fully carry out its mandate.
17-13603

15/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

That speaks to a broader point applicable to all
peacekeeping missions: the Security Council should
not indefinitely support mandates that lack the strategic
consent of the parties. When we are faced with those
challenges, we must use the leverage we have to
ensure our peacekeeping operations are effective. That
includes demanding that States that are benefiting from
our missions comply with their agreements with the
United Nations and with each other. If they do not, then
it is our job to take action.
We therefore welcome the Council’s decision that
this will be the last extension of UNISFA’s mandate
to support the Border Monitoring Mechanism unless
the parties can clearly demonstrate through their
actions, including through the steps outlined in today’s
resolution, that they are achieving the full functioning
of the Mechanism. It is incumbent upon all of us as
Council members to question the status quo when we
have recognized that the status quo is not working.
The United States has committed to helping to
support security and stability in Abyei, the Sudan,
South Sudan and the region. We urge a reinvigorated
political process leading to a permanent solution for the
status of Abyei. We also call on the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan to honour their commitments
to support UNISFA’s full deployment and to remove all
obstacles to its operation.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2352 (2017), which renews the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) for another six months. As the
only troop-contributing country to this unique mission,
it should come as no surprise that we attach a lot of
importance to UNISFA. That is why we actively and
constructively engaged in the negotiations of the
resolution. We worked with the penholder and other
members on this important file even before joining the
Security Council. We know that there has always been
unanimous support for this mission since its inception.
No doubt, the negotiations on the resolution were not
easy. In the end, however, it is good that all of us were
able to maintain Council unity on this important matter.
Let me take this opportunity to express our thanks and
appreciation to the penholder and to all the members of
the Council for demonstrating the necessary flexibility
and compromise in a bid to achieve consensus.
With regard to the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), which was the

S/PV.7939

most important sticking point in the negotiations,
all of us know the reason for the lack of meaningful
progress; there is no point in dwelling on it here.
The most important issue is that both parties should
demonstrate full commitment to the implementation of
their arrangements and take the necessary steps to that
effect, as called for in the resolution just adopted. On
that, the penholder has a very strong point.
In that regard, we welcome the outcome of the
extraordinary meeting of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism held in Addis Ababa yesterday
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, which underscored the need for
both parties to urgently take practical steps to activate
the JBVMM and facilitate its work. The meeting also
outlined a clear road map on steps that need to be taken
over the coming weeks and months. That is indeed the
essence of what we discussed over the past couple of
days. We sincerely hope that things will move in the
right direction so that there can be tangible progress
by the time we meet again, in six months, to consider
this file.
It is also imperative that the parties urgently
begin to establish the Abyei Area administration
and constitute the Abyei police, in accordance with
the commitments under the 20 June 2011 agreement,
without which UNISFA will be forced to continue
to operate in a governance vacuum, which creates
difficulties for the mission in carrying out its mandate
and shouldering additional burdens in undertaking
civilian responsibilities. Therefore, the parties should
also endeavour to unlock some of the issues hindering
the establishment of a civilian administration and police
services, with a view to making progress towards the
full implementation of the 2011 agreement.
In the absence of any progress, the continued
presence of the mission, which is so critical for peace
and stability in the Abyei Area, will be in serious
jeopardy. The strong message to emerge today from the
Council on this issue is indeed very good. We trust that
both parties heed the call.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I speak also on behalf of Sweden.
This unanimous vote is a strong sign of Security
Council unity. We are grateful to the United States, in
the role of penholder, for the constructive position that
allowed us to reach an important result. We also thank
Ethiopia for its flexibility and its role in the mission
in Abyei.

17-136033/9

S/PV.7939

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We share the points raised by United States on the
need for greater effectiveness in United Nations peace
missions. Renewing the mandate of a peacekeeping
mission should never be considered a routine activity
or business as usual. Instead, it always requires an
in-depth analysis by the Council. That is why, together
with Sweden, which I would like to commend for its
cooporation, and in close consultation with the 10
elected members, we asked on Friday to continue our
discussions. We thank you, Mr. President, for having
accepted that request, which led to a fruitful discussion
that made it possible for us to bridge positions and paved
the way for consensus in the interest of Council unity,
which we consider to be of paramount importance. In
that spirit, we worked towards a balanced solution that
brings together the need for more efficient peacekeeping
while contributing to preventing further instability
across East Africa.
The review of a peacekeeping mission should take
into account the views of the regional actors and of the
troop-contributing countries, in particular when such
views are convergent and adhere to the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic reviews, as is the case with the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
Today’s resolution 2352 (2017) does just that.
Nevertheless, we agree that the stalemate in
Abyei has gone on for too long. Today the Council is
saying to the parties that they must demonstrate clear
commitment in the next six months or UNISFA’s
support for the joint border verification mission will
come to an end. In that regard, we welcome the recent
meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism,
held in Addis Ababa. The parties must now promptly
take concrete progress on the implantation of the
border arrangements.
The outcome of today’s vote can provide a
successful model for discussion in the coming months
on other peacekeeping operations. Italy and Sweden
will continue to work with all members of the Council
for sustainable and inclusive solutions.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supported the adoption
of compromise resolution 2352 (2017), on extending the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) . It is our view that, even if working at
limited functionality, the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism remains of great importance
for the entire process for inter-Sudanese solutions.
4/9

15/05/2017

Fully halting UNISFA’s support for the Mechanism
seems illogical and destructive, not just in Abyei but in
the entire region. It is our hope that both the Sudan and
South Sudan will heed the clear signal from the security
Council regarding the need to activate the mechanisms
established by the agreements on Abyei so as to make
progress in the process of the political settlement.
We are pleased that, at the end the day, common
sense prevailed and a resolution was adopted that
reflects the views of leaders of the region, and is not
limited just to narrow financial concerns. While indeed
significant questions remain regarding the working
methods of the penholders, who to the very last minute
procrastinated in finding a compromise, we would
nonetheless like to express our support for the activities
of UNISFA and welcome the efforts of Ethiopia’s as
the troop-contributing country that bears the primary
burden for the maintenance of peace and stability in
the region.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2352 (2017). We
thank the United States for its strong determination to
lead the negotiations and for its engagement throughout
the process. We would also like to highly commend the
flexibility of Ethiopia in supporting the resolution.
Japan voted in favour of the resolution based on the
need to maintain the relative calm in Abyei and improve
the functioning of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism. The role of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei has been crucial in
the absence of the Abyei Area administration council
and police service. We thank Ethiopia for its efforts in
that regard.
Japan is encouraged that grassroots dialogue
between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya continues
and that the Amiet common market is benefiting both
tribes. However, we are disappointed by the lack of
political progress to bolster those developments.
The Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and a Joint
Political and Security Mechanism are very important
to build confidence on pending issues such as the
final status of Abyei as well as the demarcation and
demilitarization of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone.
Japan, as a matter of principle, supports
streamlining United Nations peacekeeping missions
through improved efficiency. We believe that, on
each peacekeeping operation, the Council should hold
17-13603

15/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in-depth discussions and make judgments on mandates
or ceilings we authorize, based on their individual
merits. We welcome the fact that the Council was able
to decide unanimously to make a final extension of its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, unless clear conditions are met.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank the delegation of the
United States for its constructive efforts to ensure
the adoption of resolution 2352 (2017), unanimously
extending the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei. The resolution to extend the
mandate unanimously reflects the unity of the Council
and sends a clear and strong message to the parties to
the conflict that the Council has a clear vision that it
wants to implement and that the two parties should
comply with that vision.
My country voted in favour of the resolution in
order to ensure a correlation between the strength of
the Force on the ground and its mandate. This approach
should be followed when reviewing any peacekeeping
operation, instead of seeking a gradual decrease in
strength that would affect the ability of the operation to
carry out its mandate.
In closing, we note the need to take into consideration
the concerns of all troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
when determining, extending or altering the mandates
of current peacekeeping operations. TCCs are an
important part of these operations and responsible for
implementing the mandates of operations. They are the
parties most capable of determining the needs of every
peacekeeping operation and of their own forces.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2352 (2017), renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
The resolution embodies the will of the Council,
while taking into account the concerns of the affected
countries and the troop-contributing countries,
including Ethiopia.
Thanks to the joint efforts made by the Sudan and
South Sudan, alongside the international community,
the situation in Abyei remains calm in general, but
challenges remain to its political and security situation.
UNISFA’s ongoing active implementation of its mandate
will be conducive to the maintenance of regional peace
and stability.

S/PV.7939

China hopes that the resolution will be earnestly
and effectively implemented. We encourage the Sudan
and South Sudan to continue to engage in dialogue;
steadily build trust and confidence, keeping in mind
the larger picture of the interests of all ethnicities and
communities in the region; effectively advance the
implementation of the relevant bilateral agreements;
and establish and operationalize interim adminstrative
and judicial institutions at an early date.
China will continue to support UNISFA in
implementing its mandate, and stands ready to play a
constructive role in achieving peace and stability at an
early date in the Abyei area.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2352 (2017) today.
Through this text, we have extended the important
work of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) for another six months.
I should like to pay tribute to the mission and to
Ethiopia for all they have done to improve the security
and humanitarian situation in Abyei, despite the absence
of political progress. Our collective priority now must
be supporting continued stability in the region and the
reinvigoration of the political process. UNISFA will
play an important role in that effort. But as it does, it is
right that we keep it under close review so that it is best
suited to fulfil its mandate.
Where there is evidence that part of a mission is not
contributing to the implementation of a mandate, we
should not continue to devote resources to it, particularly
when budgets across all missions are under pressure.
For the past five years, the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism has been unable to monitor the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone effectively because the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan have not
matched the commitment of UNISFA. The resolution
makes it clear that support to the Monitoring Mechanism
will stop in six months unless both Governments show
steadfast commitment to allowing the Mechanism to
reach full operational capability.
Therefore, let me close by urging the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan to fully engage
with the African Union and the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism, including by implementing the
commitments they made over the weekend, so that
governance and justice mechanisms can be established,
direct negotiations resumed and a final, overdue
settlements of the Abyei question can at last be agreed.

17-136035/9

S/PV.7939

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2352 (2017),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We thank the
members of the Security Council, in particular the
penholding delegation and the troop-contributing
countries, for their flexibility, which made it possible
to achieve this dynamic compromise.
Senegal decided to join in the renewal of the
UNISFA mandate, including its operational support
for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, because we are deeply convinced of the
need for a united approach of the Security Council to
managing relations between the Sudan and South Sudan,
underpinned by our determination to work side by side
with the two countries in the search for lasting stability
and peace. To that end, in implementing the relevant
agreements between the two countries, we appeal to the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to establish
provisional arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei area and agreements on border
security, in particular the Agreement on the Border
Monitoring Support Mission.
In the context, we need all possible guarantees
in order to prevent tensions that could compromise
the stability that has been achieved. The scope of the
challenge requires the Security Council to remain
continuously vigilant and united, and to cooperate
fully with the organizations and countries of the region,
which have a very important role to play. In that regard,
my delegation is convinced that we must engage in and
maintain a dynamic and constructive dialogue with the
troop-contributing countries.
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2352 (2017), renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for
six months. It is indeed crucial to continue to closely
follow the situation between the Sudan and South
Sudan and to align the mission with its mandate.
Stable relations between the Sudan and South Sudan
are a major determinant for peace and security in West
Africa. France welcomes the activities of Ethiopia,
which, through its soldiers deployed to UNISFA, is
contributing to that goal with resolve and dedication.
Stable relations between the Sudan and South Sudan
are first and foremost in the hands of the two parties.
The agreements signed by the two parties in 2011 and
6/9

15/05/2017

2012 are the road map to be followed to ensure that
stability, which requires a change in the status quo.
We therefore welcome the resolution’s call on
the parties to live up to their responsibilities in this
framework and to make the necessary progress in
managing their relations. In this connection, we
recall our support for the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, headed by President Mbeki, in its
ongoing and stepped-up efforts for the implementation
of the agreements between the two parties. The meeting
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism in Addis
Ababa over the past few days is a welcome development,
and we hope that the commitments undertaken will be
fully implemented.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as a representative
of Uruguay.
Frankly, I trust that if any clear element should
emerge from Uruguay’s membership of the Security
Council, it is our firm conviction that no State — much
less a State participating in a peacekeeping mission — can
hinder missions established by the Security Council. I
think we have fought quite hard on that theme.
The adoption of resolution 2352 (2017), which we
welcome, is conditional. This will be the last extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei unless both parties demonstrate in
deed a clear and firm commitment to and offer firm
guarantees for the implementation of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. At the same
time, we will await the report to be issued by the
Secretary-General before 15 October in order to see
whether the Mechanism has reached full operational
capacity. The issue of the full operational capacity
of peacekeeping missions has also been an ongoing
concern of my delegation.
We commend Ethiopia for its efforts in Abyei over
the years. It has undoubtedly done important work in
protecting the civilian population. We thank the United
States for the transparent and open way in which it
conducted the negotiations on the resolution, allowing
it to be adopted unanimously. Let me clearly reaffirm
that the future of this peacekeeping mission is now
exclusively in the hands of the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
17-13603

15/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7939

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.

Demilitarized Border Zone, and remove any obstacles
to the work of the JBVMM.

Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. I wish you
every success. I am sure that we will cooperate fully
with you in this endeavour.

The Government of my country is fully committed
to implementing the decisions the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism, which met today and
yesterday in Addis Ababa. We are also committed
to implementing any decision resulting from future
meetings, especially those relating to the activation
of the JBVMM, the creation of additional team sites
and the implementation of the Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of
the Abyei Area. My country hopes that the decisions
of these meetings will constitute a new start towards
normalizing relations between the two countries and
addressing any concerns, especially security concerns.

I would like to thank the Council for the spirit of
cooperation and consensus that allowed it today to
adopt resolution 2352 (2017), extending the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) for six months. We hope that the same spirit
will characterize the discussions of the Council in a
manner that will allow it to confront all challenges to
international peace and security.
My country is committed to implementing the
resolution adopted today and any subsequent relevant
resolutions. I take this opportunity to stress my
country’s commitment to cooperating with UNISFA in
order to allow it to implement its mandate under the
resolutions of the Council.
I note the security and stability prevailing in Abyei
and the significant progress achieved towards ensuring
peaceful coexistence between the Misseriya and Ngok
Dinka communities. This is a fact noted in all the
reports submitted to the Council and is the direct result
of the joint efforts of the Government and society and of
the positive role played by UNISFA since its inception.
The Sudan has never contributed to disrupting the
work of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JVBMM) or restricted its movements.
The Council has received the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/312), which notes that the Mechanism
cancelled 18 of its air patrols due to delays in receiving
authorization from the South Sudanese authorities. This
clearly shows that the Sudan, unlike the other party,
cooperates fully with the Mechanism.
My country believes that the Mechanism is
necessary to ensure peace along the borders between
the Sudan and South Sudan and to normalize relations
between the two countries. Therefore, we cannot
understand why UNISFA would end its support for
the Mechanism. If we are to activate the Mechanism,
we need to launch dialogue and discussion with the
Government of South Sudan, pressure it to honour
its commitments in order to operationalize the Safe

My country is committed to all agreements signed
with the Government of South Sudan, including the
2004 Abyei Protocol, the 20 June 2011 temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area, and the 27 September 2012 Agreements on
Cooperation and Security Arrangements. We call on our
brothers in the Government of South Sudan to engage
seriously with the Government of the Sudan and with
the African Union in establishing the Abyei institutions
provided for in the 20 June 2011 Agreement in order
to determine the final status of the Area, which is the
sole prerogative of the President of the Sudan and the
President of South Sudan, according to the agreements
signed between the two parties.
Until then, we stress that the Abyei Area is
Sudanese territory. The Republic of the Sudan has
full sovereignty over that territory according to the
provisions of international law and the decision of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague. We enjoy
full sovereignty in line with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. That status cannot be altered other than
through a referendum between the two countries or
mutually agreed upon measures.
My country believes that sustainable peace and
security in Abyei and along the border between the
Sudan and South Sudan can be achieved only through
the two pillars of implementation of the temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area and the implementation of all provisions of
the 27 September 2012 Agreements on Cooperation and
Security Arrangements.

17-136037/9

S/PV.7939

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

15/05/2017

The 20 June 2011 Agreement provides for the
establishment of the Abyei Area administration, the
Abyei Joint oversight committee and the Abyei police
service, which are important institutions for ensuring
the administration of the area so as to provide the
necessary services and ensure peaceful existence
among all communities. Those institutions would also
contribute to generating the necessary conditions to
determine the final status of Abyei in a win-win manner
that would satisfy the aspirations of all parties.

carry out all its tasks pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Moreover, the 20 June 2011 Agreement laid
strong foundations for normalizing relations between
the countries and ensuring cooperation in all areas.
The Agreement covers every important area so as
to ensure a normal relationship between the two
countries. The Agreement also provides for certain
security arrangements, which call for ending any
support to insurgent movements and the establishment
of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. However, the
Government of South Sudan continues to support
and harbour insurgent Sudanese movements in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states and the Darfur region
despite the substantial cooperation offered by my
own Government, which has been praised by all our
international and regional partners. My country hopes
that the Government of South Sudan will honour its
commitments by fully implementing the necessary
security arrangements so as to improve relations
between the two countries and meet the two countries’
aspirations to peace, stability, development and goodneighbourliness.

I would also like to acknowledge the positive role
played by your predecessor in leading the Council
last month.

With regard to the deployment of the police unit
to protect the oil facilities in the Diffra oil complex,
my country believes that the establishment of such a
unit resulted from the failure to establish the Abyei
police service and the presence of Sudanese insurgent
movements in South Sudan that would attack the oilfield.
Such was the case in 2012 when the Heglig oilfield near
the Abyei Area was occupied and destroyed.
To conclude, I would like to extend my thanks
and appreciation to all our partners who contribute
to facilitating the work of UNISFA, in particular the
Government of Ethiopia and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, as well as the African
Union Commission and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan and South Sudan
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Sudan and South Sudan. The Sudan is fully committed
to cooperating with UNISFA so that it can smoothly
8/9

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Permit me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I would like to assure you of our full cooperation
in achieving the success of your presidency.

We warmly welcome the report (S/2017/312) of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei and strongly
support the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). As we have
repeatedly stated, although it continues to face serious
challenges in implementing its mandate, UNISFA is
the best thing that has happened to Abyei in its long
history of struggle. With regard to UNISFA’s presence
in the Abyei Area, the report of the Secretary-General
shows that, although a great deal remains to be done,
notable progress has been made in promoting peace
and security in Abyei, thereby fostering reconciliation
and cooperation among the communities that converge
seasonally in the Area, delivering social services and
humanitarian assistance, and initiating programmes
dealing with social economic development. That
would not have been possible without the creative and
determined effort of UNISFA.
Cooperation between the two countries is critical
to any constructive and productive effort in Abyei.
Indeed, even the progress made by UNISFA could
not have been possible without a certain degree of
functional cooperation between the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan. However, much more
cooperation is needed if the efforts of UNISFA are to
continue to bear tangible results that will benefit the
two countries and help facilitate continued progress in
the countries’ relationship.
The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
believes that the withdrawal of support for the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism would
negatively impact the implementation of the Agreements
on Cooperation and Security Arrangements, by
emboldening each side to take a more combative
posture along the border. The Security Council is urged
17-13603

15/05/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to continue to encourage support of the Mechanism
because ceasing the vital support that is much needed
for the Area may lead to a proxy conflict along the
South Sudan-Sudan border.
We are indeed encouraged by the recent
improvement in relations between the two countries.
The Government of South Sudan sincerely hopes that
that will develop into even greater cooperation in a
wide range of areas of mutual concern and interest.
In this connection, it is our firm belief that the Abyei
Area could contribute significantly to the development
of cordial ties between the two countries. This can
be done by building on grass-roots intercommunal
cooperation, which can extend to the national level in
the two countries.
In conclusion, as things now stand it is obvious
that the search for a final solution to the Abyei problem
has stalled due to the differences between the two

S/PV.7939

Governments, despite the tireless efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, under the
leadership of the former President of South Africa,
Thabo Mbeki, and the support of the African Union and
the United Nations.
The people of Abyei and the neighbouring
communities from both the north and the south who
migrate to the Area seasonally in search of water and
pasture cannot be abandoned to suffer neglect in a
vacuum of State responsibility for their security and
general welfare. The international community is called
upon to step in and fill the vacuum, not only in the
immediate interests of the communities concerned,
but also in the long-term interests of the two countries.
This is urgently needed to stabilize the situation in the
Area and create an environment for a more constructive
and fruitful dialogue on the future of Abyei.
The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

17-136039/9
