A /71/PV.74

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

74th plenary meeting

Thursday, 6 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/71/L.60)
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Argentina to introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.60.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour for me to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.60, entitled “Micro-, Small and Medium-sized
Enterprises Day”.
I would like to begin by thanking all the countries
that are sponsoring this draft resolution and all the
delegations that participated actively and constructively
in the negotiations.
I would also like to thank the International Council
for Small Business (ICSB), in particular its Executive
Director, Mr. Ayman El Tarabishy, for all the support
and information provided to us from the start of this
process. The ICSB held its 61st annual World Conference
here at the United Nations last year, which was attended
by officials from more than 55 countries. On that
occasion, the ICSB made a statement on the urgent
need to designate a day recognizing the important role
of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises in the
development of economies as a whole. That is when the

Argentine authorities decided to advance and promote
this important initiative in the General Assembly.
Since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, all countries have been
working on its implementation and on finding ways to
ensure that each actor can contribute in the best possible
way. Micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises are
one such actor. That has the potential to have a lasting
positive impact on the world’s development needs given
that, in terms of number, they dominate the global
business landscape.
Estimated figures indicate that 95 per cent of
companies around the world are micro-, small and
medium-sized, accounting for approximately 60 per
cent of private sector employment. These companies
can become engines that sustain growth for long-term
development in developing countries. With stronger
economic growth, micro-, small and medium-sized
enterprises gradually assume a key role in industrial
development. They can meet the growing local demand
for services, which allows for increasing specialization
and, moreover, support large companies with services
and consumables.
We hope that the establishment of 27 June as
Micro-, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Day will
help raise public awareness of the important role such
companies play in many areas of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the many challenges
they face.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09300 (E)

*1709300*

A/71/PV.74

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/71/L.60, entitled “Micro-,
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Day”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of A/71/L.60: Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guyana, Haiti,
Libya, Myanmar, Nicaragua, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South
Africa and Tunisia.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.60?
Draft resolution A/71/L.60 was adopted (resolution
71/279).
Agenda item 13 and 117 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/71/L.58)
The President: I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Mora Salcedo (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): As members are aware, paragraph 23 of draft
resolution A/71/L.58 refers to the phase II preparatory
meeting, which is to be held in Mexico in late November.
The International Organization for Migration will hold
its Council meeting from 28 November to 1 December.
That will mean that two significant meetings on
international migration are be held at the same time.
For that reason, we have been requested to change the
dates of the preparatory meeting.
In the light of that request, our intention is to hold
the three-day preparatory meeting in early December
to ensure that the draft resolution is consistent with the
requirements of Member States and to allow for the
proper planning of travel arrangement. Therefore, we
propose replacing the words “in late November” with
the words “in early December”.
2/7

06/04/2017

The President: The representative of Mexico
has proposed an oral amendment to draft resolution
A/71/L.58. May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to adopt the oral amendment?
The oral amendment was adopted.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.58, entitled
“Modalities for the intergovernmental negotiations
of the global compact for safe, orderly and regular
migration”, as orally amended. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/71/L.58, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 71/280).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Amadeo (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank the facilitators, you,
Mr. President, and the many delegations that worked so
hard to negotiate resolution 71/280. The United States
joined the consensus on the resolution and looks forward
to engaging actively during the preparatory process, the
negotiation of the compact and the intergovernmental
conference in 2018.
We appreciate the fact that the modalities resolution
clarifies the role of the International Organization for
Migration (IOM) in providing support and expertise
throughout the development of a compact and during
preparations for an intergovernmental conference.
With its extensive migration expertise and presence in
nearly 150 countries worldwide, IOM’s contributions
will be critical during all phases of the compact’s
development and implementation. We also welcome
the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for International Migration, and we are pleased
that Ms. Arbour will play a leadership role in the
compact process.
Throughout the negotiation of resolution 71/280,
the United States underscored the importance
of transparency, particularly with respect to the
participation of civil society during the preparatory
process and the conference. Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), academic institutions, private
sector actors and other stakeholders play an essential
role on issues related to migration. For that reason, the
17-09300

06/04/2017

preparatory process and conference should be open to
all concerned parties, including those that do not have
consultative status in the Economic and Social Council.
Their expertise and participation are essential to the
success of the preparatory process, the conference and
the implementation of a global migration compact. In
that context, we would like to reiterate our belief in the
importance of inclusiveness, fairness and transparency
in compiling the list of NGOs for participation in the
compact preparatory process and conference and in
other United Nations summits and high-level meetings.
Any concerns that a State Member of the United
Nations may have about an NGO’s participation in
meetings related to the compact need to be addressed
transparently, not behind closed doors. NGOs must
not be denied access to United Nations meetings and
forums arbitrarily or for political reasons. According to
paragraphs 6 (b) and 6 (c) and the corresponding footnote
in the resolution, the President of the General Assembly
will bring a proposed list and a final list of civil society
participants to the attention of the General Assembly
for both the preparatory process and the conference. It
is only by comparing the proposed and final list that
we will see whether an organization has been blocked.
This process is inadequate because it will not make
clear which Member State objected to the participation
of an NGO or why the Member State objected. It is our
firm belief that the source and basis of any objection
should be shared with the General Assembly.
The United States attaches the greatest importance
to the contributions of civil society to the work of the
United Nations The compact preparatory process and
the conference will have greater value if all legitimate
and concerned civil society voices are heard without
exception. Each special session, high-level meeting
or conference is different, so the language in the
resolution concerning civil society participation should
not be seen as a precedent for other resolutions. In the
future, this organ should strive for more transparent
modalities language that will foster robust civil society
participation in the work of the United Nations,
Finally, the United States would like to emphasize
the importance of transparency regarding cost
estimates during the negotiation of General Assembly
resolutions. The Secretariat should respect the intent of
rule 153 of the General Assembly’s rules of procedure
and provide Member States with a cost estimate before
Member States conclude the informal negotiation of a
resolution. The formal adoption of a resolution often

A/71/PV.74

occurs a number of a days or weeks after Member
States conclude their informal negotiations. In order
for Member States to be responsible contributors to the
United Nations, the Secretariat must proactively share
cost estimates at least 48 hours prior to the conclusion
of informal negotiations. Member States must have
sufficient time to review cost estimates and consider
whether they match the activities envisioned in a
draft resolution.
As noted throughout the negotiation process,
the United States is interested in ensuring that this
process be conducted efficiently. We are pleased that
the resolution has established a voluntary trust fund
that can and should be used to support the preparatory
process and conference in 2018. We urge Member
States to contribute to the fund accordingly. The United
States looks forward to working with Members States
of the United Nations, the Office of the President, the
Secretariat, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Arbour, the IOM and all other stakeholders to
exchange views on experiences and best practices and
to develop a non-binding global migration compact that
will result in practical outcomes.
Ms. Pritchard (Canada): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Australia, New
Zealand and my own country, Canada.
First, let me begin my thanking the co-facilitators,
Switzerland and Mexico, for their open, transparent,
cooperative and collaborative approach to preparing
the modalities resolution 71/280. We appreciated the
opportunity to discuss ideas throughout the process,
and we are on the whole quite pleased with the
outcome of the negotiations. We would like to take
this opportunity to comment on three aspects of the
modalities resolution.
First, human rights and the gender dimensions of
international migration should be at the heart of the
migration compact. We were disappointed that the
language in paragraph 20 in particular was weakened
in the final stages of negotiations. We are committed to
ensuring that those issues are appropriately addressed
and that the international human rights obligations of
Member States are reflected throughout all the phases
of the process leading toward the development of the
global compact.
Secondly, we fully support efforts to make the
process of including civil society organizations more
open and inclusive. Nevertheless, we would have

17-093003/7

A/71/PV.74

preferred to see more inclusive language on participation
by civil society, as civil society actors will play a
critical and wide-ranging role in the global compact
process. We believe that the language providing for
participation on a non-objection basis may not provide
an adequate level of transparency and accountability,
and we would encourage Member States to exercise
restraint in any objections.
Finally, we would also like to reiterate our support
for the role of national human rights institutions in
the process. Such institutions are unique, independent
bodies created by State legislation or by constitutions
that have broad human rights mandates that allow them
to apply the full range of international human rights
norms and standards in their work. They are well
positioned to support the process of the development
and implementation of the global compact, and we
would encourage their participation to the greatest
extent possible.

06/04/2017

We also note with satisfaction a growing awareness
of the truly global nature of migration issues, as well
as an understanding of the need for global consensus
and cooperation.
While recognizing the efforts of the facilitators
in finding common ground and the flexibility of all
partners, the European Union and its States members
regret that it was not possible to include a reference
to the non-legal and binding nature of the outcome
document. While we remain committed to engage
constructively in the upcoming negotiations, it is
our understanding that our discussion will result
in an action-oriented document that will not be
legally binding. We have stressed that throughout the
negotiations for the modalities resolution. Although it
is not reflected in the document, we consider that the
basis for our future engagement.

As members are aware, we very much support the
decision to hold thematic and regional consultations
as a first step to developing the compact before
negotiations. We remain committed to actively engaging
in the process to develop the migration compact as the
consultations get under way, and we look forward to
working with all delegations in that regard.

The President: I would like to take this opportunity
to express my sincere thanks to Ambassador Juan
José Gómez Camacho of Mexico and Ambassador
Jürg Lauberof Switzerland, the co-facilitators of the
informal consultations, who demonstrated great ability
and patience in their conduct of the discussions and
complex negotiations on resolution 71/280. I also thank
Member States for their valuable contributions to
reaching an agreement on the resolution.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 13 and 117.

We shall now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution 71/280.

Reports of the Fifth Committee

I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.
Ms. Voutounou (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.
At the outset allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the successful outcome of the
negotiations on resolution 71/280, entitled “Modalities
for the intergovernmental negotiations of the global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration”. In
particular, let me thank the co-facilitators and their
teams for their efforts to bring this important exercise
to a successful conclusion.
These modalities lay the basis for our joint work in
the next two years and will ensure the successful adoption
of the global compact for migration in September 2018.
4/7

The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 133, 134, 140 and 148.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Ms. Diana Minyi Lee of Singapore, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee before
the Assembly.
Ms. Lee (Singapore), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour to introduce to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee,
which contain recommendations on issues considered
during the first part of the resumed seventy-first
session of the General Assembly. The Fifth Committee
met from 6 to 31 March and held five plenary meetings,
as well as numerous informal and informal-informal
consultations. The Committee’s report on agenda item
115, “Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary
17-09300

06/04/2017

organs and other appointments”, was already considered
by the Assembly at its seventieth plenary meeting on
8 March.
Let me now introduce the additional reports of the
Fifth Committee, which contain recommendations on
issues that require action by the General Assembly.
Under agenda item 134, “Programme budget for
the biennium 2016-2017”, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/71/716/Add.1, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of a draft resolution on special subjects relating to
the programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Under the same agenda item, the Committee provides
advice to the General Assembly on programme budget
implications should it adopt draft resolution A/71/L.58.
The relevant report of the Fifth Committee is contained
in document A/71/854.
Under agenda item 140, “Joint Inspection Unit”,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/71/855 the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 148, “Financing of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals”, in
paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/71/704/Add.1 the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
that was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 133, “Review of the efficiency
of the administrative and financial functioning of
the United Nations”, in paragraph 8 of its report
contained in document A/71/717/Add.1 the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of a draft resolution entitled “Progress towards an
accountability framework in the United Nations
Secretariat”, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote. In paragraph 9 of the same report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of the draft decision entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
I thank delegations for their cooperation during this
session and for the spirit of compromise, which enabled
the Committee to finish its work on time.
I would also like to thank the Chair of the
Committee, Ambassador Rhonda King, for her guidance

A/71/PV.74

and encouragement. I look forward to working with her
and my fellow members of the Bureau in preparation
for and towards the success of the forthcoming second
resumed session in May.
Finally, please allow me to thank and acknowledge
the members of the Secretariat who have worked
tirelessly to support the Committee: Ms. Sharon Van
Buerle; Ms. Sarah Mueller; Ms. Lindsay Edwards;
Ms. Geraldine Velandria; Ms. Rogena Inductivo;
Ms. Ilene McGrade; Ms. lvanka Sporysova; Mr. Joseph
Nemeth; Mr. Andrew Kowalchuk; and Mr. Bobby Strano.
The President: On behalf of the General Assembly,
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Her
Excellency Ms. Inga Rhonda King, the Permanent
Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
the United Nations and Chair of the Fifth Committee,
the members of the Bureau, the Secretary of the
Committee and representatives for completing the work
of the Committee in an efficient and timely manner and
for a job well done. I congratulate all of them.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee
and are reflected in the relevant official records. May I
remind delegations that under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
a main committee and in a plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
the plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that

17-093005/7

A/71/PV.74

we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. That means that we will
proceed to adopt without a vote those recommendations
that were adopted without a vote in the Committee.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/716/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 71/272
B).
The President: I call on the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Concerning part I of resolution 71/272 B, my
delegation has a reservation with regard to allocating
funds to the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for
the Syrian Arab Republic. It is an unjustified decision
that reflects well-known positions of some Member
States that are inimical to my country. Some of these
States support armed terrorist groups wreaking havoc
in my country. Furthermore, the Mechanism has proved
to be paralysed and ineffective. We therefore believe
that assistance should be provided from within Syrian
territory and in full cooperation and coordination with
the Syrian Government.
In this regard, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic stresses its principled, firm position on the
provision of humanitarian assistance to all those in
need without discrimination in accordance with our
constitutional obligations. We also stress that we shall
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and its
agencies to provide humanitarian assistance as long as
the United Nations guidelines relating to humanitarian
assistance are respected, as reflected in the annex
to resolution 46/182, pertaining to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, which must be done in
accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality
and impartiality.
6/7

06/04/2017

Syria believes that resolution 71/272 B is not
credible, either in numbers of beneficiaries or in the
amount of assistance that have been distributed. We also
reject allegations and reports of the Secretary-General
that the mission provided humanitarian assistance
without incident or complaints from any party.
My delegation joined the consensus on part VII of
the resolution, which relates to special political missions,
good offices and other political initiatives authorized
by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council,
including the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM). This proceeds from our principled
position on the condemnation of chemical weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction. The use of
such weapons is immoral and unacceptable. We did so
although we reject all allegations and accusations in the
report of the JIM, which are not neutral, not objective
and have many illegal defects that affect its credibility.
My delegation also stresses its objection to funding
from the Trust Fund that was created through voluntary
contributions outside the regular budget. The Fund will
be used in a political manner outside the purview of the
membership of the General Assembly. Our objection
also takes into consideration the fact that Security
Council resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016) did not
take up the issue of funding. Therefore, according to
current procedures, the Mechanism should be funded
in full from the regular budget of the United Nations, in
order to ensure that contributing States do not interfere
in its operations, particularly those Member States well
known for their positions inimical to my country and
their support for terrorist armed groups attempting to
destroy my country on their behalf.
In conclusion, my Government is committed to
fulfilling all the obligations it undertook on when
it joined the Chemical Weapons Convention and
reiterates its determination to rid the country of all
chemical weapons.
The President: The Assembly has thud concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 134.
17-09300

06/04/2017

A/71/PV.74

Agenda item 140

Agenda item 133 (continued)

Joint Inspection Unit

Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/855)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/281).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 140.
Agenda item 148 (continued)
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/717/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report and a draft decision
recommended in paragraph 9 of the same report. We
shall now take action on the draft resolution and the
draft decision, one by one.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
resolution, entitled “Progress towards an accountability
system in the United Nations Secretariat”, contained in
paragraph 8 of the report. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/704/Add.1)

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/283).

The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution, entitled “Construction of a new facility for
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Arusha branch”, recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.

The President: The Assembly will now take action
on the draft decision, entitled “Questions deferred for
future consideration”, contained in paragraph 9 of the
report. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/282).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 148.

The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/546 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 133.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it for this meeting.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

17-093007/7
