UNITED

NATTONS

/ NATIONS

SECURITY

UNIES

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS
NINETEENTH
nd MEETING:

1122

YEAR
26 MAY 1964

I

Rme SÉANCE: 26 MAI 1964
DIX-NEUVIÈME
ANNÉE

CONSEIL

DE SÉCURITti
OFFICIELS

DOCUMENTS
NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS

Provisional
agenda (S/Agenda/ll22)
, , , , . . , , , , , , . , . . , . . , , ,
Adoptionoftheagenda
.,.,.
..* ~III..,,.III.I.,,I.I.I.I
Complaint
conoerning
aots of aggression against the territory
and
civilian population of Cambodia (S/5697). . . . , e . . , , , I . , . . , .

TABLE

DES

pw

1
1
1

MATIERES

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/ll22).
..................
Adoption de l’ordre du jour. ............................
Plainte pour agressions oontre le territotre
et la population
çambodge(S/5697)
................................

1
1
oivîle du
1

i

NOTE
Relevant doouments of the Security
aupplements to the Offfofal Records,
Symbols
of
combfned
wfth
a Unfted Nations

Unfted
Natfons
figures,
Mention
dooument,

mesfde
Ti
~olivla, Brae
Coaet, Moroa
publias, Unik
Ireland and U
Present:

Council

are published

are oomposed
of
a symbol
f:rdicates

documents
of such

in quarterly
capftal
letters
a reference
t0

Prof

*
*

*

Les doouments pertinents
du Conseil de s6ourit6
supplf3monts trimestriels
aux Documents
offfcfels.

sont publi6s dans des

Les ootes des documents
de l’Organ!satfon
des Natfons
de lettres
majuscules
et de chfffres.
La sfmpfe
mentfon
texte sfgnfffe
qu’ff s’agft
d’un document
de POrganfsatfon.

Unfcs se composent
d’une cote dans un

1. Adoption
a. tiomplain
tho terri
(W397).

agenda
Complaint c(
terrltary anC
1. The PR1
aooordanoe v
invite the re]
publia of Vie
Tbe

At the fnvfi
(Cambodfa)
a

took plaoes 8
3, Mr. STE’
not dwell on
tlve of the E
States again
and aoousatîl
war rhetorlc

3. But 1 mu
Cambodia In
mresslon
b
met upon thl
plaint. Eaoh’
slve aotions
8peoifioally
ou tho oooasl
Each day, h
most rooentl
reitornted th
bers of the
CommencecI,
atanoo an A
exprossed II
ernmont. It 1
hae any evl
Navorthelesl
Counail have

ELEVEN

HIINDRED

Held In New York,
MILLE

AND TWENTY-SECOND

MEETING

on Tuesday, 26 May 1964, at .3 p.m.

CENT VINGT-DEUXIÈME

SÉANCE

Tenue b Nttw York,

le mardi 26 mal 1964, d 15 heures.
Prefafclent: M, Roger SEYDOUX(Franœ).
President:
Mr. Roger SEYDOUX (France).
Prhmta:
Les reprbsentants des Etats suivants:
preaenh The representatîvee ofthe followlng Statee:
Bolivia, Bracll, China, Cceohoslovakia, Franoe, Ivor?
Bollvîe, Brbril, Chine, C!6t&dWolre, Etats-Unir
Coast, MOrOOOo, Norway, Union of SovietSooiallrt Red@Am6rlque,Frsnœ, Maroo, NorvW, Royaume-:Jnf
de Grande-Bretagneet d’Irlande du Nord, Toh@ooslopublîos,UnitedKlngdomof Qreat Britaln andNorthern
vaqule et Union des R6publiqueseooialistes sovlb
Irelandand UnitedSW8s of Amerloa.
tiques.
Provlslonal

agenda

Ordre

(S/Agenda/ll22)

Adoptlon

of thr

agenda

Adoption

T&e agenda was’adopted.
Complalnt
territory

concrrning
and civillan

du tour

provisoire

(S/AgendqIt

122)

1. Adoptionde l’ordre du jorv.
a. Plainte pour agressionsoontre le territoire et
la populationolvlle du Cambodge(WSS97).

1. Adoptionof the agenda.
a Complalntooncerningaote of aggresslonagalnst
the territory and oivilîan populationof Camtxxlta
(WJ97).

L ‘ordre

de l’ordre

Plainte
pour agrrrrions
et la population
civile

acts of aggression
agroinst thr
population
of Combodla
(5/5697)

du iour

du jour 08 t adoptd.
contre
le territoire
du Cambodge
(S/S697)

1. Le PRESIDENT: Cc&orm6msnt aux dQolrionr
prises antkleurement, je vais lavîiter les reprbsentantsdu Cambodgeet de la Mpubllque du VietNam Aprendre plaœ B la table du Conseil.

1. The PRESID$NT (translated from Frenoh): In
aooordancewith tho deoislonstakenpreviously, 1shall
invite the representatîvesof Cambodlaandof the Republicof Viet-Nam to take placesat theCounoiltable.
At the invftatfon of ttm Preefdmt,
hfr. HuotSambath
(Catnhodfa) andhfr. Vu Van Mau (Republfcof Viet-Nam)

Sur l%wftatfon
du Prdaident,
M. Mot Sambnth
;Cambodge) et M, Vu Van Mau (RdpubJfque du Vfeb
Nam) prennent pJaoe à la table du Conreil.

took plaoes at the Counoll table.

a. M. STEVENSON(Etats-Unis d’Am6rîque)[tradutt
de lknglais]: Je ne m’appesantirai pas sur le8
ooouraMonurblt4rber du repr6sentant de 1Wnlon
novl6Mquequi lmpte aux Etats-Unir une rqrsrrlon
oontre le Cambodge.Ce genre d’aoousationset
d’attaques @ana
fondementfait bopulr longtempopartie lntdgrante do la rh&orlque de guerre
froide
dont w sert le Qouvernementtivi#cique.
9. Mdr je dolr me d6olarer surpris que le Cunbadge ait r(p(t.4 dovbnt le ConMI ces aocuratlonm
d%grersion dont 11ne donneauoune preuve. JUB@
pr4eent. le Conseila ri6g6 troir jourr pour examiner
la plalnk du Cambwlge.Cbaaunde œa jœra, mon
gouvernementa ni6 toute aotioa agressiveou Intention agressive de sa part A l%gard du Cambodge.

2. hlr. STEVENSON(UnîtedStatesofAmer;oa): Iwlll
net dwell on the repsatedohargesby the representative of the Soviet Uniun of aggrrsdon by tho Unltod
Statbs agalnet CambcdIa. Suohunsupportedattaoks
andaoourationshavebeena standardflxture in the oold
war rhetorio of the SovietQovernmentfor manyyearr.
3. But 1murt expresr mysurpriseat the repetition by
Cambodlain thls Counoîlofunsubetantiated
chargesof
aggrerrlonby my Government.The Councllhar rofar
met uponTerre dayr to oonrlder the Cambcdlanoomplaint. EaohdaymyCiovarnmentha8danledanyaggres@ire aotlons
or intentions
toward Cambcdla.We have
speolfioallydenied that Amerioans orossed the l>order

Il a dt3menti expres&met-tt que des Ambrioalns aient
franohl la frontlke lors des lnoidento
dont le Cambodge a’eftt plaint. Chaoun de oot3 jours, oependant,
le ropr0sentant oambodgien- tout rkemmsnt,
o%tait le Ministre dos nffairoo 6trattg8res du Cambodge - a r6ltBr6 ce8 aoousations d6nu6ee de fondement. Je rappelle
aux membres du Consell que

OII the oooasions about whloh Camkxiia
bas oomplnlned.
Eaoh day, however, the Cambodlan representatlvemost reoently, the Fore@ Minister of Cambodia-has
reiternted these unfounded charges. 1 remlnd ehemembers of the Counoll that long before these meetings
ootnmenood, the Unlted States admitted chat 1~ one instanoe an American had orossed into Catnbodla and
expressed ita oinoere regrets to the Catnbodian üovernmont. It hua, as 1eay, dsnlod tho other charges. Nor
bas any evldence [**en introduced to support them.
Nevertheless, the repreeentatives
of Cambodla
in this
Council have continued to repent itnpreclse nnd unsup-

longtempsavant le debut do ootte skio de s&noerr
les Etats-Unis ont reconnu que, dans un oae, un
AmBrloain avait franohi la frontlbro et ils en ont
exprlmû
leurs aln&res
regret6 nu Gouvernement
oatnbodglen. Comme je l’a1 dit, mon pays n mpouss0
1

portod arrertiona implying chat numerous Amerioanr
bave violated Cambodian territory on several
oooat3lono.

4. Speoifioally with regard to the inoidente of 7and 8
M 1964,I hope wewill hear no more of auoh charges.
In xl e meantime, to remove any vestige of doubt, let
me repeat onoe more that the United Statsr harr not
oommitted any t\ot against Cambodia whioh couldposaibly be ooneidered aggreseion by any objerJt1veand
reaeonable onlooker, Let me repaat afgln: that with
the exoeption of the Chantrea inoident, our inveetiga#on8 show that no Amerioan personnel bave oroseed

Wo 08mbocUan
territory,

5, Flnally, let me eay thot the United States pereonnel
the Viet-Nameee Amy in ite effort8 todefend
araist
ite ooun
9 ry are under rigid and strîot orders not to
qrosa the Viet-Nameee-Cambodian border.
8, 1 aleo wish to add that, a8 a result of the olose
aeaooiation that my aowrnment hae had with the Republic of Viet-Nam, the United Stateeie oonvinoedthat
the Republioof Viet-Nam hae no aggreeslve deeigns
toward Cambodia and oannot be 80 oharged with aote
of oaloulated a reraion againot Cambodia, The rea~oned preaenta h on d the vîrt-Namsro~presentative
hsre yerterday wan furthsr confirmation of theanxfety
andthe effort8 of ths 3epublio of Viet-Nam 3 resta-e
good re\atlonr with its anoîent neighbour Cambodia,
Indeed, it rresmr tome almort ludiorous to euggest that
ths Republfo of Viet-Nam, with a11of its onerfffeo oonoontrrted on a life-anddeath struggle to defend ite
territory from guerrilla forces sponsoredand SU~pork&-from OUtuldo,watld ohooreta embarkupon a
lîny of aggrereion towarde ite neighboure, Border
4”rfotîono thsre haw ken, but this 1shardly surprisîng
whenthe nature of the border and the diffioulty of oontrolli
it, the mixed ethnie population along it, and
th;h~t-Con#
aotivîtiee 8011008it ar3 taken into
“f

7, Next, I murt oonfers that1 am unable to understand
the vlswr of the repreaentative of Cambodia oonoernlng the role of the Untted Nationr in this oomplaint,
Flrrt, the Royal aovernment of Cambodiafiledaoomplaint against the Republio of Viet-Nam and the United
Stator (8/5866]& and on 18 May arked for a meeting

d the SOa~rltyCamoîl a8 #oonarpor#ible [S/5807],V
Ne%t,the Cambodlanreprersntative rtrosrod the rerponriblli of the kourtty Counoil to reek a #olutio-t

&Ucfizdl, L r, FOI‘ example, a week ago, he rtated in

Vhe Seourity Counoil,on whlohour Orgnni%atIon
oonfers primary roeponsibility for the matntenance

of International poace und seourity, 1s rzartainly entitled to 1001~
into thirr oituation whloh seriously
threatens tliat peaco and saourity,n [1118thmeetIng,
para 221
And on last Thureday he flaid:
*The maIn objootlvo of tho Unitod NntionePEIthe
maititenance of pence, For this purpo80, our Organl-

lea autrer aoousati~ne, 0 Pap 1 derquelloe auoune
preuve n’a 5tB apport5e. Nr anmoine, ‘108 reprbaontante du Cambodge nu Conseil ont pereist5 A
r5p5tor de’s affirmations lmpr5oieea et gratuites donnanth entendre quo do nombreux AmBrioaine auraient
viol4 10 territoire oambodgien en pluaioure oooaelons.
4, En w qui oonoerne ep5oialement 10s inoidonts
des 7 et 8 mai 1984, jceep&re que noue n’entendrons
plue de telles aoousatione, Pour Eliminer la moindre
traoe de doute, 10 rbp6teral unefols de plus quo le8
Etata-Unie n’ont oommie oontre le Cambodge auoun
aote qui puisse Otre oonaid5r5 par un obeervateur
~bjeotlf et raisonnable comme une a e8sion. Je
r5p5te 5 nouveau; B Pexoeption de PWoldent de
Chantrba, noR enqu5tes ont btabli qutauoun membre
du personnel ambrloain n’a p5nbtr5 en terxdtolre
oambcdgien.
6. ‘Enfin, je d5olarerai que le personnel ambrioain
qui aide lWn5e du Viet-Nam dans ooa efforts pour
d6fendre son pays a repu deetnotruotiona rigoureuses
lui interdieant formellement de franohir la frontibre
entre le Viet-Nam et le Cambodge,
6, Je tiens A ajouter quia la euito dee oontaots
Btroits que mon gouvernement a eue aveo la R&ublique du Viet-Nam 11 a aoquie la oonviotion que
oe pays ne nourrit auounointention agreseiveoontre
le Cambodge et qulil ne peut dono 8tre aoourb
d’aoten dtagreeelon pr5m5dMa oontre le Cambodge,
La d5olaration raîeonnable faits hier îol m6mepar
le reprbsontant vietnamien montre B nouveau oombk:
la Rbpublîque du Viet-Nam souhaite rttabllr de
bonnes relation0 a080 son vieux vofaln 10 Clam
b”\%”,
et lee efforts qu’elle d5ploie 5 cet effet, En vbrit
il me paraft presque ridicule d’imaginer que la
Rlpublique du Viet-Nam, qui oonoentre toutes Ben
Bnergles sur une lutte dbsosp5rbe pour d4fendre
son terrltolre contre la @illa
lnrplr5e et appuy& de Pextbrieur, veuille ae lanoer dans une
politique d’a@Wsion oontre 888 voisins, Il y a eu,
oerta, dee polnte de friotion au sujet de la frontibre,
maie oe n’eet gubre 6tonnant ai l’on tient oompte
de la nature de la frontilre et de la diffioultd de
la uurveiller, du m5lange de raoeu ianr leo populations frontalMes et dee rrements des bande4
du Victoong 5 travere la frontlT re.
7. D’autre part, je do16 avouer que Jo suir înoapable de comprendre la faqon dont le repr5rentant
du Cambod#e oongolt le r5le der Nation0 Unie8
dana oette question, Tout d’abord, le Gouvernement
royal du Cambodge a dOpor5 une plainte contre la
RBpublique du Viet-Nam et ler Etat#-Unir [S/5666u
et a demand5, le 15 mai, que le Conaeil de r5ouri td
roit oonvoqu5 le plus t& porrible [S/56WU], EnmW,
le reprbrentant du Cambodgoa inriot6 sur le fait
qufil inoombait au Conrell de r&nwi# de reoheroher
une rolutionl par exemple, 11 y a une remaine, il a
d4olartI au Conseil;
“Le Conseil do ebourit6, h qui notre organieation oonfbro la responsabilit6 prinoipala du

maintien de la paix ot de la sbourit6 internntionales, a un droit de regnrd certain 8ur aette eituation qui manaoe s&ieusement cette pnlx et
oette sf3ouritQ.n [1118bme s6anoe, par, 22.1
Et, jeudi dernier, il a dit:
Wobjootif ~JrlmOrdîal
le mnintien de la pIiiX.
Yî.ï.7 Vulr

odo,

fJoounlollLs
.--

OfflClClS

Su~)~xhhnont d'evrll,

de8 Nations Uniefi est
Oette
fin, 1lOtPe Orgn-

A

du Conooll

II~I OI Julo 1964.

do s6cur1r6,

dlx-neuvllh~

mationm
not only

prevent t

8, Howeve
reproeontai
Nation8 mc
speoifioa14

“It haa
maohiner
We feel t
dofinite 1
9, Now 1 r
Mon threat’
ilitdZ~
Charter, 8)
lution liea
10, And Y
understood
lies outeldl
sinoe therc
the United
aotion, car

ported oon

oiaively 81
oertainly (
meanet an
Seourity CI

11, 1 belic
Nations ha
dealing wit
serioue thl
think moet
peaoe-keel;
stands up 1
frustration
have mark
the Cleneva
mission fc

we have eI

thesechar

whole rad
sion, wheti
makor it 1
very naturc
and deoirf
neoearary

fortunate 1:

border, TI
tdnly a de
tiona1 con’
wilful

aotti

tho Agreen
formhg 81

underthat

muet, a8 oxprosrly stated in tho Cha*r,
not only stop any aots of aggrereion but also try to
prewnt thoir roourronœ.w [lll@th meeting, para, 6.1
ca#on

8, Howovor, almoet at tho aamo timo, tho Cambodlan
repreeentative soomod roluotant to oonsidor Unlted
Nationa maohinsry to do preoisoly what ho requosts.
gpeoifioally, ho aleo told the Counoil:
“It has Mon euggeetod that now and offootive
maohinery under the United Nation8 shouldbe eetup.
‘Wefool that suoh now maohinery oould not produoo a
definito and permanent solution,w [!?& parck J3.1
9, NOW 1 must oonfossto somebewildermenr, A situation throatoning peaoe and eeourity le brought to the
United Nations for an urgent appealfor helpia aooord~Q-,UIOB
wlth tho peaoe-keeping responeibllities oi the
Charter, and thon the oomplainant arguee that tho eolution llos outsido tho United Nations,
10, And yesterday the represontativo of Franoe, if 1
underetood him, said that he agreoe that the eolution
lies outeldo the United Nations, Woll, I am parploxed,
sinoe there ha6 been no oxplanation why they beliove
the United Nations, to whioh Cambodia har appealedfor
aotion, oannot aot quiokly and deolsivoly, The unsupporkd oonolusion that it oannot aot quiokly and dooieively osoapea mo entirely, It oeoms to me that it
oertainly oan do better on both points than any othor
meanel and if not, why wa8 the aomplaint filod in tho
seourity Counoil in the first plaoe?

11, 1 balieve a11of UBhera Will agree that the United
Nations hae an admirable albeît imperfeot reoord in
dealing wîth probloms equally as serioue as, or more
serious than, the problem now beforo the Counoil, I
think moet of us oan a180agree thnt the United Nation8
peaoe-kooping maohinery, whatever ite shortoomingm,
etands up in rhini eplendour in oomparieon with the
fruetratione, the Y! eeltanoy and the inaotivity whioh
have marked the reoord of maohinory eet up undor
the Oenova Agreemente, that 1stho International Commiesion for Supervision and Control. Undor theee
we havo endless war in Laon, in Viet-Nam, and now
theee ohargee of border violations in Cambodia, The
whole rad rtory of the International Control Commlsaion, whether in Viet-Nam, in Cambodla or in Laos,
makoa it patently oloar that thr oommlwions, by the
very nature of thoir oomporition, are inoapable of qulok
and deoirlve aotion, the klnd of action whioh will be
neosrrary to prownt a reourranoe of tbo reoent unfortunate inoîdontr alongthe Cambodian-Vlrt-Namers
border. Tho prerent sad oxperîenoe in Laos ie oertdnly a domonstration for a11to 80s that tho knturnatîonnl Control Commission oan ba prevantod, by tha
wilful aotlon of only on0 mombw In oloar violation of
the Agroement ostablishing tha Commission, from perfcwnlng ovon tho most routlno dutles asslgnod to lt
under that Agreemant.

IraMon doit, oommo le prbvoit O%p~Wbnat k
Charte, non aeulemont rbprimOr tout l oto d’agreasion, maie onooro ohoroherA eu prbvenlr 10 Wna+
vellomont+n (111OAmea6ano0, par, 6.1
8, Or, pr&quo on marne temps, 10 reprdoentmt
du Cambodge somblo rbpugnorA envirager un mOO40Mmont
nirmo doa Nation0 Union pour PttSlndre
10 but qu’il vire. En part&ulirr, il a de Irrb auwi
4’4 COlM~il~
“On a tmtggdr0un m~o4nirn~enava& et affioaœ
sous les auepiaea do8 Nationr Unior, $$XI~ panawu
‘~qup~ ~4oanîame nyveau ne uaydt pas a%
postion d une ma& r ra ;d@@ti~. St
j8rmanont6, l&&&, par, 1a.l
D, ~Ioi Je dols m’avcuor confondu, Uni situation qui
monaœ la paix et la darrit ert port40 dmnt IlOrgam
nieation deo Nationa Unles, qui, dans un urgent appel
A l%ido, oet pri4a dYntea%nir en oxhuthn
dea
obll atiouw quo la Ohart lui arrigne pMr le maintien
do %a paix, pu10 le plaignant vîont soutenir quo la
solution ne peut Atre trouv6o ofen dqhora de llOrw
niaation,
10, Hior, 10 roprdsentant do la Ehtoo a dtiolarb
reoonnaftro, lui aueai, si le l’ai blon .oompria,
qu’il fallait oherohar la solutîo& lyoro du oadre du
l~Organisatlon, Cola me laîane perplexe,. -0ar je
nhi pas ëntendu qxpliquer les raiion pourleiüu$le@
on eetlmo quo lIOrganleation, dont le Oam
q
a demanda l~lnterventlon,.: reratt inoapable dU#ir,
lapon rapide et d&irlv& Obtt6 O@iBiOnf16fi i%Mtiv@ë
selon laquelle 110 attisaMon aeraft incapable d!a#2
de tapon rapide se dtdirive &hap&a OomplAtémeht
A mon entendement. Il me aembli que l~Organirati6n
pourrait, de oes deux points de .w, agir miëux qüB
tout autre mAoaniemol et, ainoh, pour ol don0 ,4ci
plainte a-tœollo bt4 d4poa4e au Oonaeîl b e a&%Mt4?
11, -Je oroir que tour odw sui wnt r&utls joi reaontiaftront que 1~0rganleation des’ Nationa Uniea,
marne ai elle nIa par toujours rbursi snMb6msnt,
a .n&unoinn obtenu dWmir&blea rbult&a
daau
la solution de problbmra aurrl graver et mime
plur
avw que onlui dont: le Conwil ert mairi
aotuel IIornent, Jr; orolr qus la plupart d!rn& noua
reoonnaftront auau que 10 m4oaniams de l’organination der Nation8 Uder m le matntîenda la paix
quelbr que roient MB im rfeotlonr brille dQm4olal
rerplendirrant A o8t4 P @lui & a .M orM en
vertu der aooordo de QenW, otort-A-d& la,Uotnmlurion întmuMonale cl0 rdrvoiII~oo et de oontr$le
qui s’eut dirti
60 par wl iloheor, aea Maltatîona
et non inaotlviY! , Satr 10 rbglme der aooord4 .&
Qenbve, une guerre ranr fin d6obire le Laor et
le Viet-Nam et noue avons maintinant dba aoouration@ de violationa de f#ontiAn au Camlxxlge, LOI
trlrter annrler de la Oornmlrrion internationrlr
de oontrdle, que oo rolt au Vlet-Nam, au Ca!%ou 8.u Laos, prouvant A l%idenoe que les oommissions, par la nature h8mo de leur oomposition,
sont înoapables d’une action prompto ot dI3oielv0,
otest-A-dire do la sorto d’aotion qui Bofa ntJoessaire pour ompbohor la retour dW3nemcrnte tels
quo les r6raonts et regx%ttablos inoidonta surwnus
le long de la fronti&w entre le Cambodge et le VietNam. La dbplorubla situation aotuello au Laos prouve
cortaincmant, oommo tout 10 monde *ut 10 voir,
quW suffit d’un seul mombro, violant df3llb8rbmont
ltauoord qui a institu6 la Commloslon lntirnatlonale
do ooutrBlo, pour l%mpOoher de eWqultter dos
tbones mhe 113splus oouranterr que oet aooord lui
0 aesignbes,

19, Now wlth thin baokgaWnd,
with thir oxporîonœ,
my Qovornment 1s not preparod to agree totho 0x@don of tho International Control Commission systam
bsyond
its present bounde ts doal wlth tho probloms
wbiah bave arison on tho Camlxxlian-Viet~Namoee
border, If tho Royal Qovornmont of Cambodia wishes
dfuotiw oontrol andproteotion of itr border, the meann
are available hers and now in thle Counoil. Cambodla
hae appoalod for assiatanoe te tho world% prlmary
rgeno for the malntonanoe of psaos and seourlty,
the
Saou
4 ty CoUnOl Of the United Nations, Tho reproeontative of Cambodia ha8 oalled for the Seourity Counoil to
tri to’avoid a rocurrenoe of the border inoidents, The
Ropublio of Viet-Nam and tha Unitod Statso of Amerioa,
against whioh.tho oomplaint has bson made, wouldwoloomo a United Nations borderœpatrol foroe. Thoy are
prepared ta oetablish it bore and now, Wo are also
anxious to havo tho border olearly marked, The Counoil oan aot and it oan aot effeotively, The romedy le
available if Cambodia wants what it asked for,
i
i7

13. As 1 etated before the Counoll, on a1May [lllsth
meeting], my Governmont hae an open mlnd toward
suglgestions that tbe UnitedNations, in addition to taking
prompt action to ostablish a foroe for suporvisingand
odntrolling ths Chmbodian-Vlot~Namose border, apœ
Point a oommittaa of inquiry to look into various aspeots af tho border prcblom, The prooeediqe in the
Coünoil, howevor, make it olear that suoha oommitteo,
ta. be worthwhilo, muet bs assigned a task mom useful
than that of investigating allegod oharges that the Cambodian aovsrnmont is guilty of oomplioity with the
Viot-Gong, Should tbe Ccunoil, in addition to clstablishing a -polir forœ, doom it advi8ablo to establish a
œmmîttee of înquîry în meponw to the Cambodian CBwost, tho oommittae muet k giwn aoooss to all of
tho available information, it muet be givon aooess to
Mio fsrraîn and population on both sides of the border
@ota whioh bave bssn traibleuomo inthe part, ao woll
au to prlaonora oapturod by either eido, bo thsy Viol
Nameao or VlobUong, TO bo ussful, suoh a oommlttoo
rhould bo ompowered to mako reoommendations ta
thîl Cm011 oonoerning furthor stops to oontribute ta
rtabllîty’in ths region, It thus ahould addrssr itsolf ta
the question of how the Cambodian-Vlot-Namoee
border oan be made immune from border violations
emanatbq from any oourœ and from eithw ride of
pie border,

14. In short, if the oause of border inoidents is ta be
rootedout,
theViet-Nomese
mustb
expeotedtorefrain
oonsoientiously
from
orosslng
into GJmbodîan
terri-

tory, and Cambcxha likewiso must be oxpeotod to ensure thfit the Vi&-Gong oannot sud do notmake use of
Cambodian soil.
16. The representativa of the Republlo of Viet-Nam
has prosontsd lmpresslvo evldenue to subshntlato tho
faot thut the Vlet-Gong do in faot mnke use of Cambodian
torrlto~y. 1 hnve no deslrs todetain tho Counoil by revlowlng the evldenoe again. Our own ovldonoe supports
that

of Vlet-Nam,

I would

point

out alao that

the Cnm-

bodian regressntatlve% statemont that no Viet-Gong

13, Or, dans œs aonditions, oonrid6rant œtte exp6rionœ, mon gouvornemont n’est pas dispos6 &
aoooptar que 10 rd10 de la Commission internationale
de oontrblo soit Btenduau-dol6do 88s limite6 aotuellos
pour qu’elle oannalrro dos dlffîoult6e qui 88 sont
produites
sur la frontibre entre 10 Cambc&e et le
Viet-Nam. Si le Uouvornemont royal du Cambodge
d4slro un oontr8le offeotif et une protaotlon offioaœ
de sa PcontiBra, o’ost loi mSme, au Conseil de
abouriU1, qu’il trouvera 10 moyen de les assurer,
Le Cambodge a fait appel B 1 aide do l~instltution
mondiale qui a la rasponsabillt6 prinoipale du maintien de la paix et de la s6ourit6, otest-bdîre au
Conseil do abourit3 dos Nations Unies, Le xiprf3sentant du Cambodge a demandaau Conseil do s6ourit4
d’essayer dlem ohor 10 retour des inoldonts de
frontMe.
La R8”publique du Viet-Nam et les EtatsUnis dlAm&ique, oontre losquols la .plainte a W
d6posbo, aooueilloraient favorablement une forœ des
Nations Unies char@% de surveiller la f~ntibro,
Ils sont pr&s h la or6or sur-loœohamp. Ils souhaitent Brralomont au0 la fronti8re soit maruu8e nettement; Le Consëil peut agir et il peut agir &ioauoment. Si 10 Cambodse d6siro obtenir 10 rem6de uuY1
a demand6, œ rombdo peut Btre trouv&
18, Comme je liai dit au Conseil le 31 mai [11138me
adanœ], mon gouvernement est pr& &envisagertoutes
suggestions tondant 6 œ que les Nations Unies non
soulemont
aronnont rapidement les dlswsitions naœaeairos pour order une forœ ohargbe-de surveiller
et do oontrblor la fronti8ro entre 10 Oambodae et 10
Viet-Nam, mais av.dsl nomment une oom~isslon
dlenqu&e pour Etudier les divers aspsotsduprobl6mo
quo pose la frontlibe. Toutefois, il ressort olairement
des d6Wrations
du Conseil sue, pour Wondre
3 son objet, une telle oommis&on doit avdir des
attributions nlus utiles auo oelle dlenWtor
sur les
aoousations -do oomplioitd aveo 10 Viatoong port6os
oontre le Gouvernement cambodgien, Au oas d le
Uonseil jugerait opporhtn non seulement d’instituer
une forœ do poliœ, mais aussi do or6or une oommisuion d’enqu8te oomme suite B la demande du
Cambodge, ootto oommlasion devrait reœvoir oommunioation do tous les renseignements disponibles,
avoir aoo6s au terrain et Blapopulation fuir 10spoints
qui, des deux 08th do la frontibre, ont donn8 lieu
jusquliol fl dos friotions et pouvoir entrer en oontaot
avoo 10s prisonniers oaptur6s par l%ne ou l’autre
des aartiss, taitil s%uisse de Vietnamiens ou do
rebelles du Ylëtoong, Pour Btro utile, une telle oommisrion devrait 8tre autorls6e
B faire deo reœmmandations au Conseil sur d’autres mesures de
nature k contribuer k la stabllit6 do la rdgioa Elle
devrait, 11 œt effet, roohoroher de quelle mani6rs
la frontibre entre le Camh&e et le Viet-Nam pourrait &re prot4g6s oontrs taük violation, queli que
rdont 881auteurs et le 0W dl06 rlle Bmsne.
14, En rbum6,
si l’on veut extirper
les oauses des
lnoidants de ErontiBre. il faut obtenir des Vlctnamiens
qulils s’abstiennent de p6n6trer soiemmcnt en tirritoire oambodglen et des Camboclgions qu’ils veillent h 08 que le Vlotoong ne puisse se servir du
sol oamboclgien et ne s’en serve pas.
16. Le reprbsentant do la P&ublique du Viet-Nam
a fourni
des preuves
oonvalnoantes
effeotlve
du territoire
cambodgien
Ye ne veux
pao retenir
ltattention
confirment
d8olaration

16, As
attentio
fg;d”t
had eng
the bon
ing an
sheltorr
nounœr
unit wh
on ourn
1361”, 1
metra f:

"As

in spil

Pei!
:-of vie
‘abs01
After n
Paper,
its agen

of”E
spiesl
rende1
tight’,
rt%l

18, Tht
praduœ
to uw f

7and8:
;Pg.g

whioh ax
that eac
Nameme
over ht
the timc
sevsral
operatlo

stnted tl
thelr
foc
sent two
enoh fro

de Putilisation

par le Viatooqis
du

Conseil

en

examinant de nouveau oespreuves, Nos propres obsorvations
que la

ha8 ove
to eay
oatogor
markod
it oontl
bOdilUU3

oelles
du Viet-Nam,
J’ajouterai
du repr&entont
du Cambodge

A

18. L~E
peat tha
attentioa
lmply-o

LBa
Lonale
XellWl
i sont
1et le
!cz
ii1 de
narer,
Pgn I
rre au
@X4lurit
$8 de
Otats~$ ‘24
L!E
‘iuht&
r=netoaueœ
k qu’il
boa
6 non
‘$3 nd-

Wller

set le

fiait
si:
tir les
frtt%s
:oa le

ltituer
IIoomde du
.oom-

Ubles,
@ointcI
LBlieu
ontaot
‘iutre
ou de

3s de8
fniens
a terveilolr du
:-&Nnm

ha@ever movsdinto Cambodianterritory ie eurprising
&J eay the leaet, not only beOaUS0 of ite sweepiq and
oategorioal nature in an area where bordera are illmarked and indifferently oontrolled, but aleo beoause
it oontradlots previous etatemonta from the CamI>odlans themeelvee.
16. A8 an e%amPle 1 wieh to oall to the Counoil~e
attention a oommuniqu4 issuod by the Cambodian
Qeneral Staff on 7 4eMonbor 199l. Tho oommuniqud
stated that armed unit8 of the Cambodian Covernmant
had engaged an armod band of a hundredforei ere at
the border in SvayRieng, takingprisoners and IFestroyinrr an entire enoampment oonsieting of about fiftv
~hëlters, One of the prisonors, aoooFding to the an:
nounoement, admitted to belng Captaln of a VioWong
unit whioh had been oarrying on Qombined exeroises
on OUF”--that 18, CambodiaIi-“tOrritory sinoe Auguot
1961~, but waB W3gularly quarte?d about ono kilomotw from thofrontlorinthe Viot-.tamesoterrltoryv,
17, Prinoa Sihanouk himself ha8 admitted Viet-Cong
use of hls frdiere, In a eigned artiole publiahed in
the ilO July 1969 ieeuo of Rbalit4e Cambodgiennos,
yrinpal9lhanouk@idi
“As for the roproaoh from Saigon that our oountry,
.-in epite of iteelf, 1s sorving as a aone of passage for
--Viot-Gong agente, ie it fair to punlsh us 80 eoveroly
when Laos-whioh is far more important as a source
-of Viet-Cong traneit-at leart until a%uxWly,ha8 been

‘absolvod’,, ,?fi
After noting that, aooording to tbo Amorioan White

Paper, nino timee out of ten North Viet-Nam sends
tt@agenta through Laos, Prinoe Sihanouk oontinuedr
What oountry in the world, moreover, 1s oapablo
;pra;ling ita frontiera againet a11 smugglers and
, , , When 800,000 iWth Viot-Nameee oannot
ronclor tho Laotian-Viet-Namoso frontier twatortight’, how oan 99,000 Cambodîan soldiera be oxpeoted te alose ontiroly tho long frontiera of thoir
QQU&$'?"

16, The regrettable inoidente of 7 and 9 May 1964 havo
produoed further ovldenoo that tho Viet-Gong oontinuo
td uoo Cambodian territory, D~ring tho operationo of
7 and 8 Mav. the Viot-Namoae armywae uuooesoful in
oapturlng tktoen Viot-Gong prironerr, Interrogation
d three of thoao prironers ha8 produoed otatemontr
whioh are of dtreot rolevanoa to thir point, They rtated
that raoh timr thora waa an operation by tho Vi&Namtrr armod feroe~, Viot-Con# unit8 normally ran
over into Cambodian territory,
From late 1968 until
the time of their oapturo, they stated that they had
severra times run into Cambodian territory to avoid
operntions of the Vi&-Nameae air force, They alsr
stated that their Viet-Gong unite purohased most of
thelr food in Cnmbodin and to tbis end evory illulhth
sent two or three supply groupa of about thirty persans
eaoh from Viet-Nam into cambodia.

satio11

taon&
381 en
Qserutaraî
kjge
A

19. Lest there be any misunderstanding, let me repent that my purpose in bringing this evldence to the
attsntlon of the counoil is net to ohurge or even to
imply-and 1 ropoat evon to imply-that the Cambodian

1Wfot qulauoun Viotoong n’a Jamair p4ndtr4 on
territoire
oambdog1on orrt pour le molta surpreriante, non seulement par 801~oaraoUro absolu et
oat4gorique, eUgieeant d’une rdgion 04 le8 fronMbros eont mal delimiteee et ndgligemment eurveil14oe, maie aueei parce qu’elle oontrodit do prdo4dentes ddolaratlons des Cambodgiens ewmdmer,
16. A titre d~oxemplo, Je rappellerai au Conseil
un oommuniquddo Pdtat-major g4ndral oambodgion,
on date du 7 septembre 1961. Dlapr4s on oommuniqud, do8 unit& de lrarm4e oambodgienne avaient
liosd combat B Svay Rieng, sur la frontW0, Ilune
bande arm4o oomposde d’une uontalno d’dtrangors,
fait des prisonniers et ddtruit tout un oampament
oomprt?nant une oinquantaino d’abris, Un dos prleonl
niess, dlapr48 le oommunlqud, avait reoonnu .Btre
le capitaine d’une unit4 du Viotoong qui faisait
ndee manœuvres oombinber~ sur notre territoiror
- o~eet+diro
le territoire oambodgion - ndepuie
le mois dIaa& 1961”. maie sui dtait station&
*normalement h un kiiombt~ ënviron de la fron;
Miro, en, territoire vlotnamion~,
17, Le prinoe Norodom Sihanouk a reoonnu luimdmo quo le Viotoong utilieait ses frontMes, Dans
un article si 4, paru dans le numdro du 90 juillet
1969 do Rdalh 4s oambodgl ormes.,19 Rrinoo glhanouk
/
a.ddolar81
“Quant au roproohe quo Saigon pourrait faire B
-1-rnotropaya d’dtro, malgrd lui, un lieu db paesags
-dos agents vlotoonge, est-il Iuste do noua on
punir 41 sdv6remont alors quo le Laoe, autrement
,permdable aux paseages du Vietoong, a dtd, JuaqulR
oo8 derniers temps du moine, “abI)Bouaw
, , ,?a i ’
AprBs avoir mentionnd que, dlapr4s 10 Livre blano
amdrloain, 9 fois aur 10 le Viet-Nam du Nord fait
passer 088. ag3qt8 par le Laoa, le prince3ihanouk
oantifiuet
Wuol pays au monde, dkilloure, pourrait-11
ae vanter de naivoir fermer hermdtiauomont 18
frontlh
A toui lea oontrobandiora et e‘spionr? , i,
Quand 800 000 Sud-Viotnamlene.. . n’arrivent naa
à ~imparmdabiliror~ i , , la frontih lao-vietkmienne, oomment peut-on reproohor-8 99 000 aoldata
kbmera d’dtre dana l~imposrib1liW de former’ h
100 p, 100 lor longue0 frontibres do leur payd?”
18, Lee regrottablee inoidonts dor 7 et 8 mai 1964
ont prouvd une nouvollo fol8 que le Vietoong oontinue
B utiliriar le territoire du Cambodge, Au oam’ dos
op4rations de oou Journ4o8, l’armda vietnamienne
a rduosi 1 oapturer 18 hommes du Vietoong, Troia do
OBCJprironniero, interrog4s, ont fait dos rdv4lationr
qui intbreroent direotement la ortion ondisourrion.
Dtapr4r lrw dtre8, ohaquo ‘Tair qWne op4ratîon
dsr forors vilrtnamionner avait lieu, 106 unit41 du
Vietoong etenfuyaient r4gulibrement en tarrikdro
oambodgien. Entre la fin do 1968 et le moment otl
ils araient 4t4 faits prisonniers, ils e%taiont ainsi
r6fugibs plusieurs fois en territoire oambodgien pour
4ohapper aux opbrations de Paviatlon vietnamienne,
Ils ont ajout6 que leurs unit4e du Vletoong se ravitaillaient presque enti4rement au Cambodge et quth
oet effet deux ou trois groupe8 d’environ 30 individus
oh.aoun IJaSfIdont
tous les mois du Viet-Nam nu
Cambodge,
19, Afin d’bviter tout malentendu, Je r4pbterai qu%n
portant oes informations A la oonnaisaanoe du Conseil
mon intention n’est prie d%-toouserle Qouvernement
ofunbodgien ci‘aider soieertnent le Vietoong en lui per-

Qovernment oonsoiously aselstr the Viet-Gong bypermifflng them to uee Cambodian territory. My purpose
rather is to demonstrate that both Cambodian authoritiee and the Vi&-Cons themselves admit that the
Vîet-Con& bave uaed and continue to use Csmbodian
territory-o~viously to the disadvoantageof the VietNamese in tbeir fight against an armed insuwotion
support4 and direoted from outside their bordera.
20, In oonolusion, however, 1 would say this. The
Seoudty Counoil should be less oonoerned with faultfinding than with mttina an end to the oausea of international dieoord and friotion and, in this 0888, with
responding to the oomplaint brought here by Cambodia
affirmativoly, We aro told that the Covernment of
CambodIa saeks no more than the effeotive guarantea
.of its territorial integrity and neutrality, SOfar a8 the
United States is oonoerned, we believe that effeotive
ateps should bs taken towards this end bythe Seourity
Counoil and that, in the oourse of taking the appropriate
deoisions, the Counoil would naturally wish to oall on
a11 States to reopeot Cambodials territorial integrity
and politioal independenoe, as weI1 as that of the Republia of Viet-Nam,
Zll, In the most general terma the Seouritv Counoil is
in a ,position to take oonorete steps whioh would, by
faot and by Word, provide what Cambodia appears to
seek, but this Counoil is not in a position to provide
the words without the praotioal steps, Indeed it would
be grossly misleading and irresp-onsible to expsot,
through thés Counoil, any paper guarantses of the sort
whioh are today being torn up in Laos. This Counoil
should respond to the justified oonoerns whioh bave
been expressed here by the representative of a Membsr
State, These inoidents, for the most part, bave
brcuught pain and st%fering to the people of Cambodla,
j& qan assist in avoiding suoh inoidents in the future,

aa. We, a8 memkws of the Seourity Counoil, there-

fore bave two taske before us, as 1 sec itt first, that of

weighing the evidenoe and reaohing a oareful and
balanoed evaluation of the full souroes and origine of
the inoidenbs between Cambodia and the Republto of
Viet-Nam eeoond, deoiding on praotioal stepe by
whioh the Unîted Nations oan use its peaae-keeping
experienoe to meot the needs of a situation whioh has
bsen oharaoterleed by the Oovernment of Cambodia
a0 Qn extremely grave threat tothe peaoe and stabili~
$y of South-East AsSa”.
?a, TO 8um u then, Cambodia oameto tha Counoil for
the kind of hePp that only the United Nationa oan prou
vide to stop the trouble on ite border with Viet-Nam,
Let us then provide Cambodia with that help,
BENIIIMA (Moroooo) (trnnsluted from
Fronoh): The Seourity Cou~oil ha8 vory oftoa had to
examina oomplaints oonooi~nii~ aots of aggresslon
committed agniust ths torritory and populntion of ono
oountry by another. Those situations sometimos nrise
followlug a torritorinl oontrovorsy hotwcen noighbours, or ns a rosult of animoslty that might be stirred
up by politioal antugonism. Although, ilïtho oaso now
brought to our attention, the r6glmee of Camboclia and
of the Republio of Viet-l\cam are different andalthough
24. Mr.

mettant d’utiliser le territoire oambodgien, ni mbme
J%mlnuer - je dis bien “ni mAme” d’insinuer qu’il le fasse, Mon intention est de prouver que les
autiritie oambodglennes et le Vietoong ont reoonnu
que le Vietoong a utilisa le territoire oambodgien
et oontinue A le faire, au pr@udioe, Evidemment,
des Vietnamiens engag dansune lutte contre une
insurreotion arm6e appuy$e et dlrlg6e de llext&ieur,
20, En terminant, j’aurai en6ore oeoi a dire. Le
Conseil de st3ourit6 doit oe pr6ooouper moins de
d0terminer les torts que de mettre fin aux oauses
des disoordee et friotions internationales, et, dans
le oas qui nous oooupe, de donner une suite positive
A la plainte dtipos@epar le Cambodge, Onnous assure
que le Cambodge ne reoheroherien d’autre qu’une
garantie effeotive de son int4grittl territoriale et
de, sa neutralit4. Les EtatHJnts, pour leur part,
pansent que le Conseil de saourit6 doit prendre
des mesures effioaoes A oet effet et que, lorsqulil
prendra les d8oieions appropri8es, le Conseil voudra
naturellement inviter tous les Etats A respecter
llintf3grit6 territoriale et l’inddpendanoe politique du
Cambodge, ainsi que oelles de la RBpublique du
Viet-Nam,
‘21, Pour mettre les ohosas en termes trAs g&&%!uc,
le Cons@1 de s8ourlt8 est A m8me de prendre des
mesures oonorAtes pour rI3pondre ar deo faits et
par des paroles A oe qui paraft Btre le d8sir du
Cambodge, mai8 il n’est pas A m8me d’offrir les
paroles san8 prendre les mesures pratiques, En fait,
oe serait une erreur grossibre et un manque de
sdrleux que d!attendre du Conseil des garanties
sur le papier, du genre de celles qui sont aujourd’hui d6ohirdes au Laos, Le Conseil doit r$pondre
aux inqui&udes JustifiBes qui ont Btt3 exprimdes
devant lui par le reprdsentant d’un Etat Membre,
Les incidents dont il s’agit ont oaust3pour la plupart,
des dommages et des souffranoeaau peuple oambodglen, Nous pouvons aider A emp8oher le retour
de ble inoidonts,
aa, En oons8quenoe, j’estime que nous, membres
du Conseil de sI3ourit4, nous avons deux tkohes B
remplia d’une part, peser soitieusement les reuves
aDaorties afin d’arriver A une odnion rBf1Bohie et
impartiale sur l’ensemble des oau’seset origines des
inoidents survenus entre le Cambodgeet la IiBpublique du Viet-Nam1 d’autre part, dboider des memire8 pratiques par lesquelles les Nations Unies
pourront mettre A profit leur exp6rienos en matiAre
de maintien de la paix pour faire faoe Aune situation
que le Qouvernementoambodgîen a qualifide luimAme de “mena- extrdmement s6rieuee A la paix
et A la stabilît8 du Sud-Est asiatique?
38, En tisuml, le Cambodges’est adresr6 auConseil
pour obtenir le genre d’aide que seule l’organiration des Nationa Unie8 peut lui prbter en rme de
mettre fin aux diffioult6s qui 6e produisent sur
sa fronti8re avoo 10 Viot-Nam. l?&ons dono ootb
aide au CamMdgo,
24. M. LIIGNIIIMA (Maroo): Lo Conseil a ou biensouvont h examiner des plaintes au sujet d’agreesions
oommisea oontre le terdtolre et la population d’un
pays par un flutra, l)o telles sitllat!ions surgissont
parfois h la suite One oontroverse territoriale entre
voirains ou du fait dluneanlmtisit4 quepourrait enkotenir un untagonisme politique. 13len quo, dans le oas
aotuollemant soumie L notre attention, les rbglmas
du Cnmbodge et de la Ilbpubliyue du Viot-Nam soient
diff6rents et qu’un problbme de fronti8re existe

there
them,
Royal
speotr
2 f?tf
aggrel
!%“r

setfi2
voke,
thus Cl
to tim
whioh
SoUth-

ae,

A

and M
sult 0
;B’!E
of whf
legitlr
not oc
ramifi
to be
Situa#
nor, g
CWlx
ae, si

deplor
and m
meritf
nisted
with v
!%rB
seriou
bodtan
av. T

sisknl
in the
internt
have f8
i%::
2::
their a
28, T
of yea
har in
along l
a gsne
Ilsen 0
f avour
taotios
of Opel
20,

P

Eormin
wIh3the
OOlWllll

1~0thhi
effcotir

7
i morne
puer -

Que les
‘eoonnu
“8nt
Ire uné
Brleur,
$33, Le
bine de
‘oauses
pitt~
,&wlne
rale et
r part,
p-endre
F=g;;
speotsr
gee 2

bmbres
iahee B
weuve8
bhie et
~XI des
$“me
ha(;éi
ituation
4e luila paix
Zonrell
mgfbnlmlede
tnt sur
0 ootto
en sousesio11s
Xl Cl’UIl
@3011t
,o entre
ontro) le oas
Bglnlas

! eoisnt
OXlSWJ
:,,

?g&

there does exist a latent frontler problem between
them, yet, by lte nature and soope, the oomplaint of the
Royal aovernment of Cambodia presents, in many respeots, highly individual oharaoteristios, The inoidents
of 7 and 8 May at Taey and Thlork are not the result
of a territorial disputer still less do they represent an
aggreesive display of reolprooal hostllity between the
two polltioal r$gimes. For ten years, with equal gocd~111,bath oountries have been able to overoome their
divergenoies and to reduoe le tensions that the nonsettlement of oertain problems may sometimes provoke, If the gond-neighbourly relations that they have
thustried to safeguard have been threatenedfrom time
to time, the explanation 1s to bs sought in the events
whioh bave progressively womened the situation in
South-East Asia sinoe thc end Of the Indo-China war.
26. Among SOmany others, the inoidents at Chantrea
and Mong, like those at Taey and Thlork, are the result of aotions taken bu the army of the Republlo of
Viet-Nam, Of oousse, the Ooverntient
of that oountry
is foroedto wagea domestio war the foroign extensions
of whioh ars obviws to all, Cambodia, whlle it may be
lsgitimately preoooupled with psaoe in that area, is
not conœrned with the oauses Ofthat war or with its
ramifioations, If its neighbours are unfortunate enough
to be plagued with a war on their territory, suoh a
situation oan provlde them neither with the pretext
nor, a fortiori, w&b the right of bring@gthat war &II
Dam~4
26, Sinoe its independenoe, Cambodia has oeaselessly
deplored this war and bas sought to avoid its politioal
and mllitary reperoussions, It is not the least of the
merits of lts Soversign that he has oourageously rssistsd blandishments and pressures and has defended,
with vigour and deep sinœrity, the determination of
his people ~2 remain outside a oonfliot whloh its
nsutrallty oan oortalnly help to salve but whosealready
SsriOUs oomplioations oan only be multiplied bycam4Odianpartioipation,
2% This polioy of poaœ haa been firmly and insistently maintained, rsgardless of the trendof events
in the region itself and regardlese of the balanoe of the
international forces whioh, in one oapaoity or another,
have found reaaons for intervenlng, It has been refleoted just as muoh in Cambodia’s refusa1to lnterfere
in the affairs of its nelghbours as inite determination
to oppose interferenoe in its own affairs by ita neighbours or by Powers whioh wére openly offering them
their support,
28, The freauenovof the inoidentr whlohfor a numbsr
of yearr now havë ooourred on Cambodian territory
has in no way weakened this polioy or led Cambodia
along a path whioh rome would like it to follow, Clearly,
a gsneralisation of the oonfliot in the area would have
heel~ of moi9 profit to a military stratogy whloh is
favourod lw a broacl front, as ~011 ns to infiltration
taotlos wh.~h oan only dsriv0 sdvantngofrom nawbases
Ofopsrations,
20, Prlnoa Norodom Sihanouk bas showninflexible dctormlnation in rojootIng a11invitations to IutOrvOnO,
WhOtherdirootly or indireotly. No doubt ha husfinally
Ootwlnoedsomo of 111s
noighbours, whohavorO0ognisod
bot111111~
desiro for poaoci and 1~1soag~noss to s~ouro
0ffootive lleutI’ality
for hîs oountry.

de fagon latents entre eux, la plainte du Qouvernement royal du Cambodge rev&, a bien des Egards,
des aspeots tr?te partiouliers, tant par sa nature que
par sa portJe. Les inoidents des 7 et 0 mai a Taey
et Thlork ne sont ni le fait d’une dispute torrltoriale
ni m6me la manifestation agressive d’une hostilit8
r6oiproque entre les deux r6gimes politiques, Les
deux pays ont su, depuis 10 ans, aveo une Egale
bonne volonte, dominer leurs divergences et r6duire
des tensions que le non-ri3glement de oertaine problBmes peut parfois provoquer, Et, si les rapports
de bon voisinage auW~ ont ainsi essau0 de sauv@garder ont 6t4-p0riodiquement mis h%3preUve, il
faut en oheroher l~explioation dans les, BvtIne,ments
qui, depuis le lendemain de la guerre d,Indooiiine,
dMriorent ohaque Jour davantage, la sQ&ton. dans
le gud-Eet astatique,
36, Parmi tant d’autres, les inoidents de Obantia
et de Mon oomme oeux de Taey et Thlork, sont le
’
r&sultat df aotions
de l’arm6e de la RSpublique du
Viet-Nam, !Certes, le gouvernement de oe paya est
oontraint de mener, A l%nbrieur de son territoire,
une guerre dont les prolongemonts sxtirieurs ne sont
plus 4 Btablir, et le Uambodge, s’il peut 8tre l&itimement pr&ooup@ de la paix dans la r@on, n’eet
point oonoorng par les mobiles do oette guerre ni
par ses ramifioations, Si ses voioins
ont le malheur
de la subir ohoe eux, oette situation ne pwt pasleur
fournir le prtItW3 et enoars mqjnsJaurqr&r~~e
&Oit de .h porter..oheaJu& - ~=- i= J :Y=~-.g6, ‘Depuis son inddpendanoe, le Dam
e n,a oess6
de déplorer oetts guerre et de voulo
rester h
T
14oart da ses inoidenoes poltti ues et mllitalres,
Oe n’est pas le dernier des m!! rites ‘de son souverain que d’avoir odurageusement r6sist.d aux sollioitations ou aux pressions et ddfendu aveo vigueur
et aveo une profonde sinoJhlt4 la volont -de 8on
peuple de demeurer en dehors d’un oonflit que sa
neutraliti peut oertainement aider Il r6soudret sa
partioipation, en tout oas, ne pourrait qu’en multiplier les oomplioations d8j8 bien ebrieuses.
g7, uette politique de paix s’est manifeetie aveo
une ferme oonstanoe quelle que fat l,&olution de
la situation dans la region elle-mgme ot quel que fit
1,8quîlîbre des foroes internationales qui, B un titre
ou B un autre, avaient trouvB quelques rataons
d,intervenir. Elle s’est traduite autant par une noning&enoe dans les affaire8 de ses voisins que par
sa volont de s'opposer it lUg8renoe dans sea
propres affaires par oea derniers ou par les puis883108squi leur aooordaient ouvertamant leur soutien,
28, La fr$quenoe des inoidente dont le territoire
oambod len ert le th6gtre depuis bjaquelques annber
n’a nus ement infl(lohi cette politique dans le aena
dane laque1 les uns ou les autrea auraient souhait4
le voir s,engager, Uar il &ait bien net qu’une g&&rulieatioh du oonfllt dans la rOgion aurait btb plus
oommOd0 h une stratbgle tnilitairo qui so trouva
a l’aisa uur un frOnt fhldu,
aussi bien qu’a ~110
aotion d’hfiltPation
qui
no
peut
quo
b6n6fioîor do
1u~1v0aux1)Ointsd’appui ot do ~~~uvcllosbases d’aotion,
28,
Le prinoo Norodom Sihanouk a fait montre d’uue
&tOrmination inflaxible pur no obder ni 6 l’une ni
a
l’uutro forme d’augag0mont direot ou ind~root
auxquolloa 11 btalt ainsi oOnvI6, Il a sans douta fini
1JlLl’

oOllV&illOr~

CiUelqUOs-UIM

do

SW

VOiSiMJ

C&d

Ollt

~eoo~u~u,on in&ne temps quo sa voloncb do paix, son
d8oir d,assuror a 0011 pays u1Jt3 ~~outruutb
dfootivf3.

SO. Iie bas bsen les6 fortunate in hisinterrupteddialogue with osrtain 0th~ Powers to whioh the polloy
of neutrallty continues to beunweloomebeoause it may
oonetitute, in oertain areas, a kind of bottle-neok in a
Wlltary system or in a zone of politioal influence.

30, Il a eu moins de bonheur pourtant bans son
dialogue interrompu aveo oertaines autreepuissanoes
aupr8s desquellee la politi ue de neutralit.6 oontinuo
A reoueillir un pr&g6 d\favorable paroe qu’elle
peut ooastttuer dans oertainee rflgions une sorte do
goulot df&ranglement dans un syathme mllitairo
ou dans une aone dfMluenoe politique,
31. Without wishing in this debate to dlgress on our 81. Sans vouloir faire au oours de oe d8bat une
evaluation of the polioy of neutrality or to pass judgedigx’ession sur notre apptioiation de la nolitlaue de
neütralW3, ni porter urïj ment sur lee‘raiso~s qui
ment on the reasons whioh bave induoed oertainoountrtes to follow it, 1 would reoall one or two examples
ont inoiti tel ou tel paysT la ohoisir, Je rappellerai
of oonfliot between the areat Powers where the statu8
pour m6moire quelques exemples de oonflit entre les
of neutrality oonstitute& by gsneral consent, a solution
grandes puiesanoes OP le statut de neutralit6 a
whiob really safenuardsd mao% 1think insartioular of Gonstltu& de Ifavis unanime, une solution qui a
r6ellement sauvegard la paix, Je me rgf&eenparti.
the reoognliion ofthe neutrality of Austrià, whoseprevlous situation appaared at oertain momentsto be oulier A la rsoonnaissanoe de la neutraliti de 1fAutrl.
ohe dont la eituatlon ant&ieure paraissait, A oertains
fraught with danger for the peaoe of Europe, The demand for neutrality and for a guarantee of territorial
moments, pleine de menaoes ur la paix en Europe,
integrity made by the Austrian Clovernment and people La revendloation de neutrali tr et de garantie dYnt&
found readler support among Powers whose mutual
griti! territoriale par le gouvernement et le peuple
diatrust at that time was nevertheless muoh more
autriohîens avait trouv8 plus faoilement un Bohofavo=
intense. It ~111not be denied that the settlement of the
rable auprAs de pulssanoes dont la m8fianoe rgoiproque
Austrian problem an thls basis had an extremelybsneA 14poque Btait pourtant plus intense, On ne oontesfiolal effeot ou tbe evolution of post-war polioy in
tera pas que le rAglement du problbme autriohien
Eur(ope and on relations bstween the great Powers sur oette base a eu des eaets extramement heureux
sur l’holution de la politique euroflenne dfaprl3.s
@epselv.es,
+ ~~~~~
--~
guerre et sur les rapports-entre les-grandes puissanoes elles-marnes,
i ,
8& La oontzoverse sur la neutraliti du Laos
38.’ For some tlme the oo&roversy about the.neufrallty of Caos pitted throe of the great Powers avait oppos8 pendant un oertain temps trois des
guqantaeing the aeneva Agreuments against the grandes puissanoes garantiseant les aooords de
pni@d States, whioh finally, thanks to the luoid reallsm
QenAve au Qouverndment des Etata-Unis, qui a
of ~President Ker&dy, reoognietrd the advantages of fini, grA.oe au dialisme luolde du pr6sident
suoh neutrallty and admitted the need for it. In any Kennedy, par en reaonnaftre les avantages et
anse, it had merits at a time when no other solution en admettre la &aessit& Elle ,a eu en tout OLLB
seemed likely to be worked out or to oommand the des mgrites A un moment OQauoune autre solution
agreement of a11 the parties oonoerned, 1 shall men- ne semblait devoir gtre 6laborBe ou reoueillir lfaow
oord de toutes les parties intiress~es, Je reviendrai
tion later the oritioism now being levelled in oertain
lue loin sur les oritiques qui sont aotucllement
oiroles *against the noutrallty of Laos in connexion
with new diffioulties whioh have arisen, But a11 Pormul8es dans oerkins milieux oontre la neutralit4
statesmen reallae, today more than before, that do- du Laos A lfoooasIon de nouvelles diffioult~s oonjonolayed solutiona allow the oonsequenoesof a situation
Welles. Mais tout homme dlEtat ait, aujourd’hui
to evolve, sinoe the olements of that situation are plus qu’auparavant, que les solutions tardives laiesent
$$c+osarlly subjeot to ohange.
se d6rouler pendant un oertain temps les oons6quenoee
cd’une situation dont les BlBments sont ntloeseaireZ>.
ment soumis aux transformatluns Bvolutives.
38. The a%OOanitJn d Ca!%Wdîa'~MtUtralîtY.
and 33, La reoonnaisuanoe de la neutralltd du Cambodge
tht, guarantee %y wMoh the Royal Khmer Clovetiment
et la garantie dont le Qouvernement royal khmer
wished it t0 be aooompanied, would undoubtedly have voulait l’assortir auraient epargnd inoontestablement
spared the Powers involved in Su.tth-East Asia many aux puisranoes dont la responsabillti est engagde au
diplomatie and polîtioal diffioulties, In any 0888, it
Sud-Est aeiatique bien de8 diffioultfls dlplomati 88
wcltld have spared the Royal Uovernment of Cambodia et politiquesl elles auraient en tout 0811Ipargn r au
the necesslty of brlnging before the Seourity Counoil
Gouvernement ro& al du Cambaffe d’avoir A raisir
the 8ltuation ow ated by the painful inoidents whioh ie Oonreil de 6 urit4 de la 8 tuatîon or(lle A la
@ok plaoe on itr Lerritory uimply through the fault of ru& des douloureux inoidentr intervenus sur son
Itr neighbourr. Finally-and thîr is not the leart
territoire par le seul fait de ses voirinr. Je dirai
important aopeot of thr question-lt woutd bave preen dernier lieu, et oe n’ert pae l(aspeot le mohr
vont&! the United States ûovernment from beooming
important, qu’elles auraient Qvlt4 auhuvernement des
involvod witb tho IIo~~ublio
of Viet-Nam In these inoiEtats4Jnis df8tro mal6 avao la 1IbpubliqueduVietdanto nnd in ths dcvclopmonts to whloh they bave Nam A de tels inaidonts et aux cl6veloppemants
givon rllse.
auxquels ils ont donn6 lieu,
84. Two kinds of arflments wore usedto ot)Poaele
34. On oppaseh la reventiontlon oambodgiam~e
dos
Cambodian demand. Ïn the firat place, it ië?elt that argumsntudo doux tiortes, En premier lieu, on ponso
tha initiation of talks on the neutrality of Cambodia que ltongngemontde oonvorsationssur la naut~alit4
would open the way to AZdiscussionwhichwouldnot du Combodgo ouvrir& la voio A une disoussIon qui
be confinedto tbîs problem, andthnt it mlrrht leadtu ne t3~arrOteraitpas aux limites de 08 sou1groblbme
a general examinationof ttie situationin South-ICaat ot qulollo rlequerait do oonduîreh un examengbnbral
Asia a8 a whole. In thls roflpeot, Cumbodln11~glvon de la situation dansltensombledu Sud-&& nsiatique~
oategorionl nfmw~llc~~

thnt it Manda to reetriot the

Le carrdxxiga a demd3,B oet bgmd, desam1~ra\~~~8

dlsou

quest
reign
in fac
for c

bave

that i
at a

neutr
in Lr
the fa

36, :
of Lt

when
Ef a!
i$$

and
the 1
norm
the (
exert

La&i
whiot
Ek
been

%Y
valid!
basis
that 1
tated

?oi

oerni

and I

ot11e
î11oidc
fmuY
to t11c

mont,

for u

SUOh

Rotio

amp1
Ilowe

dissussions, at the oonferenoe whioh it seeks, to ths
question of its neutrality and respect for its sovsrsi ty. iSuggsstions for a general disoussion ooms
in $aot from another uuarter, and the oountries whioh
for one rsason or another fear this seoond debats
bave suoh relations with thsir partner whloh seeke it
that
...-- thcv
--. . oan beein euoh a disousslon-or refuse ltat a place other than a oonferenus on Cambodian
neutrality, gsoondly, the detertoratlon of the situation
in Laos 1s invoked tn indloate the fragllity, or evsn
the failure, of the solution of neutrallty,
$6, 1 statsd a short while agothat, if tho neutrallty
of Laos had enjoyed general support from the Mme
when the needfor lt appsared, many events, of whloh
ths present situation 1s merely the ultimats but foreseeable oonseWenaecwould bave bsen avolded,

oat6goriques sur le fait qu’il entend limiter les
d6bats de la oonfhenoe uu’il r6olame au seul aspeot
qui oonoerne sa neutralitè et le respect de sa ëouveralnetd, Les invitations A une dissuasion g6n6rale
viennent en r6alid db autre o6t6, et les pays qui
pour tslle ou tsAle raison appr6hendent oe deuMme
dbbat ont de telles relations svea 1sUr partenaire
ul le r6olame qu’ils peuvent engagsr une tslls
Il soussion - ou la refuser - ailleurs au’A l’oooasion
due oonf6renoe sur la neutraiit6 du Oombodge,
On invoque, d’autre part, la d6t6rloraUoade la situation au Taospour?en oonolure A la fragilit6 ou m6me
A 1Wwo de la solution ds neutralit6.
Ni, J’ai 6voqu6 tout A l’heure le fait que, si la
neutralît6 du Laos avait b6n6floi6 de l’appui g6n6ra.l
d6s le momentoD.la a6oessit6 en Btsit apparue, bleu
des BvBnements dont la situation aotuelle n’est que
la oons6quenoe lointaine mais pr6visîble, aursient
6t4 6vît6s,

86, Undoubtedly, the exfstsnoe in Laos of stroqly
differentiated politioal trends oonstitutos a kind of
Aohilles( heol fur ths neutrality solution as aoospted
and rsoognised in lB6!& The oonstant ohallengs to
the interna1 balanos derives just as muoh from a
normal struggle for power wfthin the country AS from
the oonfliot between the two baslo influences that
exerolse pressura on the two extrsme sides of the
LacMan politioai. ohess-board The only tondenoy
whloh has SOfar bsen able to rally the oontsndlng
faotions around it has bsen the neutralist polioy of lts
leader, the one statesman in the oountrv who has
been at the centre of ail politioal oombinatons likely
to ensure stability, Even Tokay and desnite the diffioulties, Prinotr -Souvanna Phouma hupss that the
valldity of the Oeneva Agreements may serve as a
bas18for the solution of existing problems, provided
that his new apprsaoh is made in oiroumstanoes dloMed-by legitlmate prudence.
81, In Cambr&a, however, the domestio situation is
different and reoognitlon of neutrality is not thrsatensd
wlth destruotion from wlthin the oountry by the pull
of forœs movî
in opposite dtasotions towards
tpDreignpoles of at
t raotion that are mutuallyantagonisI
88, Finally, thers is a moral oonefderatlon involved
in the example given by thls smsll oountry whioh.
despits the -delioaoy of lts position, is appsaling
despsratsly to the whole world for reoognltion of its
psaœful vooation, for ooneolidation of ite eovereignty
in peaœ and for the preservatlon ofits territory from
the oonsequenoes of a war whioh it dœs not want,
tlther on its neighbour% tarritory or on its own,

89, The Moroooan delegation would havs preferrsd
to oonftne its attsntion to Cambsdia~a domplaint oonoernlng the aots of aggression agalnst its territory
and population, Thie would bave lad us to join with
othor members of the Counoll in roprobating euoh
lnoldents nnd in saaklng with thsm the mears of
saaurlng moral and materle regarntlon nppropriM
b the dignlty andintersote of the Royal IChmor Covarnmont, wa would also bave oontributed to tha soaroh
for ways and means of provontlng the roourrsnoo of
suoh inoldants. If wo had oonflnetl tho study of the
Wostlon beforo us wlthln tho strict limlts of tbc

Rotlon1 huvojuEltoutlilled, our delognt~o11
wouldhavo

amply fulfillod ite rosponelbility and Its obligations.
Ilowever, tha Prcsîdont and tho mombors of tho Coun-

96, Il est oertaln aufau Laos IWis’tsnoe de tandanoes politiques fotiment diff6renoi6es aonstitue
une sorts de talon dlAohUe A la solution de neutralit6, telle qu’elle avait 6t6 admise et reoonnue
en lB6& La remise en oause oonstanta de I~6cWibre
interne roo6de autant d’une lutts normale puur le
pouvoir a l~int6rieu.r du pays que de l’opposition des
deux influsnoes fondamentales qui slexersent sur les
deux ailes extr6mes de 1Oohiquier politique laotien,
La seule tendanoe qui avait pujusqu%pr6sent grouper
autour d’elle les faotions oppoa6es, la seuls persannaUt politique du pays qui Btait au oentre de toutes
les. oombinaisons politiques susseptibles dtassursr
la stabilit6, -6taient la tendanoe neutraliste et son
leader, Aujourd’hui enoore et malgr6 les diffiouMs,
le prlnoe Souvanna Phouma asp6rs que la validit6 des
auoords de Qsn6ve urra oonstituer la base de la
solution aux dlffioul tr s aotuelles, A oondition dtentourer sa nouvelle d6marshe des oondttions quVnsple
une 16gitlme prudenoe.
97, Or, au Oambodge, la situation interne est diffdrente, et la reoonnaiesanoe de la neutralît6 n’y
risque pas dt6tre d6ohtr6e de lW6rieur par des
tirdllsments de tsndanoes oppos6es qui auraient dss
prolon mente vsru des pbles dWraotion antagonistes r l~ext6rieur.
88, Xl est enfin un Bl(lment d’ordre moral uuî rlattrohe A l&emple dom16 par oe pstit pays- qui, en
d6pit de sa situation et ds la fragilltd qui en d6soule,
en appelle dbsesp6r6ment au monde entier pour
faire rsoonnaitre sa vooation paoîfiuue, oonsoAîder
sa souveroined dans la paix -et mëtie son territoire A l’abri des BpiphBnom6nes d’une guerre
@il ne rouhaita pas plus voir obss ses voisins
que ohea lui.
80, La d616gation marooaine aurdt bien ptbf6r6
tuMur
son attention sur la plaints du Oambodge
au sujet des agreselons dont son territoire a 6t6
l’objet ot sa population la vlotlmo, Cola nous aurait
oondtit il partager avoo las mcmbras du Conseil la
dbsapprobation do tols lnoldonts ot il rouhoroher aveo
eux les moyens dt!.+.~orbparatfon moral0 at mnt&Wlo
npproprl60 h Aadignlt6 ot uux lntbr&s du Ciouvenw
mont royn~ ld~n~~~. Nous aurions oontribu6 aussi A
lu raol~erol~e dos voies ct mouures susoeptlbloe do
prbvenlr ou dtempOoher le ronouvellomont do tels
inoldonts. Si nous nous Qtions born6.s A ltoxamen do
la quostlon yul nous est soumiso, dans 10s seulos
llmltos do l’aotlon quo jo viens d%voquer, notro
dUl6gatlon SO serait d6jA amplement aoqulttie do

oil would readlly agree w!th us that ths Cambodtan
oomplaint oannot be oonflned to the narrow limite imposed by the title of an agenda item, The root oauses
of the tnoidsnts in question are intimately oonneoted
wlth the politioal and military situation in the whole
region, If this debote were confined to striotly forma1
limite, we should bs unable ta oontribute to a deep and
lasting improvement in the relations betweenCambOdla
and the Republio of Viut-Nam and we shouldbe unable
to oonsider honestly taaether the links of oause and
effeot whioh unite ali thé problems arising In what WRS
formerly Indo-China, Furthermore, in the statements
whloh bave already been made, previous speakers have
expatiated with varying motives on I ‘1 the implioutions
oi the problem, It is therefore natural that the Moroooan delegatlon should eoho not only its own nreooounatiens but the feelings and anxietieé of manj ocuntiies
whioh have already, at R number of international oonferenoes, stated their v!ews on the situation in SouthEast AS18 and expressed their sympathy and support
for the Royal Cambodian Governmentls legitimata
dsslre for a guaranteed neutrality of its territory,

40, I oan assure you, Mr, PresidBnt, that outside
the Counoil this discussion is bsing followed with the
gxdatest Aerest, partioularly by that segment of
world op!n!on wh!oh I have the honour ta represent, Al1
the arguments bave been oarefully analysedl for the
real issue is not merelv the re-establishment of noodnltighbourly relations between Canrbodia and thënepublio of Viet-Nam or the improvement of relations
between Cambsdia and the Wnited States, but also the
passionate desire for peaoe in a part of the world
where, si!!&-? 1047, war ha8 been going on under different flags but to the detriment of the psoples ooncerned who may, out of sheer weariness, aooept peaoe
at any pr!oe a& they beoome aware that they are extsrminating eaoh other for interests whioh are not alwavsthelr own. For this reason, the araunrents whioh
haie been put forword before thé Counc& warrant the
part!oular attentian of Membsrs of the Unlted Nations
and thelr respective mer!ts muet be assessed with
equal objeotivity, espeoially where the views of the
great Powers now direotly involved are oonoerned,

(19 responeabilitg et de ses obligations, Male le
Pr6sident oomme les membres du Conseil pourront ais6ment oonvenir aveo nous que la plaints du
Cambodge ne peut Btre oloisonn6e dans les oontours
Etroits qu,lmpuse le libell6 dkn ordre du Jour,
Les oausea profondes des inoidents en question sont
intimement li6es au oontsxte politloo-milltaire
dans
toute la Agion et 08 n’est oertain~ment pas paroe

qu’on aurait 010s le d6bat aotuel dans un oadre
formellemsnt limitg aue nous aurions oontribu8 h
une am6lioration profonde et permanente des rap
ports entre le Cambodge et la P@ublique du VletNam, pas plus que nous n,aurions r8fl8Ohi ensemble
et loyalement sur les rapports de oause B effet aui
lient; les uns eux autres;-tous les probl8mes qui ‘se
posent dans lknoienne Indoohine, Du reste, dans les
interventions ui ont d6jlt i%S faites, les70rateurs
qui m’ont pr l o8d6 ont largement d6velopp8 aveo
des motivations diffbrentes toutes les implioations
du problame, Il est dbs lors nOrmal que la dB&
gation maroaalne se fasse 1,8oho, en mgme tsmpsque
do ses propres ~r~oooupations, des oonsidgrations et
dos inqul&udes‘ d’un large oàurant d’opinion qui a
dajh, dans un oortain nombre do oonf6renoss inbrnationales, fait oonnaftro son apprgoiation sur la situation dans le Sud-Est asiatique et exprim6 sa sympathie et son soutien au vœu ldgitime duGouvernement
royal du Cambodge quand il rSolams une neutralitb
garantis-de son territoire,
40, Je peux vous donner l,assUranoe, Monsieur
le Prgsidont, qu’en dehors du Conseil aussi le d6bat
est suivi aveo le alus crrandintgr&, notamment dans
oette partie de l,opini& que j’ai 1,lionneur de reprbsente& Toutes les th8ses ont &6 MAlydeS
aveo soin,
oar l’enjeu est non seulement le r&ablissement
dos rapports de bon vo!sinage entre le Cambdgs
et la P&ublique du Viet-Nam ou 1,amglioration des
relations entre le Cambodge et les Etats-Unis, mais
aussi la passion de la paix dans une partie du
monde 00, depuis 1047, la guerre se IxX!rsuit sous
des banni8res diffgrentes mais au detriment des
marnes psuples aui risauent, parlassitude,d,aooeutar
n’importe quellë paix-a mësure qu’ils -se rendent
oompts au,ils s,exterminent pour des int&&s au!
ne sont pas toujours les leur& C’est pour oela qüe
les thi3ses aui ont 6ti exposees devant le Conseil
retiennent p&iouli8reinent- 1,attention des Membres
de l,Organisation, et ue leurs m8rltes respeotifs
sont retenus aveo une 1 gale objeotivitg de jugement,
notamment oelles des grandes puissanoes dont la
respunsabil!t8 est aotuellement direotsment enga&e,

41, W haoe noted with espeoial satisfaotion that for
the flrrt Hme in the Seourity Counoil, and in suoh a
Oomplex oaoe PI this, the Frenoh delegation has endormi so olearly the position whioh the non-aligned
oountrles for a long time and often alone, have had k,
defend SO strenuously, If this meane anything for us
in tha praeent world nituutlon, lt moans that tlio nonalignod Sto”res oan look forward wlth knoro hopu to
inorsas!ng understanding, on tlio part of tho grent
Powor0, for polioi13s of non-alignmont whioh in Elis
past huve beon mlsunderstood und somcAimes, evon,
oondomnod.

41, Nous avons pris aots avea une eatisfaotion pardu fait que, pour la premibre foie devant
le Conseil de rgourld et dans un oao aurai oomplsxe,
la d&ggation franpaise ait fait eienne de fagon aussi
nette la position que les pays non aligngs ont 6té
longtsmps, et souvent seu18, g d6fendrs aussi olaireInOnt, Si OOlA dOVait AVOh LU1 SQ118 ~XIUr UOUS ÜCLUS la
oonjonotura mondiule notuollo, o lest que 10s l3tate du
tism nmado pouvont onvisngor uvoo uns plus grando
00pl1Yll100 la oOmprlhOllsiOll do plus on plus largo
dos grandes l~uissu~oos pour dos attitudes de nonou ngornont qui ont btb mal oomprises et quolquofois
mf 1110ropl~oohl3os,
42, Si i\oue ~VOUSnous-mLhos p~‘ln sur oo l~roblbmo
uno attitude do soutien aussi olairo au Camhodgo,
o’dat par fld&itC D.~3 l~litiquc h laqu011010 Maroo
a, dbs la premi8re heure, doan son aclh6sio11oomp1ëto et dont il a oontribu6 sans rolrlohc, clans toutoe
tiouli8re

42, If, in disouseiag thls problen~. WQoursolvoel~nva
adolltQd 00 olour an attitude in 81 ‘)0X+of Cambodln,
it 1s out OI faithfulness to a polioy COwliioh Morooo6
bas fully adhcrod from ml3 vory outeet. At a11intornntional oonfei~onoes it bus worked unromittingly to
10

nourish thtr p
its moral effe
48. The oom
~oroooan
del,
will be underl
polloy with rf
to the frss ohc
tione~ polioy,
geographioal 1
tsrpreted as I
from ths pain
ooexistenoe 0
oeptions of frc

Mon whioh1de!

examined by tl
get forth, with

44, However,

neither the G
Iw32Q wm OI
Nations aotlor
bility, The ou1
those Confen
end ts the we
But aeither t
their result t
the United No
with the peac
sn0ss oulmlne
reaohed and 1
the two Conf
authority of
within tbe exo
to those deoia!
Nations oan hr
a problem aba
been oourteou
ha8 sometime
In order to av
45, 1t willbe
the Cyprus qui
iugs] we tale
kourity cou
Zurioh and L
no right to dc
agreeinents rf

basis of interr
themaelves to

freely from WI
46, We have
instruments E
oould stlll, if
tho settloinant
47, SOlong w
to t110s0 ugrc
c0un0i1 oannoi
and aspouse tk

nwrirh thir polioy through example and to rtrengthea
its moral effeot in relations between States,

les oonf8renoes internationales,
L nourrir F
l%xemDle le oontenu et h oonsoliderla mrt4e morale
danslis rapporte entre Etats,
48. The oomments 1 bave just made, on behalf of the
48, Les remarques que je viens de faire au nom
~oroooan deleeation, on the problsm befora the Caunoil
de la d816gatiOn marooalne, D. propos du problbme
will be under&od, $e hopé, as the expression of our
qui est soumis & Ilattention du Oonsoil, seront oompolioy with re ard k, peaae and war and with regard
prises, nous l’es rons, oomme Btant l%xpression de
to the faw ohof 08 by any glven oountry of Its internanotre pollU1ue !?llBgard de la poix et de la guerre
tional polioy, independently of the situation in a glven
et A ll(lgar du libre ohoix, w ta1 ou toi pays, de
geographioal region. Theae oomments oannot be inaa politique internationale, inlpendamment
du
terureted AS a standin favour of one eide or another
oontexte de telle ou telle rdgion g60 raphique, Ues
fioin ths point of vies of ideologioal subetanoe, The
remarquee ne peuvent Otre lnterfl tt es oomme une
ooexistenoe of dlfferent r&lmes and different oonprise de position en faveur d’une th8ee ou d’une autre
oeptions of freedom le a dire+ oorollary of the postau point de vue de la substanoe id6ologique, La
tion whloh1definedearlier, A speolfloproblem 1s belng
ooaxi~tenoe de r6glmee diffdrents et de oonoeptions
examined by this organ of the Unlted Nation& we have diffdrentee de la llbert6 est un corollaire immkiiat
set forth, with einocrity, our view of its baslo aspeots,
de la pooitlon que J’ai d8finie tout B l’heure. Un
probl&ne praois fait l’objet d’un examen devant oet
organisme des Nations Unies1 nous avons exposa aveo
-sino4rid notre fauon d’en annrBoier les aermots
essentiels,
44, However, we are not overlociklng the faot that 44, Mais nous ne psrdons pas de vue par ailleurs
neither the Ueneva Conferenoe of 19842/ nnr that of
le fait que ni la Oonfhenoo de QenBve de 1984u ui
19683/ was oonvened within the framework of United oelle de 1013@/n’ont BtB oonvoau8ee dans le oadre
Nations aotion or under the Organisation% responside llaotion des Natione Unies- ef sous leur responbility, The outoomeof negotiations or oonoerted aotion,
sabUt& IVJsuAtatsde traotations ou dlaotions oonoerthose Oonferenoes were oonvened in order to put an tdes, oes oonfhenoes ont BtB r&inies pour mettre
end to the war in Indo-China or to prevent another, fin h la guerre dfIndoohine ou pour en pr(lvenir une
I3ut neither the initiative, nor the negotiations, nor seconde, Mais.ni Ilinitiative ni les n8goaiationsellesu
their result have in any way oommitted any organ of mbmes ni le rhultat n’ont d’une fagonou d’une autre
the United Nations, Of oourse, we were a11 pleased engae8 un organe queloonque des Nations Unies,
with the peaoeful oonoluslons in whioh those ConferOërtes, nous nous sommes tous r8jouis des oonoluenoes oulmlnated. But the applioation of the deoisions
sions paolflques auxquelles elles ont abouti. Mais
reaohed and ths trend of events slnoe the holdlng of llapplioation de oe qui a Bt$ d6oiti et l%Mution
the two Conferenoee have always been outside the des Bvhements depuis oes deux oonfhonoes ont
nuthoritv of the United Nntions and have remainod
toujours 8ohapfi h l’autorit de l’Organisation des
withln tlïe exolusive oontrol of the Powers whioh agreed Nations Unies et sont demeur6es du ressort des
to those deolsions, It seemstous logiaal that the United
sëules puiesanoes qui en avaient uonvenu,. Il noua
Nations oan hardly take A deoislon on the substanoe of semble logique que les Nations Unies puissent difa problem about whioh it has for the most nart merslr
fioilement prendre une d8oision sur le fond d’un
bsën oourteously lnformed or with regad to whioh it
problbme dont elles n’ont Bti la plupart du temps
has sometimes ken oalled unon touse its nood offices que oourtolsement informBe8 ou pour lequel elles
g order to avold an aoute orisis,
ont M quelqusfois amendes h exeroer leure bons
oëioes pour Bvitar une ortse aigu&
46, It will k remembered that during the diooursionof 45, On se souviendra que, lora des débats uur la
the Uyprus question [lO86th and1084th to 1108rd meetquestion de Clhypre (10888me et 10Mme A 11088ms
ings] we told thooe frlends of ours who wanted the tdanoee], nous avons Apondu A nos amis, qui vouhurlty
Counoil to denounoe the Agreements of laient que le Oonrell d&onoe les Aooorclade Zurioh
Zurioh and London that in our view the Counoil had et de Londres, quY1 ne nous paraîreaît pas fond6
no rîght to determine the validity or non-validity of de dire, au sein de cet orgaMme, si oe qui avait
agreements reaohed outside the United Nations on the (fi oonvenu en dehorr de lui uur la base des rapporta
basis of international law andthat it wasfor the parties
de droit international devait demeurer val&10 ou
omer de I%re, et qu’il appartenait aux parties
themselves to find the means of disengaging themselver
freely from what they had frsely agmed to,
de trouver les moyenr de se ddUsr librement de
oe qu’eUeuavaient librement convenu rnremblh
48, We have olearly expressed bllr opinion that the 48, Nous avons nettement exprimd notre opinion
instruments establiehed by the Qenevn COnferf3nOM suivant laquelle le6 înstrumonte or668 par les oonf&
oould still, if usod with oqual good faîth, sorvo for
ronoo~ do aonbvo pouvaient onooro, sMs btaîent utin
tlro settlomont of tho probloms faolng CambodIa
today, Iii& aveo WIQbgnla bonnofoi, servir au r8glomont
dos problbmos qui 80 poaont uujourd%ui AU Çatnbodge.
41, Taut quo 00rtai110s partIes qui ont sOUsOrlt h
t0 tlloso
u~mmento
2bmnin
attaohad
to thern,
tlb
oos oonventione leur domouront attaoheee, oo n’est
Counoilountiotfroc thoothorufrein tlreir oommltmo~~t~ pas oo oonsoil ui pout libbrax lue autree de leurs
ou
and ospouse thair vlewsoonoernîng tho validlty or non- angagomontsct 1pcuoor lour thbseSU~:la vaWt8

a 00110vP
Uollforonco
oulll0 I’robloltIofroororlngI’onco111
Itldo-cllllin,
hO’d I~OIII 16 Juno 10 21 July

1954,

validîty of thOae agmemOnt8, But wedo think it possible
that oontaote betwesn the oapitals oonoerned-oontaots
whioh, paradoxioally, the present orieis oould faoilitate-might provide the most appropriate meane of
eaoaplng from the deadlook,
48, Before oonoluding, 1 must state that at present my
delegation oan take no dsfinite stand on oertaln proposa18 whioh havo been made to the Counoil for a
oourse of aotion llkely to load to the establishment of
a Bondywhose task would be to assist the two parties,
inter alia through border oontrol, and thus avoid tho
roourrswe
of inoidonts suoh as those brought to our
attention, The delegation of Cambodia has made uertain suggestionsi wo also llstened yesterday to tho
statement by tho ropresontativo of the Republio of
Viet-Nam, in whioh ho made othor suggestions, This
dtornoon again, tho Unltsd Statos representativo sot
forth at longth a further suggesti&, linkod to thoso
already made during le initial statemont
by the United
States delegation [1118th meeting], We shall remaîn
in alose oontaot with other delegations whosegoodwill is apparent and whoso efforts are enoouraging, We hope we oan roaoh a formula that oan provldo
the parties oonoernod with the friendly undorstandlng
whioh thoy cjesiro with equal -s!pperity- toc@i@!!!@l!
amongst thomselves,
i
49, The PREiIDENT (tranelated from Frenoh)t 1oall
on tho representativo of CambodIa.
50, -Mr, HUOT SAMBATH (Cambodia) (translatsd
from Frenoh)! This statement is in oontinuation of
those made to tho Counoll by the Permanent Ropretentative of Gambodia and, at tho last meeting, by
myself, It would not have been nooossury
bnt for the
faot 3hat at previous meetings certain delogations,
partioularly that of tho Republio of Viet-Nam, took
th8 opporturdty to try to dîsoredlt Cambodia(s polioy
of independenoe and neutrality by means of slanderous
allegations and hostile insinuations,
61, As I said yesterday, in every instanoe, whethor
at Mong, Chantrea, Taey or Thlork-to mention only
the mont reoent attaoka of whioh wo have bsen the
viotlms-1 myself vieited the soene to ether wîth the
membere of the International Contro f Commission,
the military attaoh6s and prese attaohda of the
embasries aooredited to Camhodia, and national and
foroign journalirtr who were able to ostablirh the
faot of the attaokr upon the people of Cambodia and
the ext&t of thr damage oaured by the Unlted St&ar
and Barth VLt-Namere fcwoeo, Thir, then, ir an oyewîtnerr aooount, not a vague philorophioal dirrertathon or a politioal statement marked by hdredor aome
other objeotîvo feeling. 1 eay fleyewltnees aooountN
advisscily, booAUs0
thel’e
WerB
010Ar
AttAOkfJ
AgAillSt
Cambotiian torritory
by Unitad 8tAtet3 Ad %Ut11 Vi&nAinoSe
Or~lTlOEl,

troope,
thOft8,

‘l’ho
pillAgillg

Attaoke
Alld

were
AooolnpA1lled
AOtB Of bAllditry.

by

la oaduoiti do telles oonventions. Mals il no noua
paraft pas exolu qu’un oontaot entre les oapitales
int8res&s, oontaot dont oetk orbe pourrait paradoxalement faoiliter la reprise puisse oonstituor
llartioulation la plus appropriQe pour so&ir de
Ilimpasse,
48, Avant do oonolure, je dois signaler qu% l’heure
aotuollo il n’est pas possible B ma d818gaUon de
se prononoer d6fInitlvement sur oertaines propositione qui ont Btd faites au Oonsoil en vue de dagager une forme d’aotion susoeptiblo d’aboutir A la
oraation d’un organisme dont la tAohe eerait d’asslster les deux parties, grAae entre autres A un
oontrble des fropti4ros, et dr8vitor 10 renouvellement
dlinoidents oomme oeux dont nous avons A oonnaftro,
LR d818gation du Oambodge a formul6 quelques
supaestionsl nous avons entendu Bmlemont, hier.
daïië son ixpos6, le ropraaontant dë la RBpibliqué
du Viet-Nam on faire d~autros, Cet a&s-midi
enoorol le ropr&ontant des Etats-Unis‘ a longuement
exposa uno dernibre suggestion qui SO rattaoho A
oollee qui ont i%I faites lors do la premi8ro intervention de la d818gatîon des Etats-Unis [11188mo
s&noo], Nous demeurons en oontaot &Oit aveo
d’autres d616gations dont la bonne volont est manifesta et dont l’effort est enoourageantl nous esp&
rons pouvoir aboutir A une formule qui puisse assurer aux partie8 int&ossiIes la bonne entente qu’elles
veulent, avso une Bgalo einofhiti, &ablir entre elles,
40. Le PRESIDENT! Je donne la parole~au repr&
sentant du Cambodge,
60, M, HUOT SAMBATH (Cambodge)8 La pri3sente
d6olaration fait suite B oollos qui ont Bt4 faites
devant oo oonseil par le repr&ontant permanent
du Cambodge auprbs de ItOrganisation dos Nations
Unies et par moi-mAme A la dornibre s&uoe. Uette
d8olaration no se serait pas imposfjo si, au oours
dos s6anoos pr608dontoe, certaines d818gations, et
on partioulier oelle do la RBpublique du Viet-Nam,
n’avaient profit6 de lloaoaeion pour tenter de disor&
diter la politique dYnd&aendanoe et de neutralith du
Cambodgë par le biais dtaasertione oalomnieuses
et d!insinuatlons malveillante&
61, Comme je l’ai dit hier, que oe soit A Mong, A
Chantrfia, A Taeu ou B Thlork. Ix)ur ne alter aue le6
plus r8oéntee a-weesions dont -nous avons et% viatimes, $3 me suis moi-m8me port6 sur ltra lieux en
oompagnie des membres de la Commission internationale de oonttble, des attaohf& militaires, dos
attaohhe de presse des ambassades aoor6dit4ee au
Cambodge, des journalirtae nationaux et Btrangerr,
lerquele ont pu oonstakr la r&lit6 dee attaques
uubiee par le peuple oambodgien ainsi ue l%endue
des dhglltr oausb par les foroer am1rîoano-rudvietnamiennes, Il 131 t dono ioi non par dtine vague
diasertatlon philorop% que ou d’un expoa politique
marqu8 par la haine ou par un autre sentiment, mais
cltuil t6ikIOIgnagQ
v6ou. Je dis Me11 %3m0ig11age
vBou”,
oar
il y a ou bel
Plsbea
du terrltolra
Aln6riOAl~O+Nd-Vietl~alnielllKxI,

62, ‘l’hitr ls, 1 think, I\ suffiolently sorfous UhArge that
ehould bo ooi~sidorod by tlro Counoil, slnoe what has
]3lAOS

is

llothh~

hSS

thall

A l?e&$UlAl’

AttAOk

bien
dos
on1nbodgie11

agressiolls
oAruot&
pnr
1eS troupes
Les Agressiol~s
ont &6

aoooinpagii6os de oriinos, de vols, do pillagas et
@aote

tAksl1

et

lll,Oll

the tor~~itorlal intogrlty of ~1eovereign andlntlepeiident
fit& Membor Of tho Unîted NAtlOtbs,

de bAllditi8lne.

62, C’est Ih, oe ina samble, un0 oharge

suffisnlnnlant

e6riellse
qlli~ dovralt
&re
prise
en o&lSid6ratloll
par
le Cons011puisqu’il ns staglt rien de moins que dtuno
Atteillte
811 r8gle
h l’int6gl~it6
t~rl~itOl~iAl~
d’un
Etat
souverahl
et fnd6penclnnt, Membre de l~0rganisation
dos NAthls
Unies.

66, In hIr 0

the Qovernn
own way WI

KhmerVletc
stated that t

oreasedin rf
4&her do
beontho vlot

ing tho as881

oriminale, I
suoh gratuit4

tive, no mat
wouadodare

64. ~Time w
olaîmod t0 k
wont SO far
aoknowledge
persisted in
plaints of thc
whon lt ie
evidonoo anc
iwth Viet-b
oxit, b adtr
nill-de Tined
argument thi
part of~theE

thoy 03068
&glmkg it 1

The Internati
and the fin&
firm that 8
fz;ie;;;;

evidenos, thc
gother unlikc
Namese trc

geasants
and

lagee, in igm
attaak on Oh
only one in a
COQ,,head al
vîeited the a(
ment, Mmac
people and
gifit&Z~

66, As re a
UC of vie &-1

irsued by h
Foreign Affl
krrorht rab
Whhhwa8r4
wasanto and

That 0ould r
tho frontiar
th0 ViQt-NA1
Cambodîan E
and othor int
hors
d.h

of the
00 se0 tl
OUtthat theU
fOlWe
oponel

ancl then îlle
More

Conti1

b0dinn terri’
came ut8

88, in NI rtrtement ye&aday, the reprerrentativeof
the aowrnment of BauthViet-Nam analyredin hie
own way what he deeoribesaa the nquestion of the

63, Danoson intarventiond’hier, le reprbrentant du
Gouvernementsud-vietnamiena analysbR samanibre
oequ’il nomme la “questiondesinoidentadefrontibre
Khmer-viet-Nameeefrontier inoidanten,Hehimeelf khmb~vletnamienne*. Il a oonatatblui-mgme quele
atabd that the frequenoyof theae inoidentshad in- rythmedeoes inoidentas Wait aoobMr8oes dernibrer
owasadin reoentyearo, ande-wtthobviousdishoneaty ann6eeet, de plus, fl a affirmé avea yne mauvaise
-furaer deolared thatl “it is Viet-Nam whiohhaa foi bvidenter“Clest le Viet-Namqui ensst viotime.r
bejeen
thevlotim”, lie therebyreversedthe roles,turn- C’est 18 renverser les Mea et tranolormer Ier
ing the aseaultedinto aggreeseore andthe vlotims into attiupb en agreaeeurs,les viotimea Bn oriminels,
or?imlnale,Howoananyonehonestlygive oredenoeto Car oomment eut-on, en toute bonnefoi, aooorder
Auoh gratuitoue statements
on the part of a representaor& h desaf!irmatione gratuitesd’un repr6sentant
tive, no matter how distlngulahed,
whenthe deadMd aussi dietingut2soit-il, alor8 ,quele8 morts et lea
woundedare there, demandlngredress?
H~&E sont bien 18, attendantque juet&aoleur soit
.
64. TimewaawhentheGovernmentof South Viet-Nam A4, Il fut un tempe oh le Gouvernement du Viet-Nam
olaimedto knowaothinganddeniedeverything,It even du Sudignorait tout, niait tout, Il allait m6M jumquQ
went 80 far 88 to deny the evidenoe,It refusedto nier IUvidenoe,Il refusait do reoonnaftrellexistenoe
aoknowledge
inoidentsprovokedb its owntroopsi it des inoidents provoqu6s par aeu propres troupes1
persietedin rejeoting, @enbloon,J llhe jartified oom- il slobstinaltB rejeter en bloa toutes les dol&anoes
plaints of the Royalaovernmentof Camlxdia,Today, justifi6es du Gouvernementroyal du- Oambodge,
when it 1s overwhelmedby a massof irrefutable Aujourdlhui,
aooablb par un faisoeau de preuves
evidenoeandunmaakedbefore the entire world, the irrMutablee, d8maaqu6aux yeuxdu mondeentier, le
SouthViet-Nameeer6glme is eearohingfor tanother r4gime sud-vietnamienoherohe une nouvelle porte
exit, b admittingite oadmeewhil8 blamingthem on de sortie en reoonnaiasant888 orimea qui auraient,
Mill-deIinad andinadequatelyguardedfrontierefl, The eelon lui, pour origine des ~Jfrontibreamal d4finierr
argumentthat it was auunintentionalmietakeonthe et ineuffieammentprot6g6esfl.La t&Beede l’erreur
part of3he~South
Viot-Nameeearmedforce8 andthat iqvolobtaire des-f6tirË armdos=tiûli+l&aralelnner
they 'torossed the frontier into Cambodiawithout ftianohieaantla frontibre duGambodgeB-leurinau
Wisin#
it is unaooeptable
to the RoyalGlovernment, nezpeut ,Btre aooeptde par le. gouv&qt3bnrent
.-%y&
T@aI&rnational OontrolOommisrion~~
invaetigation Eu I#&i lea-enqu9tee
:dela Commiarionibternationalr
andthe findlnge of theforeign military attaohdroon- duoontrbleet les oonstatationa
deeattaob8ëmUitairdn
firm that a miatakeof this kind at pointawherethe &rangere--mettsut-en--relief -lQnpoaoibflit!-dUne
frontier is wry olearly defined by natural linee, ie errëur de oet ordre en des pointa oh.la fmdibti
quite impossible,But even assuming,dgspite the est trhe. olairement matMalis8e ~par des lighes
evidence,that euoha mistakewas made, it ie alto- naturelles, D’autre part et oontre-toute -Lvîdënne,
getherunlikely that the UnitedStatesandSouthviot- ortte erreur eQt-elle Bt6 ,oommisequ’il ert- fitirai*
Namese troops deliheratily aanaarinatedKhmar $emblablequelestroupesam6rioano-bud-vie@raieiipaaeaïïtsand-pillagedtid deetroyedCambodianvilnee~elent~dBlibBrb~meqt=asLrureiJdes
paysan@
authen~
1 es1in ignoranoe,and in errer, In the oaneof the tiquement 4hmer8, pillt! -et d4truit -des+llii
aif aok on Uhantrea, for example,this village wasthe authentiquement
oambodgienu,
~toujourrpar ex&w et
onlyonein a vaut expanseof plain,GeneralHuynhVan & leur insu, Dan8le OM de l’attaque~dëO&üatr&
000, headof the SouthViet-Namesadelegationwhioh par exemple,fl s%girsait d’une plaine .r~6tandant
!a
visitedthe uoeneat the inviation of theRoyalOovern- perle de vue, n+nt pour tout village e Ohantr6a,
mant, himrelf admitted thir and deolared to tbe Le dn6ral HuynhVanUao,ohefdela ti$$gatidnau&
people.and the Preerr~“1 oannotunderstandruoh A vietnamienne,qui -11~6tait
rendu our -1011
‘lieux -mur
mirtakebelng made,,, 1amsendingaai alto Sai@n l’invitation du gouvernementroyal,l’a. oonrtati iU=
demMdinf~that_
WR!3Porponathlebo wf. .u$A!&
”
mdme, Cleetainsi-quU a CMolaAdevantlq’@pUlatign
r--- ---.
et& presse8%Tene m@explique
pau l$rr&r :co&
a.a
Je
Wrrrphfe
R
saimt
x40!rnm
le
ogm-jnt QI wj,bJea,R .t:i- m 1 i,“’
: :;‘T:-li,t’~
664 As w rdr Taey thorepresentativaofthe ROI~&- 66,‘ -En oe qui oonmrne Ta& le repr6rdakte la
Mpublique du Viet-Nam, ruivhnt )n aolr le o+
Med by hir oountry’u Minirtder of ~&onoa a? muniqu6oommunder Mlnirtror ‘dela Mari Mit8
F6r@iaaA%irs, ihade no mentionwhaknr of tha a#aim 6trrngbM1 de. MB PW?;-c pu116&x&‘I
~~~~~t rridw soutbViet-Name rmnmmd whioler
tëtiënt -~OUIsilence le raid tworim .du -Mn dr c
Whiobwasnr noiblo for the dëathof innooentKhmrr
rud~virtnamiona, qui a oaurl la mort dUoo(ak
pbasantsand if e lootingof the population18property. piayaannkhmOr9et le pUge des blenrr dc lapopulatfon, Lh non plus il nepouvaite%glr d’uneorrour,
That oould not havo been a mistako dthor, b~oause
th0 frontior in thio looality iA markod by forost on la frontibro h oot ondrolt Btant dblimitdo par la
UlQViot-Nnmososido and by an oponplaiu ontho for& du o6t6 VIetnamion et par la plaine du 08t.4
CAmbodian eido, Tho Wttited Statea rvwtary Attnohb
oAml>odgion, LUtnoM
milltairo
Am6rloaln ainai que
Atld Othor international 0~~1orvor~, inoluding tho momd+iutros observateurs Internationaux, parmi losquele
bera of tho International Control Commiseion, woro
les mtimbros de la Uommlssion
internationale
do
ablot0 800this with their ownoyes.It muetbepolnted oontr810, ont pu oonotukw00 fait do vlriu II oonviont
out fflat the United Statos and South Vi&Namesa
Armod
do pr6oieor que 10sforoos arm6&Î&&ioano-audvlatnamionnos ont tir6 f3urla population khmbra A~ns
fwos openodfiro on tho dafonooloes Khmer population
~d thon illogally arroatod throo provinoial guards, dOfonso, puici ont proobd6 h 1Qrrestation fll$gale
bfOl+e oontlnufng tholr inourAfon furthor înto Camde trois gardce provholaux nvwt de lwureulvre leur
bodianterritory, On tho naxt dny, 8 May 1064, the
inoursion plus profondbmont en territoire
khmer, @es
n&nos unMA, le lendemaiu6 mai 1664,ont p6n6tr6
AAme unit8 agnin oroesod the frontior, nt I’hlork,
lb of Vie&”-Nam, in iinr wîtb the joint oommurdqu6

where it is just as clearly defined as at Taey. In these
circumstances,
how cari there be any talk of a mistake?

cette fois-ci & Tflork,
of~ la frontiére
est nettement
dbfinie comme dans le cas de Taey. Comment, dans
ces oonditions, parler d’erreur?

56. The representative
of the Saigon Government
speaks of the good faith and alacrity with which his
Government
sought to make reparation
for its acts
of aggression. Actually, it apologized only once-after
the attack on Chantrea-and
that over a month later,
when its flagrant aggression
had been brought home to
it. Moreover,
the offer of compensation
was purely
oral and has never been followed up with action. In a11
the other cases of murderous
attack, South Viet-Nam
continues to claim that the attacks did not really take
place in Cambodia, despite the findings of the International Control Commission
and the other international
observe?%.

56. Le représentant
du gouvernement
de Saigon
parle de la bonne foi et de l’empreSSement
avec
lesquels
son gouvernement
a cherché 51 reparer
ses actes d’agression.
En fait, il ne s’est eXCUS6
qu'une
seule fois, lors de l’attaque de Chantrea, et
ce avec un retard de plus d’un mois et alors qu’il
était pris la main dans le sac. De plus, l’offre de
dédommagement était purement verbale et aucune
suite matérielle n’a suivi cette offre. POUr tOUS les
autres cas d’agression
meurtriers,
le Viet-Nam
du Sud prétend toujours qU'ilS
ne se sont Pas réellement produits au Cambodge, en depit du constat
fait par la Commission
internationale
de contr8le et
les autres observateurs
internationaux.

57. The representative
of the SaigonGovernment
also
referred
to alleged violations of South Vi&t-Namese
territory
by the armed forces of Cambodia, and cited
as examples the Vinh-Lac affair and the L-19 reconnaissar-ce aircraft
shot down by our fighter planes.
In the case of Vinh-Lac,
the Royal Government issues
the most categorical denial. This slanderous accusation levelled at the Royal Cambodian Army is part of
the usual campa@ waged by the Saigon Press, and it
is surpsising
to hear it repeated by the representative
of South Viet-Nam,
As for the L-19 aircraft allegedly
shot down over South Viet-Nam by Cambodian fighters,
the facts are as follows: the aircraft in question was
directing the attack on Chantrea and was in Cambodian
air space; the Cambodian fighters, after issuing to it
the usual summons, shot it down while it was still
flying over Chantrea;
and according to the Saigon
Press, one of the two occupants of the aircraft was
killed outright whilst the second was able to fly the
machine back to South Viet-Namese
territory
before
it crashed. The explanation given by the representative
of South Viet-Nam
to the effect that the aircraft’s
engine was riddled with bullets, which caused it to stall
and the machine to plummet vertically,
reveals a somewhat ourious conception of ballistics.

57. Le représentant du gouvernement de Saigonafait
également état de pretendues violations du territoire
sud-vietnamien par des forces armees cambodgiennes
et a donn8 comme exemple l’affaire
de Vinh-lac et
de l’avion d’observation L-19 abattu par nos chasseurs,
Dans le cas de Vinh-lac, le gouvernement royal tient
B apporter le démenti le plus formel.
Cette accusation portée contre l’armee royale khmi?re fait
partie de la campagne men6e habituellement par les
journaux de Saigon et il est etonnant de constater
que cette calomnie soit reprise par le représentant
du Viet-Nam du Sud. Quant a l’avion L-19, qui aurait
été abattu dans l’espace aerien sud-vietnamien
par
des avions de chasse cambodgiens,
il convient de
Pr&iser
ce qui suit: cet avion, qui dirigeait l’attaque de Chant&a, se trouvait dans l’espace a&rien
khmer;
la chasse cambodgienne,
aprés les sommations d’usage, l’a abattu alors qu’il survolait encore Chantréa; l’un des occupants de l’appareil
fut
tu8 sur le coup, d’aprés la presse snigonnaise, alors
que le second put ramener l’avion, avant qu’il ne
s%cra&t,
en territoire
sud-vietnamien.
L’explication
donnée par le représentant du Viet-Nam du Sud, selon
laquelle le moteur cribl8 de balles a amen6 1 ‘arr&
instantané de l’appareil et sa chute verticale, révèle
une assez curieuse conception de la balistique.

58. As for the allegation that the frontier is ill-defined, 1 would recall that the Cambodianfrontiers
have
been delimited in documents and detailed maps. Although these frontiers
were drawn in a mannes unfavourable to Cambodia, they have been stsictly observed by our country which expects, however, that
the “minimum”
thus left to us shall not be oalled in
question by our neighbours.
59. Another
favouxite
argument
advanced by the
Saigon Government,
and SO willingly
repeated by its
allies, is that Cambodia is used as a place of refuge
and supply fox the Viet-Cong forces, Once again, the
Royal Government
most categorically
rejects these
false allegations. Anyone who paid any attention to the
gratuitous assertions
of the representative
of the Government of South Viet-Nam
would be led to believe
that Viet-Cong
dead and wounded had been left on the
battlefield.
But this is not SO. The victims are a11
peaceful Khmer villagers.

58. En ce qui concerne la ligne de frontibre
qui
serait imprécise,
je voudrais rappeler ici que les
frontiéres
cambodgiennes ont Ate bien délimitees par
des tedeS
et des cartes
Pr&is.
En d8pit d’un
tracé qui lui a été defavorable,
le Cambodge s’y
est strictement
conformé, mais entend quand même
que ce “minimum”
qui lui reste ne soit pas remis
en cause par ses voisins,
59. Une autre thÎ%e favorite
du gouvernement
de
Saigon, egalement reprise avec tant de complaisance
par ses allih, est que le territoire
cambodgien sert
de lieu de refuge et de ravitaillement
aux forces
vietcongs. Une fois de plus, le gouvernement
royal
tient 3 apporter le démenti le plus formel 2. ces
all8gations mensong?%es. En tout État de cause, si
l’on accordait crgdit aux affirmations
gratuites
du
rePréSentailt
du Gouvernement du Viet-Nam
du Sud,
on serait amené B conclure que des cadavres ou des
blessés vietcongs seraient restés sur le champ de
bataille. Or, il n’en est rien. Toutes les victimes
sont de paisibles villageois khmers.

60. In the case of Chantrea, one of the targets of
the South Vi&-Namese
air force was obviously the
pagoda, as ev-idenced by a line of bomb craters and
thefr direction.
This was noticed by General Cao when
we flew over the site in a helicopter. The representa-

60. D’autre part, dans le cas de Chantréa,
par
exemple, un des objectifs visés par l’aviation sudVietnamienne était manifestement la pagode du village,
comme le témoignent l’existence
des cratères
de
bombes et leur orientation, et comme a pu le cons&
14

ttl
Bu
th;

63,
fOS1

Tls.1
Zga1
na1
K-I
10 i
to ti
is r
San
ml
fort
fxar
Hear
agai
hdi

64.
stre
urge:
tory
alon
collt
65,
and,
in h:
plett
cuit

~~8 of the Republîo of Vlet-Nam, who 1s himself a
Sud&&$ will appreoiate the saorilegious nature of
that aot.
61. AS for the allegod pursuit Of the Viet-Congin the
atta& on Thlork, we must Point out that our forwa,
whioh had taken up po8ltlOnS at the frontier on the
prOtious
day, following the ma88aore of the Taey
villagers by the United Statee and South Viet-Namese
foraes, were keeping a partioularly .sharp look-outmade a11the sasier by the nature of the terrain whioh,
aa I mentloned before, 1s a vast and oompletely unint~r~pted plain, On this OCOaRiOn, as on othars, there
wasnot a trace of a Viet-Con& let alone a battalion of
thym. The members of the International Control Commission and the international observere, inoludingthe
United States Military 4UtaohtI, aotially Witnes8sd the
engagement taking plaoe, on Oambodian territory,
betweenthe forces of the Royal Government andthose
of the Covernment of Saigon;
82, It was in order to put an end to aoousations that
we were eheltering and supplying the Viet-Cong that
Camboaia proposed a g8neral international oontrol of
its frontiers, The Snuth-Viet-Namese proposal for a
oommfssion of experts to delimit the Camtxxiian-Bouth
Viet-Namese frontier 1s hardly aooeptable to the Royal
Covernment of Cambodia, ainoe it would in faot mean
oalling the frontier line in question, If by this expedient
South Viet-Nam wlshes to oall thefrontier in question,
Cambodia for its part would k oompelled to reolaim
aertain Khmer territory whioh waswrongly awaredto
South Viet-Nam by the Frenoh authorltlee at the time,

88, As for the South Viet-Namese propo8al for the
forming of mixad patrols to oo-operate in joint euparvision of the frontier eone, we must point out once
again that the aivil war in &uth Viet-Nam is an internal affair of that oountry, in whioh neutral Cambodia
oan in no way militarily lntervene, Consequently
Cambodia will oontlnue, as kforo, to prevent aooess
to its territory by Vi&-Namese, whether they balong
to the Qovernment or to the Vlet-Cong aide, If any proof
is required, 1 need only dte the oa8e of a Soutb VietNameee general who sought refuge in Cambodia
and together with MS troopa, waa disarmed by the
fOW38
of the Royal Cambocllan Army, Another cloquent
example is that of Mr. Nguyen Tou Hoan, now Deputy
Head of tbe Saigon Qovernment, who while fighting
against the Dlem rflgime oame in vain to eolloit Cambodla’s a88i&moa,
84. Moroovor, it 10 with a V!OW to oonflr!xlng and

strengthanlng our absolutc nautrality that Cambodln
urgee ganeral suparvisîon of its frontlors and tarritory by the International Control CommIseion, whioh
alon
is onpable of eneuring offeotivo and p01mln011t
Oontrol of the frontiar.

f% The Commission 1s olroady thare, on tho opot;
and, a8 the rapresentative of Prance rîghtly observed
in Itie statemeat yesterday, the estabMunont of oomPletely new organs would inovitably be a “slow, diffldult and eostly bucdne8sW.

ter le gBn6ral Cao quand nous avons survol6 ler
lieux en h6liooptbr% Le repr6sentant deluR6Publlque
du Viet-Nam, lui-m8me bouddhiste, appr6oiera B
sa juste valeur cet aote saorilbge.
61. En oe qui ooaoerne la r0f6renoe h la poursuite
des Vietcongs dans L’attaque de Thlork, il est bon de
pr6oiser que no8 foroea, qui avaient pris poeition
h la frontibre la veille, aprbs le ma88aore des habitants du village de Taey par le8 fOrOeS am6riO~O=
vietnamiennes, la surveillaient avao une vlgilanoe
partioulibre; surveillanoe d’ailleurs faoilit0e par la
nature du terrain qui, oomme je Ilai eoullgn6 plu8
haut, est une vaste plaine aana le moindre obataole,
En oette oooasion oomme en d’autres, il rity eu pas
l’ombre d0n~ Vletoong, ot enoore moins oelle d(un
bataillon, Les membres de la COmminSlOn interna=
tionale da oontr8le et les observateurs internationaux,
parmi lesquels figurait lJattaoh6 militaire am6rioain,
ont pu assieter sur les lieux m&nos, h ltengagement
qui mettait aux prises, en territoire khmer, les for
oes du gouvernement royal et oelles du gouvernement
de Saigon.
82, Clest pour Bviter que l’on oontinue h noua acouser d’abriter les Vietoongs et d%tre une souroe de
ravitaillement pour eux que le Cambdge a propos6
un oontrble international g6n6ralls6 de aes frontit%es,
La proposition du Viet-Nam du Sud, tendant h la
or6ation d’une oommiesion d’experts en vue de
d&imiter
la frontl8re kbmaro-eudmvletnamienne,
n’est gubre aooeptable pour le Clouvernement royal
du Cambodge, oar elle ooneisterait en fait h -mettre
en oause le traos des frontibres. Si, par oe biais,
le Viet-Nam du Sud veut remettre en oause la ligne
de frontibres, le Cambodge, lui, se verrait dans llobligation de r6olamer oertains territoires khmers injustement attrlbuds au Viet-Nam du Sud par les autorit&
frangaises de lq&oque,
83. En de qui oonoerne la propoeition sud=vietnamienne d’une formation de patrouilles mixtes qui
ooop&eralent dans la surveillanoe oommune de la
eone frontalibre, il noua faut souligner une Loir
enoore que la guerre olvlle au Viet-Nam du Sud
est une aPlaire lnt6rleure de oe paya dans laquelle
le Cambodge neutre ne saurait en auoune fapon rVn@rer militairement. Le Uambodge s’en tient en oonsb
quenoe B sa position de toujours, qui est dWerd.trs
llaootts de son territoire aux BlBments vietnamîenr,
quille soient gouvernementaux ou vletoongs, Wfl faut
des preuves, il me suflirait de oiter le oas $Un
g&Wal sud-vietnamien qui, oherohant refuge auC&snbadge, a &6 dbearmb ave@ ae(l troupes par les
forces de lQrm0e royale khmbre, Eloquent 4galemsnt
eet le oan de M. Nguyen Tou Hoan, aoturlletr.4
vîoe-prhsident du gouvernement de lafgon, qui, rlorr
quY1 luttait oontre 1s rlgime Mem, ert venu vain*
ment sollloiter l~asslstanoe du Cambodge,
24. C’est d’nillours pour confirmer et renforoor oetto
neutralit6 fhOhI6
quo la Cambodge domnnde aveu
insistanoo un oont& gbn6rnlis6 de .WS frontibres
et do 8on territoire par la Commiseion internationale
de oontrble. Cotta dornibre est en effet saule eusoep
tible d’ausuror un oontrble offioaoo et permanent de
la frontibre.
CG. Cot organisme est dbjh BU~ plaos ot, oommo
l’a si justement fait remarquer 10 repr6eentant do
la Ibu~oa nu ooum do son întorvontion d’hier, la
or6ation de toutest piboes d’organismes nouveaux
“serait in6vltablement lento, ardue et 0116rau~en,

66, The present situation is the result of non-oomwlth the Ceneva Aereements of 1964, and it
fs more than ever essentiel to reoonvene the Ceneva
Conferenoa in order to euarantee Cambodia’s tsrritorial integrity and neutiality. Cur neutrality dates
from that flrst Ceneva Conference. It would be the
task of a reoonvened oonfersnoe to define the powers
of the International Control Commission and give it
tbe meaue of playing its part effeotively, That would
put an end, onoe and for all, to the aonaooted story
of Cambodian oomplioity with the Vie+Gong, In thie
oonnexion, while 1 regret that Mr. Stevenson. the
United States represenlative, has glven oreden& to
suoh a fable, 1 would agree with Idm that “others in
the area bave not bsenpreparad to leave the psople
of Cambudia free to pursue their own ends independently and peaoufully” [S/PV,lllO, para. 671. For
us, those who Will not let us live in parce are the
oountries whioh are pursuing a polloy of aggression
and systamatio hostility against us.
pliame

67, The representative of Sath Viet-Nam in& oated
yestsrday that Cambodia wasenoouraging the ol&~destine IntWhOt!oU
ht0
South Viet-Nam Of ohemioal !JrOduots used in the manufaoiure of exploslves,~In‘this
oaso also, the Royal Covernment most oategorioally
gives the lie to these slanderous assertions, whioh
are olearly intended to sow oonfusion in worldopinion
with a view to justifying the repeated setbaoks suffered
by the United Statss and South Viet-Namese forœs,
68. This polioy of systsmatio hostility towards Cambodia is nothinn new. It ha8 been praotised bu a11suooessivs CoveGmentS at Saigon, As early asFebr%iary
1960. the Suith Vietnamese r&ime. then ruled with a
rod if iron by Ngo Dinh Diem, bas uaught red-handsd
in a oonspiraoy to overthrow the national r6gime of
Cambodia, The Khmer General Dap Chhuon, a traitor
ta Ns oountry, reosived direct aid from the Saigon
Uovernment in the form of arm8 andvarious subsidies,
to plot agaiest Cambodia’s polioy of neutrality. In the
preeenœ of the diplomatio corps and all foreign
observera resident at Phnom Penh, it was establishsd
that there waa alose oollusion between Dap Chhuon
and Ngo Trong Hieu, the rspresentative of the Republîo of Viet-Nam lu Cambodia, The mont overwhelming
evidenœ was displayed, showing that General Dap
Chhuon~s trdtorous plan against our oountry, our indepsndsnœ and our neutrality hadbeen hatohed abroad,
Nga Trong Hieu, who held euoœsrive poots of rus nribility in hi8 oountry andwhomthe representativs
op”Viet-Nam here prerent muet havs knownqults well,
waa not the onIy Ilnk in the ohain. Two radio experts
from SoutbViet-Nam and a member of the Unibd States
Embarry, Viotor Matsui, were alro unmarked in their
anti-Khmer aotlvitiee.

60. Today this attitude of eystomatio hostility towards
Cainlxxha, far from diminishing, bas been aggravatud
to the point whore it bordero on hysterla. Wo now 800
Unitsd States politloians followlug in the footstepe of
the Saigon autlïorities, openly reooinmendiry au extonsi011of tho war to Catnbodia. Whother it Ix, Lr olootiouoering or othor purposoe, tho faot romains that
Mr. Nixon, Mr. Coldwuter sud Mr. Itookefeller have
boon quiok to proparo Unitod Statos opinion for a
possible oxteuslon of tho oonfliot in South Viet-Nam

66, La situation actuelle Hsulte du non-respeot des
aooords de Cenbve de 1964, et une nouvelle r&mion
de oette oonferenos s’avbre plus que jamais indlspensable pour garantir lYntQrit4 territoriale et la
neutralit8 du Cambodge, Cette neutraIlt6 a trouv6
d’ailleurs son origine B oette premikre oouf6renoe
de Qenbve, Uns nouvelle oonf&enoe aurait pour
attribution de prboiser Bgaiement les pouvoirs de
la Commission internationale de oontrble ot de lui
donner les moyens nsoessaires pour remplir offioaoement son &le. Elle mettrait-fin d’uno- manibre
d6finitive h la fable de la oomnlioits khmbre aveo les
Vietdongs. A cet bgard, tout -en exprimant mes rQgrets que M, Stevenson, ropr6sontant des Etats-Unis,
puisse donner sa oautlon B une thbse aussi fantaisiste,
je voudrais oonvenlr aveo lui qu’en effet “d’autres,
dans la region, ne sont pas dispoo& k laisser le
peuple du Cambodge libre de suivre sa proprs vole
dans la paix et lQnd&pendanoe [lllobme sdanoe,
par. 671. Pour nous. oeux au1 ne nous permettent
pas- do ‘vivre en paix sont blën les pays qui mbnent
oontre nous une politique d’agression et d’hostilit4
syst8matiqu0,
67. Le reart%entant du Viet-Nam du Sud a lais&
ontendre hier que le Cambodge favoriserait l’introœ
duotion olandostlne au Viet-Nam du Sud do nrodults
ohimiques utilisds pour la fabrioation dlexplosifs,
Le gouvernement royal tiont h renouveler le ddmenti
le plus formel oontre oes assertions oalomnieuses
dont le but apparent est de semer la oonfuslon dans
l’opinion internationale afin do justifier les 6oheos
r6pWs des foroes am&ioano-sud-vietnamiennes,
68. Cette politique dlhostillts syst&matique envers
le Cambodge ne date pas dlaujourdlhui, Elle est le
fait de tous les gouvernements qui se suoo6dSrent B
Saigon, En effet, dbjh en fbvrier 1960, le r6glir.e
sud-vietnamien, plaod alors QOUS la f6ruIe de
Ngo Dinh Diem, &ait pris en flagrant d6lit dans
une affaire do oomplot visant k renverser le tigime
national du Cambodge, Le g6ndral khmer Dap Chhuon,
traftre h sa patrie, regut une aide direote sous
forme d’armements et de subsides divers du gouvernement de Saigon pour oomploter oontre la politique
de neutralitl du Cambodse. En Wsenoe du 001’1)s
diplomatique et de tous 6s observateurs dtrange‘rs
en rdsidenoe h Pnom-Penh, il fut &abli qu’il existait
une oolluelon Etroite entre Dap Chhuon et Ngo Trong
Hieu. renr6sentant de la Rgtmbllaue du Viet-Nam
aÜ~C&nb&lge, Les preuves les-plus àooablantes furent
BtalBee au grszid jour montrant ,que le plan de trahison du g&nBral Dap Chhuon avait Bt4 trao6 de
l%tranger oontre notre pavs, notre lnd6pendanoe et
notre neutralitd, Ngo Trong Hieu, qui a oooup8 auooesrivement des postes de responsabillt4 dans son
pays, et que le reprdaentant du Viet-Nam ioi prdsent
doit avoir bien oonnu, nUtait pas le seul maillon
de la ohaine, Deux sp6oiaIlstes en radio du Viet-Nam
du Sud et un membre do l~nmbassade des Etato4nis
d’AmfJrlque, Viotor Matsul, furent bgnlement d6*
masquQs dans leurs aotlvltds antlkhmbros.
00. Aujourdbul, ootto attltudo d~hostllltI3 systBmatiqua onvors 10 Cambodge, loin do e.laW~uer, s’ont
aggravbo h un point ta1 qu’allo frise l%ystdrio.
Embofiaut le pas aux autorlt6s ria Saigon, vollh que
des porsounalit6s polltiquos am6rloalnoa prboonlsont
ouvertemont d%tondro la gucrro au Cambqdgo. Qu’il
slaglsso do suronohbre Bleotorale ou autre, 10 fait
est la1 MM. Nixon, Colclwnter ou Dookefellor n’ont
pas hbsltb h prdparer l~opl~~ion arnbrioalno ou vu0
dtuue oxtenelon possible du oonillt du Vlot-Nam

tu a11thi
Waeblng
sou?w,

:::%i
Oise rep
lierre in
the very
gtoen W
of frienc
Stevenso
be for@
ila%
%SEi

;:tzE
denoe. ü
tante bat

70, If t
rosponsi
be share
near the
VieGNar
oerfh 00
thelr fan

Il, The
inetanœ
-and thl
tlnues to
at the att
0faBout
Tarp

1

Armc&
Army, 1
by the ml
Sion in t
oluding t
Embassy

79 As 1
entitled
oonditiom
pesœ.
78, Firr

against C
74, seot
in posfti

sots ocuu
7G. T%ir
the Unit4
bo oomp
roetore
orase thc

16, Fou:
011 take
le reoonl
pose of I

1884
:ro-

uits
Ilfe.
lent1
1888

b a11the oountrles of the Iudo-Chines8 penlnsula, The
wotlng an undoubtedly reIlaljIB
that the Pentagon was in favour of
direct lnterventlon in Cambodla wlth a vlew to overthrowlng that oountry’s Head of St& Wlth suoh predse reports at hand, lt is difhlt for us not to beIleve in the imminence of a grave danger threatenfng
the very llfe of the Khmer nation. Desplte assuranoes
glven b$ the Unlted States Clovernmentand thefeellngs
of frlendshlp and admiration expressed here by Mr,
Stewnson for the Cambodian Head of State. we mav
be forglven, beoause of our earller experl&&f&
fearing that onoe again these words do not correspond
to faots. Indeed, in every attaok of whloh Cambodla
has been the olOtlm, the so-oalled Unlted States
advlsere have taken an aotlve part in the opsratlons,
Ths Unlted States representatlve oontlnues todenythls
Unitad States Npresenoen, desplte overwhelmlng evldenoe, In every one of thsse attaoks, the looal lnhabltants have been ablu expresely to reoordthis presenoe,
TO, If the Unlted States oonslders ltself not ta be
responslble for the frontler lnoidents, that viewoannot
be shared by the Khmer psople-espaolally those living
near the frontlers, who all too often sec the South
ViebNamese troops, etlffened wlth Unîted States offloers, oome to ravage their villages and maasaopB
their familles,

lans
Lt308

pes.
Pers
mt le
int a
*me
1 de
Jans
E
boué
verique
=Vs
Ilere
Etait
rang
Nam
t:::
l de
m et
Buoson
sent
lllon
Nam
Lh;
I

71, The United States has hltherb admltted only one
lnstanoe of lts partlolpatlon-in the attaokon Chantrea
-and thls booause lt was oaught red-handed, It oontlnues to deny the presenoe of Unlted States fladvlsers”
at the attaoks on Taey andThlork, desplte the testlmony
of a south Vlet-Namese prlsoner namedNguyenOuang
Tung, a private aged twënty-four, reglstra%&numbe~
101646, bslonging to the fourth detaohment of theflrst
Armcured Rerriment, SP4OG6.of the Sc&h Viet-Namese
Army, 1 muef add tlïat thls grlsoner was interroga6d
by the members of the International Control Commlsslon In the presenoe of international observer&, lnoluding the MiIitary AttaohB from the Unlted States
Embassy.
18. As a Member of the Unlted Nations, Cambodla 1s
entltled to ask thie Organisation that the necessary
oondttlons be oreated to enable Cambodla to live in
mas,
78, First, the olearly proven aots of aggrsssion
agalnst Cambodla muet be formally oondemned.
74. Seoondly, we ask that measures be taken, by those
In positions of responslblllty, to ensure that slmllar
aob oannot roour,
7G. Thlrdly, tha viotlms of the aots of aggresslon by
tlle Unlted Statea and South Vlot-Namose foroas must
be oompeneatod, although no ropnratlons oan ever
restera llfe to our dead, oblltcrate our wounds or
81’088the memory of thoso odlous orlmes,
70, Fourthly, Cainbodla urges that tho Seourlty Co~nail tako a doolsion suoh that the aeneva Conforenoo
1s reoonvenod at ths earllost opportunlty for the purpose of solvlng the general problem effeotlvoly and

du Sud a tous les 1)~s de la pBnlnsule indoohlnolse.
Le Washln&on Ro&i pour sà part, a rapport6 de
souroe oertalnement digne de fol que le Pentagone
est partisan d’une intervention directe au Cambodge
en vue de renverser le chef de 1’Etat khmer. Faoe
B des rbf6renoes aussi ptiolses, 11 nous est difflolle de ne pas orolre B lllmminenoe d’un grave
danger qui menaoe la vie m0me de la nation khmbre,
En dBpit des assuranoes donn&s par le CBuvernement
des Etats-Unis d’Amf3rlque et deisentiments dtamlt16
et d’admiration exprlm6s 101m8me par M. Stevenson
B l’adresse du ohef de IlEtat du Cambodge, qu’il
nous soit permis, compte tenu des exp&rlenoes an&
rleures, dè oralndre qu’une fols de $US oes paroles
ne oorrespondent pas aux faits r&els, En effet, nu
oours do toutes les agressions dont le Cambodge
a BtB viotlme, les sol-disant oonselllers am6riaalns
ont partlolp6 aotlvement aux op&atlons. Le repr&sentant des Etats-Unis dtAm&lque continue B nier
oette “pr&enoefl am6rloalne en deplt de t6molgnages
aooablantsi dans toutes oes agresalons, les habitants
ont pu oonstater formellement oette pr&senoe,
70, Si les Etats-Unis, en effet, estiment ne pas
8tre ooupables des lnoldents de frontibres, oatte
oonvlotlon ne saurait btre partag6e par 10 peuple
khmer, et partloullbrement par les habitants frontallers, qui volent trop souvent les troupes sudvietnamiennes, enoadrees par des offlolers ami%%
oalns, venir ravrrgsr leurè villages et massaorer
leurs familles,
71, Les Etats-Unis d’Am&rlaue n’ont reoonnu
jusqullol qu’une seule partlelpatl& am&loalne, oelle
lors de l’attaque de ChantrBa, et oela paros qullls
Btalent pris en flagrant dbllt. Mals ils oontlnuent B
nier llexlstenoe de noonselllersn am6rloalns lors
de l’attaque de Taey et de Thlork mal@ le tfJmolœ
gnage du prisonnier sud-vietnamien d8nomm6 Nguysn
Ouang Tung, soldat de abme olasse, f@ de 84 LUE,
num&o matrloule 101 846, appartenant au 48me d6taohement du premier rbglment des bllndds, SP 4056,
de llarrnbe sud-vietnamienne, Il me faut ajouter que
ltlnterrogatolre de oe prisonnier a 4th fait par les
membres de la Commieelon internationale de oontrble,
en prbsenoe dlobservatsurs internationaux dont l’attaoh militaire de l’ambassade des Etat+Unis d%mBrique luCm8me.
72, Pays Membre de 1~Organleatlon des Nations
Unies, le Cambodge est en droit de demander B
oette organisation Sue des conditions lndlspensabfes
lui soient assur6es pour qulfl puisse. vivre en pafx,
78. Premlbwment, les aotes d’agression dont le
Cambodge cet vlotlme doivent falre l’objet d’une
oondamnation formelle, Btant dont& la mat&laIltl
des faits,
74, Dsuxlbmement, noun demandons que des mesures
soient prises par les responsables afin que de semblablw aotos ne puissent plus 8s renouveler.
7G, Trolslbmeme11t, les vlotimes dos agressions
dos foroos a1n6rloano-eud~vi~t11a1nicn1~es
doivent rooovolr uu d8dommagamoat, bien que des r&arations,
quslles qu%lles soient, ne puissent jamnls faire
revivre :~OSmorts, olontrleor nos blessures et falro
oublier oos orlmcs odieux.
78. QuatrlblnemonE, le Cnmbodgu insista pour qu’une
dboision soit prlso par le Conseil de s6ourltf3 afin
que la Conf6renoe de Ueabve 88 rbuniese le plus
tbt poosiblo pour r&oudre, d’une manlbre efflonoo

permanent& through the reoognieingandguaranteeing
of our neutrality and territorial integrity,
77, In thés oonnedon, 1 would remind those who are
inolined to invoke the situation in Laos in opposition
to our request for suoh a oonferenoe that the two oasee
are not at a11 similar. TO begin with, ever sinue the
Qeneva Agreements of 1964 Cambodia has bebn pursuing a polioy of neutrality, whereas Laos has been
groping its way. Our neutrality ha8 been the subjeot
of an Aot unanimously pasaed by the Cambodian
Parliament, and it 1s explioitly mentioned in our Constitution, Furthermore, violation of one agreement is
no reason for not oonoluding others,
78. A reoonvened Geneva Conferenoe would set the
forma1 seal on this neutrality and guarantee, internationally, Cambodinls territorial integrity, It would
also enable an end to be put to the aots of aggression
of whioh we are today the viotlms, and peaoe and
stability in that part of the world to be safeguarded,
in aooordanoe with the purposes of the United Nations,
79, Mr, FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Sooialist Renublioe) (translated from Russianl: The Soviet deloiation bo‘nsiders it neoessary to niake some remarks
with respeot to the statements we havejust heard, and
partioularly to the speeoh by Mr. Stevenson, the Unlted
States representative,
80, The Uidted States representative has onoe more
indulged in myth-maklng, It should be noted that mythe
sometimes suooeed in living on terms with faots, but
not for very long, Faots, by their very nature and
psyohology, rebel or revolt against myths, They rovolt,
beoause an attempt fs made not to take them into
aooount. They revolt and take vengeanoe on anyone
who loses bis feeling for the realistio approaoh and
does not wish to look reality, truth, in the faoe.
81. In the statement that he just made, the United
Rates repreeentatîve showeddispleasure at I’. 1statements of the Minlsterfor Fore@ Affaira of Ca ‘-&ia,
the representative of Franoe, the Soviet delegation,
the Ceeohoslovak delegation and others who oonsider
ft neoessary that an international oonferenoe shouldbe
oalled with a view to guaranteeing the neutrality and
sovereign inviolabllity of Cambodia,
82, Instead of aoknowledging guilt for the aggressive
aotions taken by the United States armedforoes against
Cambodia-a Member of the United Nations-and deolaring to the Seourity Counoil with dus responsibility
and aourage that the United States Government, as
beffts a great State, would take appropriate steps to
prevent the reourrenoe of oriminal aots with respeot
to violation of Cambodia’s sovereignty and territorial
tntegrity, our United States oolleague has ueed every
devioe to shield first himself and then bis Saigon
PupPets.

83, Furthermore, the United Statcs rcpreaentativa,
forgetting tt at this time bis oountry is not tha
aooueer-ah
havo alraudy pointed out-but lias
been aoousna of tho moet gross and serioue vlolatîon
of the United Nations Charter and ths Geneva Agrcement8, aseiuned tho role of a tutcr nncl looturscl the
Government of Cambodia-a eovereign State-on whnt
it should nnd should not do.

et permanente, le problbme d’ensemble en reoonnaissant et en garantissant notre neutralit6 et notre
int6grlt6 territoriale,
77. A cet agard, B oeux qui ont tendanoe h 8voquer
la situation au Laos pour nous refuser une telle oonf&
renoe, je voudrais rappeler que les oonditions nesont
pas du tout les m8mes. D’abord, alors que le Laos
oherohait enoore sa voie, le Cambodge a poursuivi,
depuis les aooords de Genbve de 1064, une politique
de neutralitb. Cette neutralit6 a fait l’objet d’une loi
vot6e unanimement par le Parlement oambodgien
et est mentionn&e explioitement dans notre oonstitution, D’autre part, 08 n’est pas paroe qu’un aooord
aurait Bt6 viol6 qu’il ne faut plus en oonolure d’autres.
78, Une nouvelle oonf&enoe de Genbve viendrait
oonsaorer solennellement oette neutralith et garantir
internationalement l’int&rit6
territqriale du Cambodge, Elle permettrait aussi de mettre fin aux agressions dont nous sommes pr6sentement les victimes
et de sauvegarder, oonformdment aux buts de notre
organisation, la paix et la stabilit6 dans oette partie
du monde,
72, M. BEDORENKO (Union des RfJpubliques sooialistes sovi&iques) [traduit du russe]! La d618gution
sovi&ique oroit devoir pr&senter quelques observations h la suite des d6olaratlons que nous avons
entendues aujourd’hui, notamment de oelle de
M. Stevenson, repr&entant des Etats-Unis,
80. Le repri%entant des Etats-Unis a de nouveau
voulu or6er des mythes, Il urrive parfoin aux mythes
de staooorder aveo la r&lit& mais oela ne dure pas.
Par leur nature meme, et pour des raisons psyohologiques, les faits se r8voltent et se dressent oontre
les mythes, Ils se rbvoltent paroe qu’on oherohe h
ne pas en tenir oompte, Ils se rebellent et ils se
vengent de oeux qui perdent le sens des r&alitI& et
refusent de voir la v8rit8 en faoe,
81. Aujourd’hui, le reprbsentant des Etats-Unis a
exprim6 son mboontentement au sujet des dbolarations
faites par le Ministre des affaires Btrangbres du
Cambodge, le reprbsentant de la Franoe, la dB&
gation sovi&ique, la dbldgation toh6ooslovaqus et
d’autres d816gations qui estiment indispensable de
oonvoquer une oonf&enoe internationale afin d’assurer la neutralite et lYnt8grit6 souveraine du Cambodge,
82. Au lieu de reoonnaftre que les foroes arm6es
am8rioalnes se sont rendues ooupables d’aotes agressifs oontre le Cambodge, Etat Membre de l’organisation des Nations Unies, au lieu de dbolarer au
Conseil de s8ourit6, oourageusement et en oonsoienoe,
que le Qouvernement des Etats-Unls prendra les
mesure8 voulues, oomme il sied R une grande puis881108,pour emn6oher sue de nouveaux aotes oriminels fie- portent. atteinte-h la souverainet et B l%ntegrit6 territoriale du Cambodge. notre oollbnue des
Ptats-Unis
a mis tout en ceuirb pour se diioulper
et, bien entondu, peur disoulpor ses marionnettes de
Saigon.
83. De plus, oubliant qu~aujourcl’hui son pays n%st
pas ici en aoousateur, mais bien eu aoous6 - oomme
jbi cl6jh eu l’oooasion
de ltindiquer œ, accus6 do
violation flagrnnta ot exti~0memant gi9ve do la charte
des Nations Unies et des aooords de Gcnbve, le
repr&entant des Etats-Unis s%et 8rig8 en mentor
et a fait la leçon au Gouvaruamant du Caml.!odge,
Etat souverah, lui supg6rant 08 qu’il doit faire et
08 qu’il ne doit pas faire.

84, Thr
of that,
of him.
United
aggresai
versally
States a(
86, Mr,
Affaire
what the
of its 6
vention
vooally f
a perfeo
86, we
position
aggresd
Namese
oivilian

of the Sa
87, In 1

the afor
pay aom
the vloti
respond
quired 1
violation
F;;g$
a view
neutralil

the legi
CtUlbOdl
88, In 7
sentatiw
of the 8
Viet-Nar
bers of
of the I
East As!
80, We
oose ap
States, :
of the U
reoently
Mr, ao11
Unlted I
use of at
by the u:
appeal b
arouae8

and le@

1seg\%
sympton
States, t
0er11111g

1

iiatlonal
and SOfc

00, Of (
Seiiator
figure; t

mente,
agree.
1
aro obvl

are una

reoont notre

,voquer
oonf6ne sont
‘e Laos
cw.livi,
,1itique
:une loi
Kxlgisl~

aonsti~aooord
autres,
,ndrait
arantir
Camagresotimes
e notre
~partie
l
~sooiaFb\tgtl
c
1 avons
Lie de
ouveau
mythes
!:gii* I
’oontre
‘robe h
: ils se
lit44 et
‘Unis a
bations
re8 du
I d416ique et
bble de
a d’asL Camirm4es

;agresbgani~rer au
bienoe,
Ira les
le puis:$:~.$:
he des
~oulpar
ttos do

84, The United StateS r%preSentatiVOdOesnOt speak
Of that, but this is what the Ss~urity Counoil expeots
of bim. If there is to be an end t0 oharges that the
United States of Amerioa is OOmmitting aots of
aggression against other sovereign States, the univarsally o0ndemned aggressive polioy of the United
StatOsagainst other Stabs must first of a1108888.
86. Mr. Huot Sambath, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cambodia, who obviously knows bast
what the Cambodian GOVernment needs for the defenOO
of its State frontiers against agression and intervention in tho interna1 affaira of Cambodia, unequivooally stated his Qovernment’s position and addressed
a perfeotly plain apgeal to the Seourity Counoil,
86, Wa understand the Cambodlan Government’s
position in the following way.It asks that the reourring
nggressive aotions of the Unit& States-South VietNamese fOrOOS against CambodiabterritOry and
oivilian population bs oondemned, It asks that the
responsibility of the United States Ciovernment and
of the Saigon r6gime for these aots be reoognieed,
81, In this oonnexion, it 1s obviously indioated that
the aforemontioned Governments must be invited to
pay oompensation on a just basis for the damage to
the viotims at Mong, Chantrea and Taey, andthat those
responsiblo for these aggressive aotions must be roquired to take steps to prevent any reourrenoe of
violation of Cambadia’s sovsreignty and territorial
integrity, Lastly, there should be support for the oonvening of the Ueneva Conferenoeon Indo-China, with
a view to reoognising and guaranteeing Cambodials
neutrality and territorial integrfty in aooordance witb
the legitimato and olearly expressed desire of the
Oambodian Government.
88, In view of the faot that the Unit& Statss representative ha8 set forth at length his underetanding
of the situation in the region of Cambadia and Soutb
Viet-Nam, we venture to draw the attsntion of membsrs of the Seourity Counoil to a highly vital aspeot
of the United States military intervention in SouthEast Asia,
89, We refer to those radioal and intempsrate bsllf0088 appeals, heard in reoent days in the United
States, for the expansion of the military aotivities
Of the United Statss armed foroes in this regioa As
reoently as g4 May the notorious United States SOnator,
Mr, Goldwakr, who is seeking the Presidenoy of the
United Statss, uttered a oannibalîetio oall for the
use of atomioweaponsin the war whiohie being wagsd
by ths Unikd States in ScurthViet-Nam, This barbario
aPPsa1by the leader of the so-oalled Qinatio fringefl
arouses in a11peaoe-lovingpeoples ange& indignation,
and le timate oonoern lest the interests of psaoe and
SsOuri$ bs plaoed in ev8n graver danger, WO may
lsgltlmakly ask how these oannibalfatio appsals, theae
symPtOmSof atsmio madness, found today in the Unitsd
Statss, aooord with the Washington deolarations oonoerning tho doeire for pea,oe,tho maintonanoe of intornational seourity, intorost in the lessening of t0nsion,
and so forth.
66, of OOWBO,there are people who will oontendthat
RQlator Uoldwater is a prlvate individual, a lona
figure; chat no attention should b0 paid to suoh statements, nnd thnt they nro not dangarous. We oannot
agrec. Tlreir danger and the vast lrarm that they do
are obvious tu all. As the saying goes, only the blind
are unafraid of snakos. Sonator aoldwabrls en-

84. Le repr8sentant des Etats-Unis ne dit pas oe
qu’il devrait dire ni oe que le Conseil de Sf3OUritg
attend de lui, Pour qu’on oesse dlaouueer les EtatsUnis dIaotes agressifs oontre d’autres Etats souverains, il faut avant tout que les Etats-Unis mettent
un terme R leur politique unanimement oondamn6e
d’agression oontre d’autres Etats.
86, Le Ministre desaffaires OtrangOresdu CambOdgO,
M, Huot Sambath, qui sait mieux que quioonque 08
que son gouvernement doit faire pour protgger ses
frontibres de l’agression et ddfendre son pays oontre
l’intervention Otrangbre, a olairement d6fini la position de son gouvernement et a adressg au Conseil de
s6ouritO une demande extr6mement prOoise,
88, Voioi oomment noua oomprenons la positiOn du
Qouvernement cambodgien, Il s’agit de condamner les
aotes dlagression r6pdt6s des troupos amdrioanosud-vietnamiennes oontro le territoire et la popun
lation oivile du Cambodge, Il s’agit do reoonnaftre
que la responsabilit6 de oes aotss inooml>e au aOu=
vernement des Etats-Unis et au r&ime de Saigon.
87, A oe propos, il oonvient d’inviter 088 gouvarnements h indemniser Equitablement les viotimes
de Mong, Chantrb ot Taey et d’exiger des rospOnsablas de oes aotes agrossifs qu’ils prennent les
mesures n63essairos pour emphoher toute nouvelle
violation de la souverainet et de lYnt6grit6 territoriale du Caml>odge, Enfin, il oonvient de se prOnùnoer en faveur de la oonvooation de la Confbronoe
de aenbve sur lllndoohine en vue do reoonnaftre et
de garantir la neutralit6 et lYntOgrit6 territoriale du
Cambodge oonform6ment aux vœux ldgitimes et olairement exprimhs du GOuvernement cambodgien,
88, Aprbs IlintarprOtation dOtaill6e que le repr&
sentant des Etats-Unis nous a donn6eioi de la situation au Cumbodge et au Viet-Nam du Sud, j’attirerai
l’attention des membres du Conseil de seouritd sur
un aspeot majeur de l’intervention mflitaire des
Etats-Unis dans l’Asie du Sud-Est,
80, Je veux parler des appels outrageueement belliqueux qui ont Bt6 lano& oes jours4 aux EtatsUnie en vue dUtendre les op&ations militaires am&
rioaines dans oette r@ion, Le g4 mai enoore, le
tristsment o6lbbre sdnateur Qoldwater, qui brble
du dgsir de devenlr 10 proohain PrBsident des EtatsUnis, a pr8oonis6 dansun appel sanguinaire l’emploi
de l’arme atomique dans la guerre que les EtatsUnis mbnent au Viet-Nam du Sud,Cet appel barbare
du meneur des ad6mentsn a provoqu6 la oolbre et
l’indignation de tous les peuples paoifiques, qui
slinquibtent B juste titre de voir que la paix et la
tdouritb peuvent 80 trouver enoore plue gravement
menao&es, Comment peut-On oonoflier oes appels
sanguinaires, oes signes de d6menoe atomique qui
se manifsstent aujourd’hui aux Etats-Unis, aveo 10s
d6olaratlons de Washington sur le ddslr de paix do
08 pays, Sur 19tppUi qu’il apportcl h la s6ourit6 internationale, sur EIO~I
ck3sir de dOtente, et autres propos
semblablas?
t)O, Il se trouvera Bvid0mment des gens pour affirmr que le s6nateur Goldwater n’est jnmais qu’un
oitoyen oomme les nutres, un0 voix isol60, Ot qu’il
ne vaut gubro la peins de tenir oompte de somblables d&olarations, yul no pr6sontent dtuillcurs
nuoun danger. Il nous est impossible do partager OO
point do vue. ]Le dnnger de oes d6olarntions ot lour

thueiaern
whioh
States
as is

for
the uoe
of atomio
weapons
in thte wara
is
now
offioially
oulled
“a war
of the Unikd
Government”,
is all the more
dangerous
inthat,

well known, it io far from the first time that
plans for ‘&e use of atomio weapons in this region
bave iasued from the United States.

91. We do not even mention the faot that oertain
oiroles in the United States oherished plans for the
&em’of atomio weapons on the IndoGhinèse peninsula
as far baok as 1964-ten years ago, and approximately
ten years after ths atomio nightmare of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. Furthermore, as for instance 1s noted in
Hanson Baldwin’s artiole publiahed in X&I New York
Times of today, 26 May, the utilisation of atomio
weapons in this region ahas long been under shdy in
the Pentatzon~. In Baldwinls words, Senator aoldwatar
simply nbrought some of these disousslons into the
nolitioal forum”-brought them, that is, out of the
bhase of seoret disouïX3ion inti the open-when he
oame out withhisfrank, free-and-easy appeal. Baldwin
continues! %uoh aotion has been advodated by some
military men [in the UnIted States] as part of oontin@noy plans. ”
,9& In these oiroumstanoes, we oannot ignore thefaot
that up ta now not one offioial representative of the
United St&s Government ha8 denounoed the oannibalistio projeots publioly proolaimed by Senator
Qoldwater, 1s tbis aooidental? The auswer to this
question should, of oourse, hrrvebeen given preoisely
gyoUn;LUnited States representative in the Seourity

caraotbre extramement nooif sont l%videnoe marne,
Comme on dit, les aveugles sont les seuls R ne pas
oraindre les serpents. L’ardeur du s0nateur Goldwater B vouloir employer l’arme nuoleaire dans
oetto “guerre du CIouvernement des EtatsœUnisn,
comme on l’appelle offioiellement, oonstitue un danger d’autant plus grand que oe n’est pas la premibre
fois, on le sait, que les Etats-Unis envisagent de
recourir A l’arme nuol6aire dans oette r9gion.
91, Je ne Parlerai naa des projets dtemoloi de
l’arme atomique en hïdoobine, que -certains ïnilieW
ambrioains avaient formes dbs 1964, otest&dire
il y a 10 ans, et 10 ans B peine apr8s le oauohemar
atomiuue dlliiroshirna et de Naxasaki. Bien alus.
oommé le note par exemple Hanson Baldwin ‘dani
le New York Times d’aujourd’hui, l’emploi de l’arme
nuol6aire dans oette r&ion “est depuis longtemps
h l%tude au Pentagone”, Selon oe journaliste, le
sdnateur Goldwater n’a fait que wrter dans Itarbne
politique oertaines de oes disoussions*, otest&dire
qu’il a expoeh au grand jour, lorsqu’il a lano son
appel impertinent, 08 qui jusqu’alors Btait un seoret,
Mais, poursuit Baldwin, “oertains militaires am&
rioains sont partisans d’une telle aotion dans le
oadre de plans pour 088 impr6vusn,

Oa, Dans oes oonditions, on ne peut manquer de
relever qu’il ne s’est trouv6 jusqu’a prdsent auoune
personnalitb offioielle aux EtatsmUnie pour oondamu
ner les intentions sanguinaires que le sbnateur
Uoldwuter a proolam8es en publia, Est-oc le fait
du hasard? Il va de soi que la r6ponse B oette question
aurait db nous Btre donn9e par le reprbsentant des
Etats-Unis au Conseil de &ourit&
93. Malheureusement M, Stevenson n’en a rien fait,
93, Unfortunately, tbis has not happene& The Seourity
Counoil bas heard no explanation from the United Statae Le Conseil de s4ourit9 n’a entendu aucune explioation
repreeentative. And we ask, how should thts silence be de sa part B oe sujet, Comment devons-nous interinterpreted-as 108sof the power of speeohbeoauseof pr&er son silenoe? Son mutisme est-il dQ B l’indiLpdig$ion and oonosrnl or as seoret, taoit oonsent? gnation et au courroux? Ou8 tagitœilplut8t d’un oonsentement taoite?
94, Inetead of appelle for the exeroise of oommon
94, Au lieu d’appels B la raison et b la mod8ration
en oe qui oonoerne la situation aotuelle dans l’Asie
seme and raetraint in oonnexion witb the existing situas
tien in South-East Ada, we hear today, from highdu Sud-Est, les repr&entants haut plao8s du C&uvernement des Etats-Unis tiennent aujourd%ui de tout
ranking rapresentatives of the Unit& States Qovernment, etatements of an entirely different nature,
autres disoours,
96. It is noteworthy that, as recently as 22 May, Mr.
96, Ainsi, tout tioemment, le 22 mai, le Seor&aire
Dean RUE~, the Seoretary of State of the United States d’Etat des Etats-Unis, M, Dean Rusk, a ddolare que
of Amerioa, deolared that the United States oould les Etats-Unis peuvent adtendre la guerre” qu’ils
Wpand the warw whioh it was now wagi in South- poureuivent. aujourd’hui dans le Viet-Nam du Sud,
Eaet Aeia, Does not the question inevitab Y y arise as Dans oe8 oonditiona, oe clhihr ardent du dnateur
to whether Senator Goldwater’e luet for the :ise of
Ctoldwater, qui pr&oonise 1‘emploi de l’arme atomique,
atomio warcponadoea net refleot offioial Uaited States ne refl?&e+il pas la politique offioielle des Etatspolioy in that region?
Unie dans oette r&ion?
96, Sinoe the United Statee reprerentative fcund it
96, Puisque le reprdeentant des Etats-Unis a oru
potisible to dwell at suoh length, in hi8 statements, on poutroir sYtendre longuement, dans aes interventions,
United States polioy in thia regian, members of the sur la politique des Etats-Unis dans oette rbgion,
Counoil would. it ueems. be entit!ed to exX+ot that le Conseil de s6ourit6 pouvait utattendre qu’il donne
he should now-oome fo&‘ard with explauati&a on SO maintenant des explioations sur oette question irnœ
important a question, raised by life itself, Without portante qui s’impose d’elle-m6tne. Faute d’une
a olear und preoiso anawer 011this matter, the Unîted rbponse prboise h 00 sujet, les aasuranoes donn8es
States repreeentutive’s protestntions to the effeot that par le repr6sentnnt des PtatsœUnjs quant aux buts
the United States is pursuing peamful aims in this pacifiques que son pays oherohe h atteindre dansoette
renion becorne even less tanrtible. In faot, the dispatoh r6gion ressemblent enoore pluo h des promesses
to-South Viet-Nam of United-States hordës numi%ring
en l’air. L’envoi de hordes am6rioniaes nu Viet-Nam
msny thousands and the aggressive aotione taken by du Sud et les notes agrensifs que la ooldatesque
the United Statss soldiery against Cambodia are of amt3rioaine oommet oontre le Cambodge oontredisent
themselves at open variante with the stntements made dejh, do façon flagrants, les d6olarutlons que fait
by the United Statos dsiegatlon to the Seourity Counoll.
nu Conseil de s8ouritb la d818gation des Etats-Unis,

97. No partioulal

sertions that the
East Asia 1sinspir
are refuted by tl
United States them
deafx in tbis oonn(
98, The memoin
published last yes
nlanations of why !
it neoeseury speoi
vention in tbls p
former Head of thc
by the Western Po
in this region noni
the loss of valua
supplies of rubber
99, This eloquenl
United States, whl
Viet-Nam, is made
stood at the oradl
Statos militury int
Viet-Nam, We reo
this stukment of
states should 10~
memairs.
100, Sinoe the U,
effort to oover up
intervention in S(
ropriato to depic
or the Liberation
laoked the supporl

B

matter to quote80

D, Eisenhower, 0:
the follovfingl
“The enemynthe Viet-Namese
pathy, and many
bath shelter and

On page 8711of tk
admission that, a1
all linee of oommu
of the population
ageo 337 and 890
Bind a frank stats
nerally oonoede
eld throughout V:
powerwould bave

8”

101. With theee h:
former Preeident l
olear what exaotly
le today trying ta
Stateu intervention
in order to preven
preosing its Will tl
tlle 1064 Gleneva
Front for the Li
aombating the Ua
to express the wlll
102. If our IJnltt
dispute ull Gis, he
with thu former 1
as

tl1cy

say

in

Eh1

9 lMgh1 0. Bluotlllow
1953.1966 (Ourdat~ Clry,

91, No partiaular effort need be made to refute asœ
sertions thnt the Unibd Statee intervention in SouthËëstAsia is inepired by wholly altruistio motives, They
are refuted by the admissions of statesmen Of the
IJnited States themselVesl Allow me to oite some evidam3 in thihisoonnexion.
86, The mernoirs of President Dwight Eisenhower,
published last Year,-d/ oontain some highly frank explanations of why the United States of Amerioa deemed
it neaeseary apeoifioally ta undertake military intervention in this part of the world, Eisenhower, the
former Head of the United States, wriks that the 108s
by the We’dtsrn Powcrs of their preferontial positions
in this region non the material side, would have spslled
the 108s of valuable deposits of tin and pragious
eupplies of rubber and rioen,
88, TN8 cloquent oomment on the Qltruism~ of the
United States; whloh is waging a bloody war in ~outh
Viet-Nam, is made by a mari who,as we a11remembsr.
stood at ihe oradle,-at the verj inoeption, of United
Statesmilitary intervention againet the people of South
Viet-Nam, We reoommend that anyoneunfamiliar with
this statement of the former Preeident of the United
&L;i,;hould
look at page 999 of Eisenhowerls
0
100, Sinos the United States repreeentative, in his
effort to oover UP the real motives of United States
intervention in South Viet-Nam, ooneidered it apropriato to depiot the fighters of the National Front
Bor the Libsration of South Viet-Nam As persans who
laoked the support of the psople, we venture on tbis
matter to quote aome more statements made by Dwight
D, Eisenhower. On page 368 of his memoirs we rsad
the followingr
The enemyn-that is how Eisenhower desoribes
the Viet-Namese partisane-Qad muoh popular sympathy, and many oivilians aided them by provlding
both shelter and information,n
On page 878 of the memoire we have Eieenhowerls
admission that, sinoe the partisans aotually oontrolled
all lines of oommuniaationl aThis meant that the mass
of the population supported the enemy,” Laetly, on
ages 397 and 888 of Dwight Eieenhowerls memolre we
Pind a fmk etatement t0 the effeot that it had been
nerally oonoeded that, had a general eleotion bsen
hout Viet-Nam at that Mme, the people’s
bave triumphsd in the entire oountry,
101, With theee hi hïy authoritative mmarke from tha
former Prseidtrnt o4 the United Statee, it beoomes quite
olear what exaotly the Gffioial United Stabs propaganda
ie today trying ti twist-namely, the faot that Uuited
Stateu intervention in S&h Viet-Nam wa#undertaken
in order to prevent the ViebNamese people from expreosing lts Will through an elootion as prasoribed by
tho 1064 Glonava Agreement, nnd that the National
Front for le Libsration of South VietGiom, todny
ooinbating the Unitad Stntes intorvantion, oontinues
t0 oxprese the wlll of the South Viet-Nameee,
102. If our United St&38 oolleague Eitill wisbos to
diepute ull this, ho should now enter into an argument
wIth Le former Prosident of tho Unitod Stnto.?, And,
08 thoy sny in English, goocl luok to llm. Dut bofore
If Uvlght 0. Il~e~rl~owot~,~Wl~ltoIlollso
Ycarat Ma~titofor
CIlan o
1953.1956 (Ourdan Çlty, Now York, Lbti%ïb,ysndComyany,
ha., 19 iv ).

BT. Lee affirmations selon lesquelles les Etats-Unis
ob6iseent B des motifs entibiement d~sintiresa8s
lorsqutils interviennent dans lIAaie du Sud-Est n’ont
gubrè besoin d%tre rMut4es. Les aveux des hommes
d’Etat amhrioains suffisent B les Mmentir. En voioi
quelques exemples,
08, Dans ses mbmoires publi&s l’ann&e dernibreti,
l’anoien president Eisenhower explique trbs franohe=
ment les raisons pour lesquelles les Etats-Unis ont
notamment juge nboessaire d’intervenir militaire
ment dans oette region du monde, Selon l’anoien
PrBeident des EtatMInis, la perte, dans oetter&ion,
des positions olefs des puiesanoes woidentales entralherait, Wr le plan mat&iel, oclle despraoieux
gisements d4tain et de souroes trbe riches de
oaoutohouo et de rie”.
BO, Aux affirmations oonoernant le Q%3sint8ressement” des Etats-Unis, qui sont engag dans une
guerre oanglante au Viet-Nam du Sud, on peut dono
opposer oe oommentaire Bloquent de celui qui, nous
nous en souvenons tous, a aeeist8 8. la naissanoe
m6me de l’intervention militaire dee EtatfMJnis au
Viet-Nam du Sud, Je reoommande B oeux qui ne
oonnaissent pas oe texte de 111%la page 333 des
mBnaoires dlEisenhower,
100, Comme le reprdsentant de8 Etats-Unis, pour
embellir les motifs vbritubles de llinterventlon am&
rioaine au Viet-Nam du gud, a ju@ bon de faire
passer les oombattants du Front nationalde liberation
du Viet-Nam du Sud pour des gens qui ne bWfioieraient pas du soutien populaire, Je me permets
de oiter B nouveau Dwjght D. Eisenhower, A la
page 666 de ses m8moires, l’anoien PrBsident Boritr
ALlennemiw - o’est ainsi qu’Eisenhower ddsigne
les partisane vietnamiens - “avait la faveur txmulairë, et beauooup de oivils lui venaient en-aide,
lui fourniesant tant& un abri. tarit& des renseignemente. fl
Nous rsoommandons aueei de lire la page 372, oh
Eisenhowerreoonnaft que, Btant dom18que les partieans oontr6laient en fait toutes les Mies de oommunioation, woela signifiait que les masses eouteriaient ltennemi? Enfin, aux pages 887 et 888 dé
aes m&noires, Dwight Eisenhower dit ouvertement
qu’il btait universellement admts que, si des Meotions
g&Mralee avaient eu lieu b 1’8 ue dana tout le
Viet-Nam, elles auraient oonsaor
“IT la viotoire du
pouvoir populaire,
101, A la lecture d’explications ausri autorir6es que
oelles de 1G~oien Prhident der Mata-Unir, on voit
rnoore mieux oe que la propagande offbielle des
EtatsmUnir oherohe maintenant 0 oaoher, h ravoirque
1Yntervention am6rioaine au VietmNam du 6ud avait
prdois4ment pour objet dlemplkher le peuple vietliAmien
d’exprimer 8~ volontb Au moyon dosbleOt.iOntr
pr&uas par les Aooorda do Càonbvedo 1064 et que
le Front nAtiOnA de liNrAtiOn du Vist-NAm du Sud,
qui lutta aujourd’hui oontre ltintorvention AmlWotie,
roflbte toujours la volont& dos Sud-vietnamiens.
102. Si le ropr4sentAnt dos Etats-Unis veut enoore
oontoeter cela, il lui faudra s’en prendre h l’anoieu
Prbsidcnt dos Etats-Unis. Jo lui souhaite bonne
oh~noa. M~is, AvAntdo ~ktngAge1~ plus Avant dans uns
-!/ bwlghtb. BIWI~JIOWI)I*,
Ihc Whlte Ilotme Yoarrt
hhinto
for
$h3e~~953-$6,
6,
I

21

Uordon

.

Chy,

New York,

Doul>leday

~MI Co~oyrny,

engaging in this kind of argument, the Unit& States
renresentative would be well advised to arm himself
wiih a few more faote.
108. In this regard I would again ventum to draw the
attention of the Seourity Counoil to a statement made
by Senator Morse in theunlted States Senate on 21 May
1964a in whioh he said inter alia:
“1 have oross-examined witnesses for aome #me
on South Viet-Nam from the Pentagon Building and
from the State Department, When 1 put the question
to theml IWhat military personnel have you fcund in
South Viet-Nam from North Viet-Nam, Red China,
Cambodia, or eleewhere?’ the anewer always is,
tPraotioally nonel , , , there bave not been found in
go$;ez;t-Nam any substantial oontingent of fore@
**. The same is true of their weapons.The
Viet-Cong have long armedthemselves from oaptursd
government stooks, not by foreign importa from
Communist oountries , , , The foreign soldiers in
South Viet-Nam are US. soldiers, not North VietNamese or Laotian SOldisrs. What a spot to bs in,
What a paradox. The United~statss is talking about
invasions from North Viet-Nam and Laos, and yet,
when we put our Government witnessesundur exami;
nation, they have 6.1admit that they bave not been able
to disoover very many of thsm. Yet, the Communists
oharge us with vlolating the Qeneva aooords by having
16,000 fore@ soldiers in South Viet-Nam,”

telle disoussion, le reprdeentant des Etats-Unis
devrait ajouter quelques faits h son arsenal.

“The situation in Asia demands, in my judgment,
th;tz;mo
to the oonferenoetable, and the sooner
I Il
It would havebaen logioal to expeot a eimilar statement
t~od:,B United Stetes representativee in the Ssourity

108, Je me permettrai h oe propos d’attirer l’attention du Conseil de s6ourit8 sur la deolaration
que le s9nateur Morse a faito le 91 mai 1984 au SBnat
des Etats-Unisa, Il a dit notammentt
“J’ai oonsaor9 quoique temps A interroger des
t9moins du Pentagone et du Département d’Etat
sur le Viet-Nam. Chaque fois que je leur demandet
flAves-vous dt3oouvert au Viet-Nam du Sud du
personnel militaire venant du Viet-Nam du Nord,
de la Chine rouge, du Cambodge ou d’ailleurs?“,
la r8ponse est la mgmel “A peu prbs auoun..,
On nIa pas trouve au Viet-Nam du Sud de oonthgents substantiels de soldats Btrangers.n Cela
est Qgalement vrai dos armes, Les Vietoongs
s’arment depuis longtemps en puisant dans les
stoake gouvernementaux qu’ils ont oaPtur9s et non
en important du matarie des pays oommunistes , , ,
Les soldats Btransers au Viet-Nam du Sud sont
AmBr.Jains et non-Nord-Vietnamiens ou Laotiens,
Quelle situation1 Quel paradoxe1 Les Etats-Unis
parlent dlinoursions venant du Viet-Nam du Nord
et du Laos] pourtant, quand nous questionnons A
oe sujet n& ‘tbmoins offioiels, forde leur est de
reoonnaftre qu’ils n’ont pas pu trouver bsauooup
d’envahisseurs, Or, les oommunistes nous aoousent
de violer les aooords de aenbvs en maintenant au
Viet-Nam du Sud un effectif de 16 000 soldats
8trangers.a
104. Il est tout aussi intsressant de se reporter B
oe quo le &atsur Morse a dit au sujet des aooorcb
de Genbve, Voioi os qu’il a d8olarb aussi le 21 mait
“Nous n’avons auoun droit en vertu des aooords
de Qen&ve Btant donne que oes aooords interdisent
l’envoi de toute aide militaire suppl8mentaire en
sus des niveaux de 1964,. , Nous n’avons m6me
pas si& oes aooords, mais nous les violona
oonstamment depuis, Nous avons oommenob h enl
voyer nos hommes et nous avons d9pens8 au total
6 milliards et demi de dollars au titre de l’aide
au Viet-Nam du Sud,*
106, Enfin, le s8nateur Morse a jug6 sainement les
ohoses pour oe qui est de la oonvooation d’une oon&
renoe sur le Cainbodge, Il a ditr
“La situation an Asie exige, k mon avis, que
nous tenlons une oonfdrenoe, et le plus t8t sera
le mieux,”
Il serait logique d’attendre une daolaration semblable
des reur8eentanta des Etats-Unis au Conseil de

106. Allow me to say a few words more. We 8~8 that
the abeurdities whioh were revealed at the Seourity
Counoil table at our lad meeting,
._. and to whioh the
Soviet delegation drew attention, havo to uomo extont
been eliminatdd. It le not our intention nowto dwell
on the oharaoter of the r8glme whioh exists in South
Viet-Nam. Howevor it may dosoriùc iteelf, its puppet
nature le not ohanged. SO far as the Soviet Union’8
attitude to tlio Saigon rbgime is oonodrnecl, the Soviet
poeition was olearly set forth in the statenrents made
by the Soviet delagation in tho Counoil on 10 and 21 May,

108. Permettes-moi de dire quelques mots enoore,
Nous oonstatons que les absürdités que l’on avait
relevdes 4 la ciornibra sdanoo du Consail et sur
losquellas la dblbgntion sovibtiquu, notamment, n
attirs ltattontion ont 6t8 dnno une oortaine mosuro
Bliminbcs, Nous n’avons pris l~intantion de noua
atendro mnintonant sur 10 onrnotbra du rbglmo du
Viot-Nnm du Sud. Quel que soit la nom qu’il EI~donne,
oeln n’y ohnnga rien: il s’agit d’un rdgimo fantoohe.
Quant a llattltuda do 1°Union sovibtiquo onvors lu
rbgime da Saigon, notre poeitlon n btb olnirorneni

104, Senator Morse% oomments on the Geneva Asreemente also deserve to be noted. On a1 May of this
year, he also said:
HWe have no rights under the aeneva aooords,
beoause the aooords thomselves forbid the sending
in of additlonal milltury aid above the 1964 levels.. .
We did net even sign the aooords, and we have been
vlolating them ever sinoe. We bave started to send
in our boys and bave spent a total of $6,600 million
in aid to South Viet-Nam.”
106, Lastly, Ssnator Morse sounded a sober note on
the question d oonvenlng a oonferenoe on Cambodial

u sas utllttxl sut00 OI Amorlca, $hlgrsoelonal Ik?cord,mxocd.
.--.-1ngr a1!4 rmlm of tha 00th Collgrosar kG%iüI sosslon,vol, 110,
,,pa1122741232.

s6ouritd,

(lllath, 1119th
the Ccunoil Will
sentative of the 8
in the Counoil OI
NlU&

107, I should lik
m another absurc
dividualS from tl
the institution of
Nations, We say
lsgal basis for t
the United Natic
counoil dooumen
Nations provide
grounds, then, c
“blus bookfl men
aooredited rapre
Unlted Nations, a
We know that the
and employed k
into the State D
know that tbis 81
of the visa pro1
where the Unitec
The State Depati
deoldes, in keepi
Md who should nf
not be this kind
aoorediting “Fer
by the Stata Pep6
for these puppet
oapaoity, attaohel
States of Amerio,
108, Mr, STBV
Evidently Mr. F#
Soviet Union, ic
system that éxis
me inform you,
ment is divided
the exeoutive ai
branoh that make
that exeoutes tht
terprets them, 6
of the United S
exeoutive branoh
other Senfttm,

209, If 1 unde:
generally offenei
hae aeked me fo
the question whef
South-eaet Asia i

ri?&%%2
would save us M
the Sovlot Union
if perhnps that w
mythology, A wi
thora 10 nothinij
murdor of a boa1

110, This is Whl
repent it, but I w
21 Mny, I said:
llFirst, tho U
national milita

[llleth, 1110th and 1120th meetings.1 Membsrs of
the Counol Will reoall that we objeoted to the representative of the Saigon régime being permitted to epeak
in the Counoll on behalf of the people of South VietNlUl-h
10~. I should llke now e0 draw the Counoil’s attention
to another absurdity-namely, the manner in whiohin&&&a18 from the Saigon r0gime are inoluded within
the institution of Permanent Observers to the United
Nations, We say nothin# of the faot that there is no
legal baals for this institution, We know that nelther
the United Nations Charter npr the baslo Saourity
counoil doouments governing the work of the United
Nations provide for such an institution, On what
grounds, then, and with what justifioation does the
Qlue bookn mention, side by side with the regularly
aooredlted representatives of Stateo Members of the
United Nations, a “Permanent Observer of Viet-Nam”?
We know that the strings attaohedto the Saigon puppets,
and employed t0 make them perform, lead straight
into the State Department of the United States, We
know that this entire matter is settled on the basis
of the visa proosdure for sojourns in the oountry
where the United Nations Headquarters are situated,
The State Department, whioh is in oharge of visas,
deoides, in keeping wlth its own lnterests, who should
and whoshould not bs admittsd, whoma and who may
not be thés kind of Observer, Slnoe t Ke question of
aooreditlng “Permanent Observers” 1s thus deoided
by the State Department, would it not bs more logioal
for these puppet personages to appar in their real
oapaoity, attaohed to the State Department of the United
States of Amerioa?
108, Mr, STEVENSON (Unlted States of Amerioa)t
Evidently Mr. Fedorenko, spsaking on behalf of the
Soviet Union, io not very famillar with the polltloal
system that exists in thls free oountry, Briefly, let
me inform you, Mr. Ambassador, that our Qovsrnment is divided lnto three branohes-the legislatfve,
the exeoutlve and ths judioial, It 1s the legislatlvs
branoh that makes the lawsl it 1s the exeoutlve branoh
that exeoutes theml it is the judioial branoh that lnterprets them, Subjeot to the laws, the forelgn polloy
of the Unîted States is made and exsouted by the
exeoutive branoh, and not by Ssnator Ooldwater or any
other Ssnator,
109, If 1 understood bis sometimes obsoure and
generally offensive language, tho Soviet representatlve
has asked me for a olear and unamblguous answer t0
the question whether the polioy of the United States in
South-eaet Aela le “more psaos” or “more warw,1 am
(Ilad h anawer hls question by repeating what 1
“7
rai hsra in the Counofl the other day, and perhape tt
would save us tlme hereaftsr if my oolleague from
the Sovlot Unlon llstonod to what I sdd. Or, 1 wonder
if perhaps that would 13poi1tbo offoot of hls rhetorioal
mythology, A wioo mari on00 snid ln this oountry tbat’
thora 1s notldng more horrlblo to wltnoeu dan the
lnurdor of A boautlful myth by a borriblo fuot.
110. ‘I%ls le what I sald. 1 batlnotoxpaotod to hava to
ropeat lt, but 1 woloomo tho ohnnoo. Bpoaking bore on
21 May, I said:
“First, tba United Stat~u hao no, and 1ropoat ‘no’,
national military objootive anywhora in South-IGast

d6finie dans les d6olaratlons que la dt&Qation sovl8tique u faites au Conseil de s6ourIt6 les 19 et 21 mal
[IllBBme, 11108me et lla08me sBanoes,] Les membres du Conseil se souviendront que nous nous
sommes BlevBs oontre llid8e d’autoriser le repr6sentant du r&Ime de Saigon B parler au COnSSi
au nom du peuple sud-vietnamien.
107, Je me permettrai maintenant d’attirer l’ata
tentlon du Conseil sur une autre absurdlt& il s’agit
de savoir oomment les gens du r4gime de Saigon
ont acquis le statut dlobservateurs permanents aUpFbS
de llONU, Pour oommenoor, oe statut n’a auoun
fondement juridique, On sait qu111n’est pr&u ni
par la Charte des Nations Unies ni par les dooutnents de base du Conseil de sf3ourit6 ni par les
autres textes qui dtiinlssent llaotlvit6 de PONU,
De quel droit, alors, trouvons-nous dans le nlivre
bleu’!, b o8t6 des repr&entants normalement aOOrbdit08 des Etats Membres, un pr&endu nobservateur
permanent du ViebNamM? On sait que otest le
Dbpartement d’Etat des Etats-Unis qui tire les
fioelles des nurrionnettos de Saigon, On sait que
toute la question est rQl6e par l’attribution de visas
permettant de r6sider dans le pays oh se trouva le
SiBge de 1tONU. Le DBpartement dtEtat, dont rel&
vent les servloes des visas9 dboide, selon ses int&
r&s, quipourraventretquine lepourra pae, qut pourra Btre observateur et qui ne le pourra pas, Etant
donn6 que la question de llaoor8ditntion des pr&endus
“observatours prmanentstl est tranohee, oomme
noue le voyons, par le DBpartement d’Etat, ne serait11 pas plus logique que 088 marionnettes aillent jouor
leur r61e aupr& du DBpartement d’Etat des EtatsUnis dlAm&lque?
108, M, STEVENSON (Etats-Unis d’Am6rique) [tram
duit de lQnglais]r Il est olair que M, Fedorenko,
qui parle au nom de l’Union sovi&ique, ne oonnaft
pas tr8s bien le r&ime @oHtiquede notro pays libre,
PsrmetteeMmoi, Monsieur llambaseadeur, de vous
indiquer brikement que oher nous les pouvoirs publios se divisent en pouvoir lf3gislatlf, pouvoir sxBou=
tif et pouvoir judlolalre, C’est 10 pouvoir 16gislatlf
qui fait les lois, C%st le pouvolr exdoutlf qui les
applique, C’est le pouvoir judiolaire qui les lnterprbte, Dan8 le oadre des 101sen viweur, la politique
sxtbrieure des Etntsdnie est dbfinle et mise en
cauvre par le pouvoir sx6outlf et non pae par le
s6natsur aoldwater ou auoun autre s&nateur,
100, Si j’ai bien oomprls aon langage parfols obeour
mais g&n&ralement ineultant, le rspr&entant de
l’Union 8Ovî6tîque m’a demand6 de r&ondre olairement et nana ambigultd B la question de ravoir ai
la politique de8 Etat&Unis en Auie du Sud-Est
implique plu8 de paix ou plua de erre, Je ruts trlr
heureux de lui r@ondre en r6 Prtant oe que j’ai dit
au Conseil l’autre jour, Peut-Btre pourrions-nous
fniro dor6nnvant u11e6oonomlo do tempe si mon oollbgue do l’Unlon eovi&lquo voulait bian mlbooutor,
muis jo mo dctmando si, peut-Otro, oola no nulralt
pas a l’offet de su rhbtorique mythiquci, Un sago a
dit un0 foie dani3 mon pays quo i>ion nlost plus horl*iblo quo d’assister Fi In dastruotlon d’un murvoilloux
mythe pnr un hori~iblo fait.
110, VOilh oo quo jlavnis dit. Je ne m’attondnis pas
A dovoii~ le i~odIi>o, mals je suis haureux dton avoir
1’0uuasi011.
lhuauat
loi, 10 21 ml,
j’ai d6Ollwb~
ttën promlar llau, 10 Gouvornament dos EtatsUnis n’a uuuun objaotif mllltniro national, Jo i*bpQto

Asla. The United Mates polioy for &uth-East Asia

le very simple, It is the restoration of peaoe 80 that

the peoples of that area osn go about their ownindependent business in whatever assooiations they
may freely ohoose for themselves without interferenoe from the outside, 1 trust that my worcis bave
boen olear enough on this point,
‘%eoondly, the United States Oovernment 1s ou+
rently involved in the aflairs of the Republio of
Viet-Nam for one reason, and for one reason on1
beoause the Republio of Viet-Nam requested the he3(
p
of the United States and other Uovurnments to defend
itself against armed attaok fomented, equipped and
direoted from outslde,” [lllOth meetin& paras, SSSO*I
111, Now let me, with apologies to representativesfor
dotaining them at this late hour, say somethingelse to
the Seourity Counoll, The Soviet representative has, in
the worst tradition of the cold war, whioh he has revived here, laid before us alle ations oonoerning military measures whioh the Uniaed States might in the
futura take in South-East Asia. l-le has notextilainedand we oan hardly be surprised that he hasnot-the
military measures whioh tbe Hanoi rsgime, with the
assistanœ of its powerful oommunist allies, has for
many years been taldng inslde the territories of lts
neighbours, Laos and the Republlo of Viet-Nam,
11% It is the outrageous, the persistent, military
aotion of the Hanoi rtlgime whioh oonstitutes thelongstand@ threat to the peaœ of 8outh-East Asia and
to the territorial integrity of the other nations of that
region, That and that only is the oause of the war in
ScmthGast Asla, Let the oommunist Powers œase
thelr aggressions and it ~111no longer be neœssary
for the United States to help those nations preserve
tbbgrtsindependenoe and maintain the Qeneva Agreee
119, Unlese and until they do oease their aggression
the United Statoe will indeed, aa 1 assuredthe Counoil
laet week, help by whatever means are neœesary the
free nations of South-East Asia to remain free,
114, 1 trust the position of the United Statesie olear,
and olear enough to satisfy the representative of the
Soviet Union,
116, Mr, FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet SooialistRepublioo) (tranrlated from Rusrian)r It would seemthat
we rhauld ba grateful to our oolle e, Mr, Stevenson,
for ht8 effort-and a rather th fur 88s one at that-in
undertsking to desoribe to ue in simple form the in;;;ons
of the interna1 politioal ayetem of the Unit&
I
Ils. Thero is a dapancse saying that suggosts itsolf
here: “Women are onohanting at a distance, in the dark
and undor a narasol,” If suoh a statomant had boen
made in a olass-room to .sol~oolohildron, it might bave
had some offoot. But this 1snot a sol1001assembly, and
we a~0 not beginners in politioe and international
affairs,
117. Thon 0ur Unit& States oolleague, wlth a metallio
note acldoclto hi6 voice, went on tohis favourlte theme

nauounn, nulle part en Asie du Sud-Est, La lX3litique
des Etate-Unis en Asie du Sud-E& est tres simple.
Elle vise R retablir la paix afin que les peuples
qui habitent oette region puissent s’ooouper euxmarnes de leurs affaires dans l’independanoe, en
association aveo quioonque il leur plaira de ohoisir
librement, sans ingerenoes exterieures, J’eap&e
que mes paroles sur oe point ont Bte parfaitement
claires.
“En seoond lieu, le Clouvernement des EtatsUnis est aotuellement m01e aux affaires de la
Republique du Viet-Nam pour une seule raison,
pour une unique raisont la Republique du Viet-Nam
a demande l’aide du Gouvernement des Etats+lnis
et d’autres gouvernements pour se defendre oontre
une attaque armee fomentee, 0quipt7e et dirlg6e de
l’exterieur.” [lllOF3me s&noe, par. 98 et SO,]
iii, En m’exousant de retenir enoore les repr8sentant8 a oette heure tardive, j’aimerais ajouter
quelques mots. Le representant de l’Union sovistique,
dans la pire tradition de la guerre froide qu’il a
fait revivre ioi, a fait devant nous des allegations
au sujet de mesures militaires que les Etats-Unis
pourraient prendre 8. l’avenir en Asie du Sud-Est,
Il n’a pas explique - et nous ne pouvons guere en
Btre surpris - les mesures militaires que le r4gime
de Hanoi’, aveo l’aide de ses puissants allies oommunistes, prend depuis de longues ann6es a l’in%
rlear des territoires de ses voisins, le LaOS et la
Republique du Vlot=Nam,
11% L’aotion militaire soandaleuse que le regime
de Hanoi’ aerslste a mener, voila oe aui oonstltue
la menaoè qui pese depuis longtemps ‘sti la paix
de l’Asie du Sud-Est et aui met en danger l’integritb territoriale des autres pays de ia rsgion,
O’est elle et elle seule qui est la oause de la guerre
en Asie du Sud-Est, Que les puissanoes oommunistes
osssent leurs agressions et les Etats-Unis n’auront
plus besoin d’aider oes pays II sauvegarder leur
independsnoe et a maintenir les aooords de Qeneve,
11% Tant que oes puissanoss n’auront pas oesse
leurs agressions, les Etats-Unis seront r6solu8,
oomme j’en ai donne l’assuranoe au Conseil la
semaine dernlore, a aider par tous les moyens qui
seront neoessaires les pays libres de l’Asie du SudEst B rester libres,
114, J’espere que la position des Etats=Unis est
suffisamment olaire pour satisfaire le representsnt
de l’Union sovietique,
116. M, FEDOHENKO (Union des Republiques a@
oialistes sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Nous devrione Btre reoonnaissants B notre oollsgue’
M, Stevenoon, d’avoir assum0 une tltohe auaei ingrate
lorsqu’il s’est ohargo de faire un oours Blsmentaire
sur les institutions politiques am6rloainee.
110, Il exista un provorbo japonais quo Jo 1110
permets cl0 citer h 00 propa: “tes femmes sont
uharmantes vues cl0 loin, dans l’obsourit6 ou sous
un parapluie.” Si M. Stevenson avait fait eon oxposs
devant des eooliers, peut-stre aurait-il eu du suoobs’
Mais nous ne sommas pns ioi clans un0 snllo de
olasso et nous n’nvons pns ai’tniro non plus Ades
debutants en mntisre de politique ot de relations intornationales.
117, Hnsuite, notre oollsgue des Etats-Unis, In voix
duroie, a repris 10 thbmo cl0 la guerre froid0 qu’il

of the %old H

It did not EPI
to us, It o0m’
responaibilitj
mats,
118, SO1 ho
forgivs me if
Through this
thIs before-0
the responslh
aots. It is on
but apparent11
and from thit
neœssary oor

11% As regs
oountrles, th
entirely withl:
we do not inte
the system-’
States-there
overt and pub:
is the ravinI
madness whia
humanity, in
bs fitting for ’
proteotlon to
jaokets and br

1ao. xt is re
eentative bas
expreosions,
making an ob
States nggreef
lai, We vent
league Will ad’
towatds what 1

il: !3e~~~
-and by the M
chat he will tal
us an anawer I

iaa, Followit
think thnt we I
already lateœnreoutive in
123, The PR
There am no I
nom Having i
CWd mset Q
hopu that it H
bats ot the OI
2% %II 2;
vlews toknorrc
Th

of the ssold war”. That orsation is not of our mahing,

It ad aot spring from our SO~LIt is something alien

to us, It somes uompletely wltbin the oompetenss and
responsibility of Unitad States politioians and diplomats,
1~3. So 1 hope that our United States oolleague Will
forgive me if Isaythathewastsdhis ttme on verbiage.
Through this rhetorio, he trled again-we have noted
this before-to dodge the issue faoingus today,namsly
the responsibillty of the Unitsd States for aggressive
aots, It la on this point that hs should bave spoken,
but apparently thers wasnothingto say in justifioationi
and fcom this the Seuurlty Cumoil should draw the
neaessary oon0lus10ns,
118, As regards the organisation of $osiety in various
oountries, thls is a question whioh, as we hnow, is
entirely wlthin the domestio jurisdiotion of Statss, and
we do not intend to intrude into thls area, But whatsver
the system-in thls partloular oase, in the Unitsd
States-there is, ‘and oan be, no justifioation for the
overt and publio propagation of atomio madness, That
is the raving of profoundly slok people-a form of
madness whioh must bs suppressed, as a orime against
humanity, in asy healthy soolety. And it would hardly
be fittlng for our Unlted States oolleague tsextend Ns
proteotion to those who should bs plaosd in strait
jashets and brought to their ssnses,
IgO, It is regrettable that the United Statss reprssentatiw bas found oourags only td use disoourteous
expressions, instead of olearly and unambiguously
mahing an objeotive assessment of the aots of United
states sggressioa
lai, We venture to hope that our Unit& Statss Sollsague Will adopta duly thoughtful and serious approaoh
towards what has bsen said here by manymembers of
the Seourity Counoll-inoluding the representatives of
tbe Soviet Union, Cseohoslovalda, France andhlorooso
-and by the Ministsr for Foreign Affairs of Cambodiar
tbat ha wlll take a duly realistio attitude, and Will glve
us an answer on tbe substance of ths question,
laa, F0110wing the proosdure already established, 1
think thnt we should not mirusa our Mme-tbe hour ia
already lats-but should ctontent ourtxelvos with the
osnseoutlve înbsrpretationinto Frenoh only,
laa, The PRESIDENT (translated from Frsnohlt
There are no more speakerson mylistfor thls afternom Havlng oonsultèd my oolleagues, 1 thinh that ws
oould msetaPain tomorrow at 10.30a,mrl 1 earaedly
hope that ft a11 bs porslble to olose the pneral dei
bate at ths rnd of tomorrow mornhg and 1 thsrefore
Urge tbst thooe of you who havs not yst asksd for ths
floor and wish ts do so will state your aovertllllents’
views tomorrow morning, if possible.

affsotionne nartioull8remsnt. La guerre froide n’est
pas notre o&atlonr elle n’est paËn66 sur notre sol.
Elle nous est BtrangBre, Elle relbvs entibrsment
de la oomp&enoe et de la responsabilité des politioiens et des diplomates amdrioains,
118, Mon ooll&ue des Etats4Jnis m’exousera, je
l’esp&e, si je lui dis qu’il a perdu son temps a
faire de belles phrases, Il a oheroha ainsi, oomme
il l’avait daja fait - et nous l’avions uonstat6 B f3viter de r0psndre P la question que nous examim
nons aujourd’hui, B, savoir la responsabillts que
portent les Etats4Jnis pour les aotes d’agression
qulils ont oommis, C’est de oela qu’il aurait fallu
parler, mais il samble qu’il n’y ait rien ft dire en
guise de justifioatian, Le Conseil de s6ourit0 doit
dono en tirer 10soonolusiuns qui s%npsssnt,
110. Quant tl l’organisation de la sooi0ts de tel ou
tel pays, olest lA une question de politique int4rieure
qui rel8ve de la oomp&snoe sxoluslve de ohaque
Etat, et nous ne voulons nullemsnt nous immisoer
dans 08 domaine, Mais, quel que soit le systeme,
notamment aux Etats4.Inis dlAmsrique, rien ne peut
justifier les inoitations ouvertes st publiques 8.la folie
atomique, C%et 1s un dt%lire de malades gravement
atteints, une folie 8. laquelle il doit Btre mis un terme,
dans une saoit%& saine, oar elle oonstitue un orime
contre l~humaniti, Et notre ooll@ue amsrloain ne
devrait pas prendre la dsfenee de osw qu’il faudrait
rev8tir d’uue oamisole de foroe et ramener B la
raison,
l!dO. Il est regrettable que le repr6sentant des EtatsUnis ait seulement eu le oourege d’employer des
expressions inoiviles au lieu de qualifier objestiveœ
ment, dans des termes nets et non 6qulvoques, les
aotes dtagression amsrioains,
lai. Nous osons espsrer que notre ooll8gue des
Etats4Jnis etudiera aveo toute l~attsntion et tout le
ssrleux voulus les dsolarations qu’ont faites ioi de
nombreux membres du Uonseil, notamment les d616gations de 1Union sovi&ique, de la TohBooslovaquie,
de la Franoe et du Maroo, ainsi que le Ministre
des affaires BtrsngBres du Cambodge, qu’il aoouelllera leurs d6olarations aveo le r6alisms et la oompr&hension voulus et qu’il voudra bien ‘nous donner
une rtiponse sur le fond de la question.
laa, Me conformant h la pratique que nousavons d6ja
suivie, je n’abuserai pas d’un tsmps pr&oieux - il ne
fait tard - et je me oontenterai de Nnterpr&stim
sonssoutive en fran9ais seulement.
laa. Le PRESIDENTI Je nlal plus d’oratsurs sur
ma Urte pour oe eoir, Aprbr avoir proubd6 A quelque8 sonsultationr aveo mes 0011 es, je pense que
nous pourrono aVOir une stmoe ?Yemrln A 10 h 80.
Je souhaiterais vivement pouvoir demain, en fin
de matinOe, en terminer 81180 le d6bat gdnaral et
o’est la raison pour laquelle je fais appsl A oeux
de mes 00118gu~squi n’ont pas enooro pris la parole
et qui souhniteraient la faire, pour q$ils veuillent
bien sxprimer les vues ds leur gouvernement domsin
si possible, dans la mntinbe.
tu a6mce est lov6e d 18 h YO.

WHERE
TO BUY
UNITED
NATIONS
PUBLICATIONS
ADRESSES OU LES PUBLICATIONS
DE L’ONU SONT EN VENTE
avpnuB,anvQQB,
PAN P~BLI~HINO
HOU~P
10 Al‘s.nd,r
,h. Or..!
WW.
S1ro”OIo1.
a~canouovnnin~a~iao8tovn~u~c~
ARTIA
1TO.m 10 Y, Smalkhh,
Pmhb,
S.
D‘NYA~~RIDAN‘YAIKI
IJNAR
YUNI‘OAARO~
LTO.
N,rr,,.d,(I,
Klb,“h~““.
K.
,INLAND,llNtAND‘I
AKATTCMINLN
KIRJAKAUPPA

WI

NI(IIRIA
NNhlAi
UNIVIR
a ITV UOOKSHOP
,NlPIRIA>
LT0
UnlvolW
Oo1lu~,
Ikdln,
NO”TH‘N4
N,Wt#lA/MWO~IlB
DU NOM01
1. IIBLOINP,
P. 0. AOI 700, M”l~b,&
wYAMtAN0
NvAs‘AtAnal
WOK‘RI)
l d VABALANOI
LTO.
Lonlyra
HUUH,
Q. 0. Boa 34. Bl~nl~l&
BOUTH
AIIIOA/AInIQUt
DU IUDl
VAN 5OHAIK’5
Il001
8TORE (PIY.)
110.
Ohurah
Blmtt
008 724, Pftlona.
TBOHNIOAL
BOONS (PIY.
LTO., Falllll)r
HPvI~
P, 0. SO, PBSS. 10 )1. O,“,..‘,
(1,,1(,
01”.
Town.
WUTHBnN
ANOOIIlA/nH~D~~II
OU BtiDi
TUO OOOK OCNIRC,
Ilttl‘1<W,
Uh\b”I%
YANOA
VIKAI
DAR e r ~ALAAM
800K8”0P
Q. 0. Boa 0010, Ollu
81lum.
UQANDA/OUOANOAI
UOANDA
BOOUBHOP,
P. 0. A”” 141, K~mpIl8.
UfJlTlO
ARAI
7lIQUBLIO
PUB AQAIB
Unlll
LIIRAIRI‘
“LA R‘NAlsS
NO1 O* OVQTL”
9 sh Adly PlIhI
Oa,,”
’
Y
AL tiAHOA
CL AitA&
SOOK‘HOP
SS Abfl~~l~~htlek
&rwrrl
91,, ON~~

RlQUB

A$lA/ASlP
BURYA
BIRYANIII
OURATOA,
aow.
1 OOK OSPOT. Rm,oon.
‘,AYWOIA~OAYUIPQII
.ZNTRIPRlsI
Q.HM(Al
oc ilmi
I<
Immmt,t.
h QIDIII<I&
9. L H. L.. Phnom.Pmh.

JAQANIJAMNI
M&,Ul‘N
OOMQANV,
LTD.
b TOfl~Nloham~,
Nthonbllht
Tox70.
KOR‘A
WQs
OP,,~Od‘
(RlQ.
OlIa
‘ULaVOO
QUSUSHINO
CO., LTO.
6, &,,A,
OhonBno.
B@oul.
QAKIbTANt
THB QAKISTAN
CO.OQKRARVt
BOOK sDCll7”
OMOl,
6111 PLkl*lln,
QUI~IIHIAS
UNITIO.
LTO., L,hor..
THOMA8
4 THOMAS.
“.l.Phl,
QNI~IQQIHI~I
QHlllQQlN‘
‘OUOAIION
OOMQANV,
INO.
11O‘Ollllb
, Q. 0. 00x (10
Q”l,~o
Mmll,.
COPULAI
dOktTO”K,
IS7S’oorat,o’Jol#,
Mm,..
iwx!‘~%%~!;.

TH‘

OITY

nooK

_
_
:so,
nom (1).
anBcar/anlaBl
KAUPTMANN
800Ks~0p
PS 818dlon
81ra~t
Alhlnl.
nuI(QAnv/noNaIIml
KuiTunA
p. 0. S”& 1.0. B”“.n.*l81.
IOKLANP ~/isiAf~B;
7&KAvvenBiuN
ulotJsAn
‘VMUNOSSONI
A”,,“l‘ultu
I B, f&.i,“lk,
..__
IR‘tANO/IItAha~~
BTATIONERY
OPMOE. Oubbn.

__,- ___-_. _

LUK‘MB0Una!
LISRAIHII
1. TRAusOHsCHUMMcR
PIN
du Th4Slrc.
t”“.mb”“~,,,
NITHIItAND#
QAWIAlI
N. V, MARTINU
Q NIJHOII
hnfi, Vwrh”“I
9, ‘%*9mvlnhaS8,
NonwAv/NonvLaI~
JO~AN
DfiuNDr
TANUM
Karl Johlnlllla,
)1. Qlt”.
POLANO,PO,WN‘,
PAN, PG,” Kul(“ff
# N~“*I.
WlrllIW&
QonTuaAtI
LIVRARIA
n00~10~~5
A olA.
IB6 HYI AU~~~. Ulbo&
IKIYANIAIROUYA~ll~
OARIIMLK
$1,. A,IwJI
rw,“d
14.18.
P. 0. 501 114~151,
Buaurqb.
SQAIN ‘~QAON‘t
LInAI b IA nOsoH,
Rond,
U”W,~Lldld
Ii, SIIC,lO”ll
LIIIR‘RIA
MUNObPRINPA,
O,,Wd
S7, MWNd.
AOU,IARS.A.OI
IOIDIONES,
Juan Bt.“~SS,Mtd~ldSe
#WtO‘f,ltU~OB~
0. i. tR1TZL’S
KUNDt.
HOVSOAHANO‘L
A.5
IwJ~mlm
P, 91ookhoh
lWITIB..LAND
IUIS‘I:
LI5AAIRIE
PA 4 07,s.
A.. hua,““,.
Otnbv*.
“ANS
RAUNHAROT.
Klmhmu*
17. l”f1011
1.
TUn”‘“,TU”~UIB,
LIBRAIRZ
“AOHITTE
0‘9 1111k1d 01dd111,
EIYOPIY, IllwlbUL

UNl,BD
KINBWMIAOVAUY‘.UNI~
H. h,. BTATION‘RV
OIWX
P, 0. BOX ‘SS, tond”“,
S.I. ,
Wd
HMSO bl,“Olm
0” khlll,L
nlrmlnmm,
S,,,l.,l,
0,14111,
Idmburah.
M.“oh,tl,rh
vUrta1LAVlAlvOU
ILAVIII
OANKARJ‘VA
ZALOPB BA

VI

LISRBRIA
CULTUQA~
SAtVAOOR‘7iA
II. AV. Sur, 8~7 BnlvIdor.
MANU‘I
NAVA
V 011.
148 A”!IUI
S”I S7, S&I acbdor.
aunvckum

LwtAwlIP “A LA oAAAVILLI”,
POI,.,“.P,,“P,<
NaNOUnAbI
LlBKBnlA
QANAM‘RIOANA,
T,,“oI,IIP,<
mia0
MIXI
UII
~O~TOAIAL
HERMES,
1,“aoto
ti,,,,,?,
.I, M4xloo.
D. 7.

9. A.

QARAPUAII
AOENOIA
Oe LIBRIRIAS
OE SALVADOR
NIlIA
011la PM. II,““”
N”. 99.41.
AlunoU”,

A~I.,,“,,
SSS, Aplrlldo
1151,
tlm,.
U”UOUA~l
LIERSAlA
RAQAEL BARIlCI,
Ramdn
Anador
4030.
M”nlavld~“.
RIPR‘SINTAOION
DE IOITORIAL‘S,
QROP.
R&:I
Ol‘lnahQ
lS41, l’AIl”,
MOnllYlde”~
KNRIUILAI
LIEASRIA
OIL ‘BT&
x d Mltandc,
NO. 68, WI, 01Wln,
Omou.

MIDDLE

H. O’BLIA

C
D

~AST/MOYEN~ORIBNT

IllANt MEHR AVIN BOOKSHOQ
Abb.,
Abat! A”,““.,
II~I~&,,,
in*
IMII
MAO v INZII’Y
EOOKSHOP,
SlBhdtU.
IBRAKL/ISRA~L~
BLUMSTEIN’
EOOiiSTOR65
~),ll.~by
Rd. 4 A8 Nmhlal
Bmlmln
bt.,
f~m~~~;Jm~“
$l,
I
I
LIBANON/LIBAI(~
KHAVAT’S
COLWX EOOU
SP.01, tu, nu,,,
EWlih

II SAHOUR

4 00.

I
OOOPERAIIVE

NORYH AMERICA/,
AMltRlQUE
DU NORD
OANAOI<l
I”L
QU‘IN’9
PAINT‘A
OllWl,
OnlIno.
UNITLD
BTATBB
0 AMI
ITAT
UNIS O’AY i IIIPU
SALES BLOTION,
UNIT‘1
Cl&
Me.1
PAN AU‘RIOAN
IOOK
DD.
Q. 0. box SI,,,
San Ju,n II.
EOOKSTOR‘,
UHIVIRIITV
07 QUBRTO
RICO
RIO Qwrrc.

Pro
Tri1

OBl!ANIAIOCéANItt

Ord
lion

LATIN AMERICA/
AMkRiOlJE
LATINE
A~‘NTlNÀ/A~BNTInll
LOlTORIAt
SUOAMSIIIOANA,
S. A., 1111”. (00, B”,II”L
Al,,‘.
IOLIYIAIMLIVI<~
LISQiRIA
S‘L~OOlON‘S
o,,,u,
071, LI CII.
iob *hua08
au
LIBRO
CISI
Qtrl afi& IIDIAI,
OI&IIII
410. Coohabamb&

WKSt INOIES/
INDES OCCIDi?NtALES
OTOR‘S

EUROPE

TIIINIDAD
CXtJP”ELL

AND TO~AOOlTRlNlTt
YOOHC”
LtO., PM

KT YOUPOI
01 8Dlh
104511
