A/RES/73/203

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 82

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 20 December 2018
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/556)]

73/203.

Identification of customary international law
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its seventieth session, 1 which contains the draft conclusions on
identification of customary international law,
Taking note of the recommendation of the International Law Commission
contained in paragraph 63 of its report,
Noting the memorandum by the Secretariat on ways and means for making the
evidence of customary international law more readily available, which surveys the
present state of evidence of customary international law and makes suggestions for
its improvement, 2
Noting also the bibliography on the subject prepared by the Special Rapporteur, 3
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progres sive
development of international law, as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of identification of customary international law is of
major importance in international relations,
1.
Welcomes the conclusion of the work of the International Law Commission
on identification of customary international law and its adoption of the draft
conclusions and commentaries thereto; 4

__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/73/10).
A/CN.4/710.
3
A/CN.4/717/Add.1.
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/73/10),
para. 66.
1
2

18-22494 (E)

150119

*1822494*

A/RES/73/203

Identification of customary international law

2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for its
continuing contribution to the codification and progressive development of
international law;
3.
Takes note of the statements in the Sixth Committee on the subject,
including those made at the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, 5 after the
International Law Commission had completed its consideration of this topic in
accordance with its statute;
4.
Also takes note of the conclusions on identification of customary
international law, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution, w ith the
commentaries thereto, brings them to the attention of States and all who may be called
upon to identify rules of customary international law, and encourages their widest
possible dissemination;
5.
Acknowledges the utility of published digests and surveys of practice
relating to international law, including those that make legislative, executive and
judicial practice widely available, and encourages States to make every effort to
support existing publications and libraries specialized in internation al law.
62nd plenary meeting
20 December 2018

Annex
Identification of customary international law
Part One
Introduction
Conclusion 1
Scope
The present conclusions concern the way in which the existence and content of
rules of customary international law are to be determined.
Part Two
Basic approach
Conclusion 2
Two constituent elements
To determine the existence and content of a rule of customary international law,
it is necessary to ascertain whether there is a general pract ice that is accepted as law
(opinio juris).
Conclusion 3
Assessment of evidence for the two constituent elements
1.
In assessing evidence for the purpose of ascertaining whether there is a general
practice and whether that practice is accepted as law (opinio juris), regard must be
had to the overall context, the nature of the rule, and the particular circumstances in
which the evidence in question is to be found.
2.
Each of the two constituent elements is to be separately ascertained. This
requires an assessment of evidence for each element.
__________________
5

2/5

See A/C.6/73/SR.20, A/C.6/73/SR.21, A/C.6/73/SR.22, A/C.6/73/SR.23, A/C.6/73/SR.24 and
A/C.6/73/SR.29; see also the statements in the Sixth Committee that are available on the United
Nations PaperSmart portal.
18-22494

Identification of customary international law

A/RES/73/203

Part Three
A general practice
Conclusion 4
Requirement of practice
1.
The requirement of a general practice, as a constituent element of customary
international law, refers primarily to the practice of States that contributes to the
formation, or expression, of rules of customary international law.
2.
In certain cases, the practice of international organizations also contributes to
the formation, or expression, of rules of customary international law.
3.
Conduct of other actors is not practice that contributes to the formation, or
expression, of rules of customary international law, but may be relevant when
assessing the practice referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
Conclusion 5
Conduct of the State as State practice
State practice consists of conduct of the State, whether in the exercise of its
executive, legislative, judicial or other functions.
Conclusion 6
Forms of practice
1.
Practice may take a wide range of forms. It includes both physica l and verbal
acts. It may, under certain circumstances, include inaction.
2.
Forms of State practice include, but are not limited to: diplomatic acts and
correspondence; conduct in connection with resolutions adopted by an international
organization or at an intergovernmental conference; conduct in connection with
treaties; executive conduct, including operational conduct “on the ground”;
legislative and administrative acts; and decisions of national courts.
3.

There is no predetermined hierarchy among the various forms of practice.

Conclusion 7
Assessing a State’s practice
1.
Account is to be taken of all available practice of a particular State, which is to
be assessed as a whole.
2.
Where the practice of a particular State varies, the weight to be g iven to that
practice may, depending on the circumstances, be reduced.
Conclusion 8
The practice must be general
1.
The relevant practice must be general, meaning that it must be sufficiently
widespread and representative, as well as consistent.
2.

Provided that the practice is general, no particular duration is required.

Part Four
Accepted as law (opinio juris)
Conclusion 9
Requirement of acceptance as law (opinio juris)
1.
The requirement, as a constituent element of customary internatio nal law, that
the general practice be accepted as law (opinio juris) means that the practice in
question must be undertaken with a sense of legal right or obligation.
18-22494

3/5

A/RES/73/203

Identification of customary international law

2.
A general practice that is accepted as law (opinio juris) is to be distinguished
from mere usage or habit.
Conclusion 10
Forms of evidence of acceptance as law (opinio juris)
1.

Evidence of acceptance as law (opinio juris) may take a wide range of forms.

2.
Forms of evidence of acceptance as law (opinio juris) include, but are not
limited to: public statements made on behalf of States; official publications;
government legal opinions; diplomatic correspondence; decisions of national courts;
treaty provisions; and conduct in connection with resolutions adopted by an
international organization or at an intergovernmental conference.
3.
Failure to react over time to a practice may serve as evidence of acceptance as
law (opinio juris), provided that States were in a position to react and the
circumstances called for some reaction.
Part Five
Significance of certain materials for the identification of customary
international law
Conclusion 11
Treaties
1.
A rule set forth in a treaty may reflect a rule of customary international law if it
is established that the treaty rule:
(a) codified a rule of customary international law existing at the time when
the treaty was concluded;
(b) has led to the crystallization of a rule of customary international law that
had started to emerge prior to the conclusion of the treaty; or
(c) has given rise to a general practice that is accepted as law ( opinio juris),
thus generating a new rule of customary international law.
2.
The fact that a rule is set forth in a number of treaties may, but does not
necessarily, indicate that the treaty rule reflects a rule of customary international law.
Conclusion 12
Resolutions of international organizations and intergovernmental conferences
1.
A resolution adopted by an international organization or at an intergovernmental
conference cannot, of itself, create a rule of customary international law.
2.
A resolution adopted by an international organization or at an intergovernmental
conference may provide evidence for determining the existence and content of a rule
of customary international law, or contribute to its development.
3.
A provision in a resolution adopted by an international organization or at an
intergovernmental conference may reflect a rule of customary international law if it
is established that the provision corresponds to a general practice that is accepted as
law (opinio juris).
Conclusion 13
Decisions of courts and tribunals
1.
Decisions of international courts and tribunals, in particular of the International
Court of Justice, concerning the existence and content of rules of customary
international law are a subsidiary means for the determination of such rules.
4/5

18-22494

Identification of customary international law

A/RES/73/203

2.
Regard may be had, as appropriate, to decisions of national courts concerning
the existence and content of rules of customary international law, as a subsidiary
means for the determination of such rules.
Conclusion 14
Teachings
Teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations may serve
as a subsidiary means for the determination of rules of customary international law.
Part Six
Persistent objector
Conclusion 15
Persistent objector
1.
Where a State has objected to a rule of customary international law while that
rule was in the process of formation, the rule is not opposable to the State concerned
for so long as it maintains its objection.
2.
The objection must be clearly expressed, made known to other States, and
maintained persistently.
3.
The present conclusion is without prejudice to any question concerning
peremptory norms of general international law (jus cogens).
Part Seven
Particular customary international law
Conclusion 16
Particular customary international law
1.
A rule of particular customary international law, whether regional, local or other,
is a rule of customary international law that applies only among a limited number of
States.
2.
To determine the existence and content of a rule of particular customary
international law, it is necessary to ascertain whether there is a general practice among
the States concerned that is accepted by them as law (opinio juris) among themselves.

18-22494

5/5
