A/55/PV.62

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

62nd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 15 November 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 105
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime (A/55/383 and
Add.1)
Draft resolution (A/55/383, para. 121)
The President: Members will recall that at its
35th plenary meeting, on 17 October 2000, the General
Assembly decided to consider agenda item 105 directly
in plenary meeting for the sole purpose of taking action
on
the
United
Nations
Convention
against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols
thereto.
The report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Elaboration of a Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime on the work of its first to eleventh
sessions is contained in documents A/55/383 and
addendum 1.
In this connection, the Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime in paragraph 121 of its
report contained in document A/55/383.

(Finland)

I give the floor to Mr. Luigi Lauriola, Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, to
introduce the report.
Mr. Lauriola (Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime): In December 1998,
the General Assembly voted to establish an open-ended
intergovernmental ad hoc committee for the purpose of
elaborating a convention against organized crime. To
complement the convention, the Assembly also
directed
that
three
additional
protocols
be
negotiated — one on illicit trafficking in women and
children, a second on illicit trafficking in firearms, and
a third on the illegal trafficking in, and transporting of,
migrants. In resolution 54/126, of 17 December 1999,
the Assembly requested that the Ad Hoc Committee
accelerate and complete its work by the year 2000 and
submit the final text of the Convention and its
Protocols to the Assembly for adoption prior to a highlevel signing conference. In accordance with resolution
54/129 of 17 December 1999, the High-level Signing
Conference is to be hosted by the Government of Italy,
and is now scheduled to take place in Palermo from 12
to 15 December.
It is indeed a great privilege and an honour for
me to speak before the Assembly today as the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee established by the
General Assembly. As the Chairman, I am here to
present the text of the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, along with two

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-74778 (E)

*0074778*

A/55/PV.62

additional Protocols — one on illicit trafficking in
persons, especially women and children; and the other
on illicit trafficking in, and transporting of, migrants.
These texts were intensively worked out during 11
sessions of the Ad Hoc Committee and were finalized
by unanimous agreement in less than two years, from
January 1999 to October 2000. That might sound like a
surprisingly rapid rate of progress within a relatively
short span of time, but the fact is that the seeds of that
success were sown well before 1999.
The idea of preparing a United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
was first formally raised at the World Ministerial
Conference on Organized Transnational Crime, which
was held in Naples on 23 November 1994. In
approving the Naples Political Declaration and its
Global Action Plan against Organized Transnational
Crime, the General Assembly urged States to
implement them as a matter of urgency. There was then
a whole series of additional initiatives that helped to
the spark the international community’s awareness
about the need to fight transnational organized crime.
I want to underline in particular the importance of
the Ninth United Nations Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held in
Cairo; the Regional Ministerial Workshop, held in
Buenos Aires; meetings in Palermo; the African
Regional Ministerial Workshop, held in Dakar; the
Regional Ministerial Workshop held in Manila; and the
meetings of the Friends of the Chair held in Rome,
Buenos Aires and Vienna. Of special importance was
the meeting of an open-ended intergovernmental group
of experts held in Warsaw, which I believe took place
in February 1998. Great credit is also due to the
Government of Poland, which introduced the first
actual draft of the Convention. That was followed by
another draft, submitted by the United States, and by a
summary of proposals by various countries, prepared
by the Max Planck Institute at the request of the United
Nations Secretariat.
Those who have experience of multilateral
conventions know that the negotiating process tends to
be a long and difficult one. Governments inevitably
bring to negotiations basic differences in juridical
concepts and the unique features of their legal systems,
not to mention the variety of political positions
stemming from their domestic and foreign policy
needs. That accumulated legal and political baggage
must then be painfully sorted through in the quest for a

2

compromise. Delay on each successive issue seems to
be the order of the day. In our case, the diversity of
juridical language that characterized our initial efforts
would have made the Tower of Babel sound like a
monologue of heavenly concord and mutual
understanding.
Our success in concluding negotiations in a
relatively short span of time was certainly not due to
the simplicity of the task, the initial clarity of the
concept or an absence of political disagreement. We
began in an atmosphere of skepticism and hesitation
but — little by little, step by step, slowly but
steadily — it was the political will of the participants
to tackle transnational organized crime that began to
make itself felt. Some of the ingredients of success
were in place from the very outset. We had almost 125
countries participating, which sent a highly qualified
cadre of delegates drawn from the ranks of
Government officials as well as from academia, while
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and other
international organizations, such as the Wassenaar
Arrangement,
added
their
experience
and
encouragement.
What helped make possible the participation of so
many delegations were the voluntary financial
contributions of several States; I should make
particular reference to the United States, Japan, Poland,
Austria, Norway, Italy and the Netherlands. But it was
the emerging political will, driven by newspaper
headlines and by public opinion, that was the catalyst
that gave decisive impetus to the search for a global
response to organized crime on a global level.
In the final analysis, it was that will that animated
our work and that took the good faith of participating
States and the talent of their representatives and forged
them into an instrument able to overcome successive
obstacles as they arose. Practically every delegation
had something to contribute, and the ongoing pursuit of
consensus put each delegation on an equal footing and
brought home to each participant that he or she was a
vital part of the process.
In the end, the pressure to succeed, the
recognition of the international community’s need for a
convention and the dynamic of the negotiating process
itself all became overwhelming. Countries that had
been opposed even to the idea of discussing the
possibility of an international instrument soon became
the strongest supporters of a convention. Other

A/55/PV.62

countries, such as Italy, Poland and Argentina, which
were considered to be too idealistic, supported the
process from the very beginning. That reminds me of
what somebody has said: it is not necessary to be sure
of success in order to succeed and in order to
persevere.
For my own part, all I can say is that starting this
process was certainly an act of courage. Continuing in
the face of adversity was an act of faith. Concluding
now by approving and ratifying the draft Convention
would be an act of wisdom of which all those who
participated in the negotiations could be proud. Indeed,
all the members of the General Assembly could be
proud of this achievement.
The draft Convention provides a framework and
tools for better international cooperation against
organized crime without borders. But what will be
critical is its implementation. Now it is the turn of the
General Assembly to provide the political will to put
into practice the machinery of the draft Convention by
adopting, signing and ratifying the three instruments
before it as soon as possible. I refer not only to the
draft Convention but also to the two draft protocols, on
illicit trafficking in women and children, and on illicit
smuggling of migrants.
For that reason, I have submitted a draft
resolution recommending the adoption by the General
Assembly of the draft Convention and the two draft
protocols. I hope that the Assembly will accept that
recommendation, and that as many members as
possible will be able to participate in the signing
conference, to be held at Palermo, hosted by the Italian
Government.
Incidentally, as far as the draft resolution is
concerned, corrections must be made to paragraphs 3
and 11 to bring them into conformity with United
Nations language and practice.
I need to recall that the mandate given to the Ad
Hoc Committee included also the elaboration of a draft
protocol against the illicit manufacturing of and
trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and
ammunition. I regret to report that the Ad Hoc
Committee was unable to complete its deliberations on
such a draft protocol in time for submission to the
Assembly. While we were very close to agreement, a
few points — in particular marking — needed
additional consideration.

Accordingly, the Ad Hoc Committee respectfully
requests that it be allowed to continue its work, in
conformity with resolutions 53/111, 53/114 and 54/126,
so that it might have an opportunity to finalize its work
in the near future. To that end, we would envisage
calling a meeting early in 2001; a paragraph to that
effect has been inserted in the draft resolution.
Allow me to express my sincere thanks to all the
members of the 125 delegations that took part in the
negotiations. I was particularly impressed by their
knowledge, by their expertise and by their
professionalism. They made it possible to conduct our
deliberations in a positive, flexible and constructive
spirit. The members of the expanded Bureau, some of
whom I see here today, deserve special mention:
Ecuador, France, Japan, Mexico, Pakistan, Poland,
Slovakia, Tunisia, Venezuela and South Africa, which
served as Rapporteur. And I personally am highly
indebted to the Vice-Chairmen, who assisted me in the
negotiation of the draft Convention — particularly
Ecuador, Venezuela, Pakistan and Tunisia — and of the
draft protocols — France and Poland for the draft
protocol on migrants, Mexico and Slovakia for the
draft protocol on illicit trafficking in persons, and
Japan for the unfinished draft protocol on firearms.
Let me also convey my heartfelt thanks to the
Secretary-General for the support given to our
Committee through the United Nations Office at
Vienna, and to the members of the Secretariat, in
particular Mr. Jan van Dijk, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde
and, especially, the Secretary of the Committee, Mr.
Dmitri Vlassis, for their unfailing assistance. I extend
my thanks also to all other staff members who served
with dedication.
Looking back to where we started, my mind once
again is drawn to a line from the Italian poet Dante,
who wrote that “From a small spark springs a majestic
flame”. We have come a long way. Not so many years
ago, Governments tended to ignore crime beyond their
borders. The statement issued by 72 heads of State at
the recent tenth Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Vienna, marked
the sea-change that has occurred since. The dangers
posed by organized crime to individual citizens and to
the international community have rightly risen to the
top of the agenda. The first steps have been taken, but
we still have a long way to go. Now it is up to the
Assembly to develop and recommend effective tools to
provide a global response to this global scourge.

3

A/55/PV.62

Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I am
pleased to take the floor on behalf of the European
Union. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe
associated with the European Union — Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta align
themselves with this statement.
The development of transnational organized
crime, fostered by a context in which globalization is
taking place, is a major challenge to the international
community. Indeed, it is today one of the major nonmilitary threats to the safety and security of
individuals, the stability of societies, the sovereignty of
States and the development and preservation of
democracy. In the light of its universal mission, the
United Nations is the forum best suited for devising the
legislative tools to enable us together to combat this
scourge.
The period of less than two years set by the
General Assembly for negotiating a draft Convention
against
Transnational
Organized
Crime
was
exceptionally short for such a complex legal instrument
of such vast scope. It was a sign of the urgency felt by
Member States with respect to transnational organized
crime and of their determination rapidly to acquire the
tools to deal with the situation.
The European Union would like to congratulate
the intergovernmental Ad Hoc Committee and its
Chairman, Mr. Luigi Lauriola, for having ensured the
success of this endeavour through sustained and
persevering work. The European Union thanks Poland
for having submitted the initial draft text of the
Convention to the Ad Hoc Committee, and it would
also like to express its gratitude to all the States that
took part in the negotiations and displayed both the
determination to arrive at an instrument that is as
legally rigorous as it is effective and the spirit of
compromise vital to overcoming the differences in
approach which emerged during the discussions.
Finally, the Union would like to thank the Centre
for International Crime Prevention, which supported
the Ad Hoc Committee’s work, and which, owing to
the competence and commitment of its staff, greatly
contributed to the conclusion of the negotiations within
the time limits that had been set.
The European Union considers the Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its related

4

Protocols to be an exemplary normative instrument. It
is the first global legal instrument devised to combat
transnational organized crime. In our opinion, it
introduces key innovations in the legal field and in the
procedures for cooperation among States parties.
As concerns the two related protocols negotiated
and adopted along with the Convention, the European
Union believes that these complementary instruments
are vital, because they take into account, and set out
specific measures for addressing, particularly serious
types of organized transnational crime.
As regards the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, the European
Union would like to thank the Japanese presidency of
the Ad Hoc Committee for all the efforts made to
conclude the negotiations. We hope that a new session
will be convened as soon as possible and that all
Member States will demonstrate the spirit of
compromise that is necessary for achieving a
consensus.
Nonetheless, the European Union considers that
the completion of negotiations on the Convention and
its two related protocols is an outstanding achievement.
This should not, however, cause us to overlook the
work that is still ahead of us. Having arrived at
satisfactory texts is one thing, but it is quite another to
ensure their entry into force and implementation. In
this respect, we shall still have several important
bridges to cross following the adoption by the General
Assembly of the draft resolution approving the
Convention and its two additional protocols.
The first will be the signing conference, to be
held in Palermo, Italy, from 12 to 15 December 2000.
The European Union thanks Italy for offering to host
the conference, which will conclude a cycle that also
began in Italy — to be specific, in Naples in 1994, with
the adoption of the Naples Political Declaration and
Global Action Plan against Organized Crime.
The European Union calls upon all Member
States to sign the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the protocols thereto at the
Palermo conference.
The second stage will be the entry into force of
the Convention and of its protocols. The members of
the Ad Hoc Committee want this to take place once the
text has been ratified by 40 States, so that the

A/55/PV.62

geographical framework for the implementation of the
text encompasses from the outset more than one
continent or one single region of the world. The Union
considers that this legitimate concern should not,
however, cause a delay in the entry into force of the
Convention and its protocols. It therefore urges all
Member States to ratify the Convention and its two
related protocols at the earliest opportunity.
Finally, the Union attaches great importance to
the effective implementation of the provisions of the
Convention and its protocols by all those States that
will be parties to it, including in cases in which
assistance is needed to bring their institutional and
judicial systems up to standard. With this in mind, and
in order to attain this objective, the Union encourages
Member States to contribute towards the widest
possible implementation of these legal instruments.
The member States of the Union, for their part,
are determined to sign and ratify the Convention and
its related protocols as soon as possible and to
resolutely apply all of their provisions.
By approving today the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its two related protocols, the General Assembly will be
manifesting
the
international
community’s
determination to combat one of the most serious threats
it is confronting today.
Mr. Vento (Italy): I am pleased to take the floor
in the General Assembly to express my Government’s
warm appreciation for the excellent work done in
Vienna by all the delegations that participated in the
intensive negotiations, which were brought to a
positive conclusion with the approval of the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the two protocols — the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, and the Protocol against the Smuggling
of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air.
In particular, I wish to single out the contribution
made by the Ad Hoc Committee, chaired by
Ambassador Luigi Lauriola.
Italy fully endorses the statement made by France
in its capacity as President of the European Union and
wishes to add the following considerations in a
national capacity.
The Convention and the two Protocols address
sensitive issues and set up a complex normative system

on matters such as criminal law, in which differences
between national legislations make the drafting of
international laws particularly difficult.
My country played a major role in the negotiating
process that led to the finalization of the text of the
Convention, whose draft was initially proposed by
Poland. The process was launched in 1994 at the
Naples World Ministerial Conference on Organized
Transnational Crime, which adopted a Political
Declaration and an operational Action Plan.
Significantly, it will conclude in December in Palermo,
where the Italian Government is organizing a highlevel political conference for the signing of the
Convention and the supplementary Protocols.
As the European Union presidency noted, the
successful completion of the text of the Convention
and of the two Protocols in such a short period of time
is clear evidence of the international community’s
growing awareness of the seriousness of transnational
organized crime and of the need for urgent and
effective international cooperation mechanisms to fight
it.
Organized crime is harmful to quality of life and
to the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms throughout the world. It jeopardizes
economic development, corrupting and destabilizing
social and political institutions. The adoption of the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime is a
major step in the fight against this scourge. It is also a
remarkable achievement in the promotion of justice
and security, and ranks alongside the approval of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court in the more
recent actions of the United Nations.
Italy is particularly pleased by the specific
contents of the three instruments that have been
submitted to the General Assembly for adoption. The
Convention does not simply lay out a general
normative framework that correlates international laws
on specific types of crimes. Instead, it is itself an
innovative instrument that has a direct impact on the
prevention and prosecution of a broad range of crimes,
including all of the serious transnational crimes
committed by organized crime groups.
To this end, the Convention includes not only
measures to strengthen national crime-fighting
systems, but also measures to foster cooperation among
States. The improvement of national legislation is a
prerequisite to preventing criminal groups from

5

A/55/PV.62

growing and proliferating by taking advantage of
loopholes in national systems. They are also a
prerequisite to effective international cooperation.

transportation of migrants over the seas should be
considered of particular value, as this is one of the
most dangerous forms of smuggling today.

The Convention gives prominence to the
agreements reached on criminalizing behaviour that
underlies the constitution and operation of criminal
groups — such as criminal association, conspiracy,
money laundering and corruption — as well as to
provisions by which States undertake to adopt crimeprevention initiatives.

While voicing my Government’s satisfaction with
the fact that it took less than two years to complete this
enormous job, I express our hope that the negotiations
on the protocol against the illicit manufacturing of and
trafficking in arms will be resumed shortly, so that a
compromise on the most controversial points can be
reached.

The Convention also contains significant
measures on international cooperation between judicial
and police authorities. The Italian Government is
convinced that bilateral or regional agreements are not
enough to meet the need for prompt collaboration in
investigating and prosecuting transnational crimes
committed by organized crime groups. Instead, we
need to build a global system of norms and practices
that fosters collaboration among the largest possible
number of countries. We are convinced that the
application of the Convention’s provisions —
especially those relating to mutual judicial assistance
and extradition — effectively and thoroughly governs
the most relevant aspects of this collaboration and will
promote national police and judicial action to fight
organized crime.

We must quickly follow up on our adoption of the
Convention and its two protocols by implementing the
provisions they contain. Otherwise, organized crime
will seize upon our delays in enforcing such action and
exploit our every weakness. Therefore the Italian
Government hopes that all States will promptly sign
and ratify the Convention. We appeal to Member States
to come to Palermo in large numbers for the Signing
Conference, and we urge them to be represented at the
highest possible level.

The two protocols support the functioning of the
Convention with specific measures made necessary by
the unique characteristics of transnational organized
crime. Trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, is a particularly heinous crime. The protocol
on trafficking, which pays equal attention to the
repression of illegal conduct and the protection of the
victims, fills in many gaps in international law and
provides an effective instrument for international
cooperation.
The same holds true for the protocol against the
smuggling of migrants. The Italian contribution to this
legal instrument has been particularly relevant, as my
Government, together with the Government of Austria,
proposed the initial draft.
From a law-enforcement perspective, this
protocol requires States to criminalize the activity of
groups that, for the sake of profit, exploit the hardship
of migrants, place them in life-threatening situations,
arrange for them to be smuggled into countries and
illegally facilitate their stay. In addition, Italy believes
that the protocol’s provisions covering the

6

If we wish to make the Convention and its
protocols operative, it is not enough for their norms to
enter into force. All States parties must take the
necessary steps to adapt their legislation and their
domestic institutions. Therefore Italy hopes that every
necessary action can be taken at the United Nations to
facilitate the implementation of these three instruments
by the States parties, and Italy looks forward to the
contribution that the political debate at the Palermo
conference will offer to this goal.
Mr. Tello (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
wishes to voice its satisfaction at the conclusion of the
negotiations on the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and on the protocols to
prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, in
particular women and children, and against illegal
trafficking in migrants by land, sea and air, which
complement the Convention. Nevertheless, we would
like to place on record our profound concern at the lack
of political will on the part of some States, which
prevented the conclusion of a protocol on the illicit
manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts
and components and ammunition.
The adoption of these instruments is undoubtedly
a concrete step towards the practical implementation of
the commitment entered into by the heads of State and
Government during the Millennium Summit to
intensify the struggle against transnational crime in all

A/55/PV.62

its dimensions, including smuggling and illicit
trafficking in human beings and money laundering.
In an increasingly interdependent world,
organized
criminal
groups
use
increasingly
sophisticated methods to make their activities
transnational. The States cannot remain paralysed. We
must have international cooperation to jointly combat
transnational organized crime.
The Convention is a novel instrument, for it
establishes a legal regime for the prevention of and
fight against transnational organized crime, at the same
times as it is broadly applicable and establishes
mechanisms for international cooperation that are
effective and will undoubtedly strengthen efforts in this
field. The Convention and its protocols have a unified
nature, but the three texts have to be examined in a
differentiated manner, for they refer to aspects of
criminality that have different features. Mexico
successfully promoted recognition of these differences.
As far as Mexico is concerned, the essential
purpose of preventing and combating the smuggling of
persons, especially women and children, is to protect
victims of exploitation for sexual reasons or for work.
It is not only a matter of combating criminal groups.
The protocol against the illicit trafficking in migrants
is an instrument of international cooperation designed
to prevent and combat this crime. It is not an
instrument to control migration. Mexico supports the
adoption of this protocol insofar as it is confined to the
penal aspects of the illicit trafficking in migrants
carried out by organized criminal groups. It protects
the rights of the persons who are the objects of such
trafficking and expressly establishes that migrants
cannot be criminally prosecuted under the protocol, nor
can proceedings be brought against third parties who
have acted in good faith to support such migrants for
humanitarian reasons or because of close family
relationships.

Mexico will continue to deploy the necessary
efforts to ensure that the instrument becomes a reality
at the beginning of the year 2001. As President Zedillo
pointed out when the Inter-American Convention in
this field was open for signing — and it is now in
force — illicit trafficking in firearms, explosives and
other destructive types of materials is a problem that
has been affecting the security of many of our
countries and the peace and quiet in our families and
communities. This trade in violence promotes
phenomena as serious as drug trafficking, which
destroys and imposes its code of death and corruption.
Organized crime commits kidnapping and violent
attacks, threatens public security and commits acts of
terrorism. All of this seeks to block the progress of
democracy and enthrones dogmatism and intolerance.
With the adoption of the protocol, we will be
taking an important step forward both in combating
organized crime and in our efforts to regulate
international trade in firearms. This Assembly has
recognized the complementarity of activities to prevent
and reduce the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation and transfer of small arms and light
weapons and activities to combat the manufacture and
illicit trafficking of firearms.
In order for the conference to be held in the year
2001 to benefit fully from the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee, we must conclude this negotiation as soon
as possible. We are committed to this goal, and we
invite the States that still maintain reservations to
reconsider their position and allow us to conclude this
important protocol, the present version of which enjoys
ample international support.

As far as Mexico is concerned, illicit trafficking
in migrants is an especially serious crime when it
endangers the lives and security of the migrants.

Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Nowadays the problem of crime has become
a factor that cannot be neglected by any State that
seeks to ensure the security, tranquillity and well-being
of its citizens. Modern criminals long ago realized the
true advantages of close international links, and they
have not been slow to use them for their anti-social
purposes, often keeping a few steps ahead of the forces
of law and order.

The fight against transnational organized crime
can only be effective to the extent that we suppress the
manufacture and illicit trafficking in firearms. This is
why we feel that the Ad Hoc Committee’s mandate will
not have been fully discharged until that protocol is
adopted.

In these conditions, the need to establish a single
anti-crime front of States at the global level is
becoming glaringly obvious. World society must create
a system under which criminals will not be beyond the
reach of the law in any country or be able to use their
illicit proceeds. The Convention against Transnational

n so

7

A/55/PV.62

Organized Crime should form a reliable basis for this
system. In just one and a half years, it has been
possible to prepare a document to serve for decades as
the
fundamental
instrument
of
international
cooperation in combating crime. This is an indisputable
indicator of the fact that, given the necessary will, we
can achieve serious results in the anti-crime sphere in a
very short time.

Mr. Rydzkowski (Poland): At the outset, allow
me to express the satisfaction of the Polish
Government on the adoption by the General Assembly,
to take place shortly, of the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. Since Poland is a
European Union associated country, it fully subscribes
to the statement of the Presidency of the Union just
made by the representative of France.

We regard the adoption by the current General
Assembly session of the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime as a big success for the
United Nations. In this connection, we would like to
note the big contribution to the attainment of this goal
made by the Chairman of the United Nations Ad Hoc
Committee, Luigi Lauriola, the members of the Bureau
and members of the Centre for International Crime
Prevention. We are glad that the Convention covers a
broad range of crimes, including money laundering,
corruption and membership in organized criminal
groups.

I would like only to make some additional
remarks. As it is widely known, Poland was the
country that started the practical work on the
Convention in terms of its concept and implementation.
Although the idea of a multilateral convention against
organized crime goes back to the Naples Political
Declaration and Global Action Plan against Organized
Transnational Crime, adopted by the World Ministerial
Conference in Italy in 1994, it was the Polish
President, Mr. Aleksander Kwasniewski, who presented
the first draft of the future convention to the fifty-first
session of the United Nations General Assembly on 24
September 1996.

It is important that the document contains
detailed arrangements for the provision of reciprocal
legal assistance, extradition and measures to protect
witnesses and victims of crime. We are sure that these
and other provisions of the Convention will enhance
the quality of the work of the law enforcement
agencies of our countries and cooperation between
them at a qualitatively higher level. We also welcome
the adoption of additional protocols to the Convention
on such pressing problems as trafficking in human
beings and smuggling of migrants. We hope that work
on the additional protocol on combating illicit
trafficking in firearms will be successfully completed
in a very short time.
No less important than the adoption of this
Convention is the question of its speedy entry into
force and the beginning of its effective functioning.
This process will be given a vigorous start in
December of this year at the high-level political
conference for signing this document. We are grateful
to the Government of Italy for offering to host this
forum in Palermo.
In conclusion, we would like to confirm once
again that the Russian Federation will continue to
make maximum efforts to combat the criminal threat
and promote the strengthening of cooperation among
States in combating crime.

8

Following this initiative, the Polish Government
invited a group of international experts to Warsaw in
February 1998 to start preliminary discussions on the
convention. Although the efforts to elaborate an
international instrument designed specifically to fight
transnational organized crime had already been part of
history, the Warsaw meeting marked an important
breakthrough in two respects. First and foremost, the
issue of drafting such a multilateral convention was no
longer addressed as a “whether or not” question but
became one of “how”. It was also the first time that
representatives of more than 50 States unanimously
agreed to have an effective tool to combat transnational
organized crime in its most dangerous transnational
dimension. Moreover, when considering different
approaches, delegations focused on identifying areas of
emerging consensus.
Today, when we are approaching the fourth
anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly
of the resolution on this matter, we are especially
pleased that the process is over and that the General
Assembly is able to adopt one of the most important
international legal instruments of our time. This
adoption reflects fully the conviction that no single
State can successfully suppress organized crime, even
within its own borders.

A/55/PV.62

The new legal instrument is of a unique character
because, for the first time, it delivers in a precise
manner the definition of the phenomenon of
transnational organized crime and defines instruments
of an effective fight against uncivil society. The
adoption of the convention and its two additional
protocols after only three and a half years of work is a
significant achievement and reflects the political will
of the international community to combat the increased
threat posed by organized crime. We hope that the new
convention will fulfil the expectations of Governments
and law enforcement authorities and become an
efficient and effective tool of cooperation between
States on all levels.

meeting of the intergovernmental group of experts, and
other countries which contributed to the work on the
convention at different stages.

From the practical point of view, the adoption of
a legal instrument is only a beginning. Now we are on
the threshold of the next step — the implementation of
the convention and its two protocols. Before us is the
signing ceremony in Palermo, the difficult process of
national ratification and implementation at the
international and national levels. At this point, it is
necessary to stress that the full implementation of the
convention will be possible only when it is done on a
universal basis, which means that resources will be
necessary to assist those States which are not able to
fight organized crime by themselves.

As I have already said, there will be some
correction to operative paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution, in which the words “summary records” are
to be replaced by the words “a comprehensive report”.

As one of the initiators of the work on the
convention against transnational organized crime,
Poland expresses the hope that the existing spirit of
cooperation will be extended to the process of
ratification and that we will shortly have the 40
ratifying States necessary for the convention’s entry
into force. We also express hope that the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime will able to finish its
work on the third protocol, covering the problem of
illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms. We
are of the opinion that the convention and its three
related protocols constitute a set and that, without one
of them, an efficient fight against organized crime will
not be possible.
Before concluding, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee, Ambassador Luigi Lauriola, and the other
members of the Bureau for their dedication and hard
work. Special thanks go to the Centre for International
Crime Prevention, without which the conclusion of the
work would not have been possible. We also thank the
government of Argentina, which organized the second

The President: The Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime has asked to take the
floor again. I call on him.
Mr. Lauriola (Italy), Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime: I apologize for taking
the floor again, but, according to procedure, I have to
read out a few corrections to the text of the draft
resolution.

In operative paragraph 11, we are to delete the
words “and under the direction of” and to add at the
end of the paragraph “in accordance with paragraph 33
of the Convention”. This is just to make the draft
resolution consistent with the language and the practice
of the United Nations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft
resolution recommended by the Ad Hoc Committee on
the Elaboration of a Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime in paragraph 121 of its report, as
orally corrected by the Committee Chairman.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Perfiliev (Director, General Assembly and
ECOSOC Affairs Division): Before taking action on
the draft resolution recommended by the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime in paragraph 121 of its
report, I should like to inform members that, first, in
connection with operative paragraph 5 of the draft
resolution, the Assembly would request the Ad Hoc
Committee to continue its work in relation to the draft
protocol against the illicit manufacturing of and
trafficking in firearms, their parts, component and
ammunition, and to finalize such work as soon as
possible. This request would imply the need to convene
an additional session of the Ad Hoc Committee in
2001. The Secretariat estimates that the session would

9

A/55/PV.62

last five working days and that interpretation and
documentation in the six official languages would be
required. These conference servicing requirements are
estimated to amount to $187,600 at full cost.
Provisions have been made in the programme
budget for the biennium 2000-2001 not only for
meetings already programmed at the time of budget
preparation, but also for meetings or extensions of
meetings that might be authorized subsequently,
provided that the number and distribution of meetings
were consistent with the pattern of meetings of past
years.
On that basis, no additional appropriation would
be required under section 2, concerning General
Assembly affairs and conference services, of the
programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001 as a
result of the request contained in operative paragraph 5
of the draft resolution.
In operative paragraph 11, the Secretary-General
would be requested to designate the Centre for
International Crime Prevention to serve as a secretariat
for the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, in
accordance with article 33 of the Convention. Given
the complex nature and wide scope of the functions
that the secretariat will have to perform, it is
considered that the current staff resources of the Centre
for International Crime Prevention would eventually
need to be strengthened. It is not possible to assess at
this stage the necessary staffing resources which would
enable the Centre to fulfil its functions in accordance
with article 33. The Secretariat would be in a position
to make such assessment in the light of the
recommendations which the Ad Hoc Committee will
make at the preparatory meeting to be held before the
first session of the Conference of the Parties, and of the
decisions that the Conference of the Parties will take at
its first session.
Given the importance attached by delegations to
the convention, the secretariat estimates that the
convention may enter into force in the biennium 20022003 and that the first session of the Conference of the
Parties would be held in 2003. On the basis of this
assumption, the Secretariat would include related
proposals in the 2002-2003 programme budget.
In operative paragraph 12 of the draft resolution,
the Secretary-General would be requested to provide
the Centre for International Crime Prevention with the
resources necessary to carry out its work related to the

10

implementation of the convention, to the servicing of
the Conference of the Parties and to the support to be
provided to the Ad Hoc Committee. The attention of
delegations is drawn to the provisions of resolution
45/248, part B, VI, in which the General Assembly,
first, reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee was the
appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly
entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters; secondly, reaffirmed also the role of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions; thirdly, expressed its concern at
the tendency of its substantive Committees and other
intergovernmental bodies to involve themselves in
administrative and budgetary matters; and, fourthly,
invited the Secretary-General to provide all
intergovernmental bodies with the required information
regarding procedures for administrative and budgetary
matters.
In the absence of any provision in the draft
resolution or in the Convention regarding the funding
of the Conference of the Parties, the Secretariat
assumes that the meetings of the Conference of the
Parties would be financed from the United Nations
regular budget. It is therefore the intention of the
Secretary-General to include in his proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003
appropriate resources for the meetings of the
Conference of the Parties and of the Ad Hoc
Committee acting as a preparatory committee to the
first session of the Conference of the Parties. It is also
the understanding of the Secretariat that the meetings
of the Conference of the Parties and of the Ad Hoc
Committee would be held in Vienna in accordance with
the provision of resolution 40/243 of 8 December
1985.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime”, recommended by the Ad Hoc Committee on
the Elaboration of a Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime in paragraph 121 of its report, as
orally corrected by its Chairman.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution recommended by the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime in paragraph 121 of its
report, as orally corrected by its Chairman?

A/55/PV.62

The draft resolution, as orally corrected by the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Elaboration of a Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, was adopted (resolution 55/25).
The President: Before calling on the
representative of Japan for an explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted, may I remind the
Assembly that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Nobuyasu (Japan): Today, 15 November
2000, marks a historic, giant step by the world in its
fight against organized crime. The General Assembly
has just adopted the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the two related
protocols. Japan wholeheartedly welcomes this historic
step and expresses its appreciation to Ambassador
Luigi Lauriola and all the other officers of the Ad Hoc
Committee, all the delegations, members of the
Secretariat and the interpreters who worked, burning
the midnight oil, to finish the work to elaborate these
important international instruments throughout the
long, difficult negotiations.
For its part, Japan joined the efforts to conclude
the negotiations, serving as one of the Vice-Chairs,
hosting a number of preparatory meetings and
providing moral, political and financial support to
facilitate the work of the participants. Japan notes with
great regret, however, that agreement was not reached
on a draft protocol against the illicit manufacturing of
and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components
and ammunition, in order to supplement the
Convention. The task still remains, therefore, for the
Ad Hoc Committee to complete the work on the
firearms protocol as soon as possible. Japan is
determined to continue its active endeavour to bring
the negotiation on the protocol to a successful
conclusion for its adoption by the Assembly early next
year.
As to the Convention and the two protocols that
we have just adopted, Japan looks forward to the
signing conference in Palermo next month and
expresses its appreciation to the great contribution that
the Italian Government is offering. It is now incumbent
upon the world community to ensure that those
instruments have as universal an application as
possible and to spread their effective implementation
around the world.

In order to help build capacity in the field of
criminal justice in developing countries in particular,
Japan is prepared to hold seminars or training courses
and continue to contribute to the Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Fund. As a starter, Japan is hosting an
Asia-Pacific law enforcement conference against
transnational organized crime in January next year.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
105.
Agenda item 42
Special session of the General Assembly in 2001 for
follow-up to the World Summit for Children
Report of the Preparatory Committee (A/55/43
(Parts I and II))
Report of the Secretary-General (A/55/429)
Draft resolution (A/55/L.34)
The President: It is my pleasure to address this
plenary meeting on an agenda item of high importance
for the General Assembly — its special session on
children, to be held in 2001.
This special session is of personal interest to me.
In September 1990, I had the honour of representing
my country at the World Summit for Children. On that
occasion, an unprecedented dialogue among 71 world
leaders led to a universal appeal to ensure a better
future for every child. I had the opportunity of being
directly involved in helping galvanize political will at
the highest level through an action-oriented agenda
devoted to the most fragile component of the social
fabric — our children.
Ten years after that unique experience, I share
with many the feeling that significant progress has
been achieved — and yet many challenges remain in
front of us.
As a result of the World Declaration and Plan of
Action on the Survival, Protection and Development of
Children in the 1990s, attention to children has indeed
increased. A vast majority of countries have now
ratified the Convention of the Rights of the Child. The
needs and rights of children have also been the subject
of major United Nations events held during the 1990s
such as the international conferences on population, on

11

A/55/PV.62

women, on
settlements.

social

development

and

on

human

However, the suffering of millions of children
around the world shows that the goals and
commitments of the World Summit for Children remain
far from fulfilled. More effective policies and
programmes in more countries are urgently required to
keep the promise made to children in September 1990.
At the beginning of the new millennium, we are
confident that focusing on our children as the most
vulnerable and cherished part of our societies, we can
agree on effective actions to ensure their survival,
protection, full development and participation.
In the Millennium Declaration, world leaders
renewed the global commitment to children by
addressing such specific issues as eradicating poverty,
reducing child and maternal mortality, ensuring
assistance and protection in cases of armed conflict and
humanitarian emergencies, as well the imperative to
give all children, including girls, a basic education of
good quality.
This plenary session is an important step towards
this global commitment in considering the process
leading to the special session in September 2001,
delegations might wish to bear in mind the spirit,
which prevailed during the Summit in 1990. As world
leaders then declared “there can be no task nobler than
giving every child a better future.”
I should like to inform members that in a letter
dated 21 September 2000 addressed to the President of
the General Assembly, the Permanent Representative of
Sweden to the United Nations, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Group of Western European and other
States for the month of September, requests that the
General Assembly hear in plenary meeting a statement
by the observer of the Holy See in the debate of agenda
item 42 entitled “Special Session of the General
Assembly in 2001 for follow-up to the World Summit
for Children”.
Taking into account the importance attached to
the issue under discussion, it is proposed that the
General Assembly should take a decision on that
request.
May I take it that there is no objection to the
proposal to hear the observer of the Holy See in the
debate on this item?

12

It was so decided.
The President: I should also like to inform
members that, in a letter dated 6 October 2000
addressed to the President of the General Assembly, the
Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of
Western European and other States for the month of
October, requests that the General Assembly hear in
plenary meeting a statement by the observer of
Switzerland in the debate on agenda item 42.
Taking into account the importance attached to
the issue under discussion, it is proposed that the
General Assembly should take a decision on that
request.
May I take it that there is no objection to the
proposal to hear a statement by the observer of
Switzerland in the debate on this item?
It was so decided.
Mr. Boisson (Monaco) (spoke in French):
Ambassador Patricia Durrant, Chairman of the
Preparatory Committee for the special session on
children, will be presenting draft resolution A/55/L.34
to the Assembly for its approval.
We thank her very warmly for her remarkable
work and would also like to thank Ambassador
Schumacher of the Federal Republic of Germany and
the very many delegations that participated in the
consultations. In this way they displayed their
countries’ firm commitment to improving the fate of
children throughout the world.
The World Summit for Children in 1990 was the
first of the great meetings and conferences held by the
General Assembly in the decade that is now winding
up. Ten years is time enough for Governments to
obtain the statistics needed to review outcomes and
evaluate progress achieved in the implementation of
the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and
Development of Children and its Plan of Action, which
were adopted in 1990.
This stocktaking should enable leaders to commit
to new initiatives, which will then appear
indispensable. It will also enable them to renew their
support in fields where we have not achieved our
objectives.
In this perspective the Convention on the Rights
of the Child is the major legal instrument in the field of

A/55/PV.62

human rights that has received the widest support and
thus must remain the cornerstone and source of
inspiration for everything we do in the future for
children.
It seems to us entirely justified that we use the
concept of life cycle proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report when we study the rights and
well-being of children and teenagers and that we
decide together on future action, which will have to be
specific, concrete and quantifiable in the three areas
which I will now describe in greater detail.
A good start in life is important and the health
and education of the mother will affect this good start.
If there has been important progress, particularly as
regards breast-feeding and access to health care, the
HIV/AIDS pandemic and the transmission of the virus
from mother to child have posed a new challenge that
we must meet. Global access to basic social services is
also a major objective. Health and food are
complementary.
The world campaign to eradicate polio is a
symbol of what a united international community can
achieve through solidarity. A good start also means not
being denied the basic right to an identity and a
nationality. Universal birth records must thus
unreservedly be encouraged; they are fundamental.
Mr. Aboud (Comoros), Vice-President took the
Chair.
Without education it is impossible to imagine
eradicating poverty. It is our strongest card in the fight
against poverty. In working through education for
development, we are also reducing the risks of armed
conflicts, of which children are often the main victims.
We must therefore favour this area of action. What is
the point of discussing universal access to information
technology if the population does not benefit in the
first place from the education required to make use of
the great tool that computer science is? Developing
States must then receive additional resources to bring
about more general basic education, including
computer science. Gender parity is of essential
importance in this field. Statistics tend to show that an
educated mother is an additional opportunity for her
children to blossom.
An environment conducive to adolescents to
enable them to fulfil their potential is important. The
particularly difficult period of transition from

childhood to adulthood demands that Governments
hold a constructive dialogue with young people. A
participatory approach is definitely to be favoured,
particularly within the nucleus of the family. An
encouraging environment for many teenagers who have
only experienced violence, war and refugee camps
includes, first and foremost, access to vocational
training. Learning a trade means stability and the start
of a normal existence. It will also protect them against
exploitation in the workplace, prostitution or the use of
drugs.
The financial resources and expertise to obtain
these objectives exist, which the Preparatory
Committee will define at the two forthcoming sessions
to be held in January and June 2001.
The new challenges posed by economic
globalization, the proliferation of armed conflict and
the HIV/AIDS pandemic call for new responses that
can only be achieved through deeper reflection and
strengthened political commitment.
We must not forget that we will also have to
adopt the necessary modalities to bring about the active
and ongoing participation of non-governmental
organizations, which work in the field with
Government authorities, children and adolescents
themselves. The Principality is studying the possibility
of including youth and youth group representatives in
its delegation to the special session.
My delegation also fully supports the special
event planned by the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) to be held in parallel with the special
session. We support the participation of children and
teenagers, as well as actors from civil society and the
private sector.
On the threshold of the decisive preparatory
process for our children’s future, we hope resolutely,
working together and inspired by the same desire to
contribute to the universal implementation of the rights
of the child, that we will prepare the General Assembly
to repeat the experience of 1990, in which everything
seemed possible, and that on the eve of 21 September
2001, at the beginning of that night, the participants of
the special session devoted to children will experience,
not only the feeling of well-being that accomplishment
brings, but also the firm conviction that the new
objectives to be established will be within their grasp.

13

A/55/PV.62

I cannot conclude my statement without
expressing the Principality of Monaco’s gratitude to the
United Nations Children’s Fund. Thanks to its
unremitting activity, this organization is at the core of
much of the progress achieved for the improvement of
children’s conditions in many parts of the world,
particularly in the least developed countries, for which
we are especially grateful.
Mr. Tello (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Together
with Canada, Egypt, Mali, Pakistan and Sweden,
Mexico had the honour of sponsoring the World
Summit for Children, held here in 1990. The national
programmes of action drafted in accordance with the
outcome of the World Summit have succeeded in
consolidating States’ commitment to protecting the
rights of children and in encouraging the participation
of broad sectors of society in the promotion of progress
in the areas of health, education, environmental health
and social assistance. Undoubtedly, these are positive
steps in the right direction.
Nevertheless, we must acknowledge that the
agreed commitments to international cooperation have
not been fully implemented, nor have the shared targets
been fully achieved. Despite important advances, many
challenges undoubtedly remain. One challenge is basic:
ensuring the benefits of globalization for children in
the framework of genuine sustainable development,
imbued with justice and equity.
At the Millennium Summit, our heads of State
and Government made the great political commitment
to ensure that by 2015 all the boys and girls throughout
the world will be able to complete a full cycle of
primary education and ensure that girls, as well as
boys, will have equal access to all levels of education.
At the Millennium Summit, Mexico signed the
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
on the involvement of children in armed conflicts and
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography.
With regard to the preparations for the special
session of the General Assembly to be held in 2001 in
follow-up to the World Summit for Children, Mexico
wishes to emphasize the importance of focusing our
efforts on translating into reality by concrete actions
the letter and spirit of each of the great commitments
made by the international community for children.
With these lofty purposes in mind, my country
enthusiastically joined the Kingston consensus at the

14

Fifth Ministerial Meeting on Children and Social
Policy in the Americas, held in Jamaica last October, in
preparation of the special session. This document
underpins the region’s political will to carry out
concrete actions for the integrated development of
children and it constitutes a valuable contribution to
the special session preparatory process.
In implementation of the commitments entered
into at the Summit, Mexico is continuing to pursue a
State policy for children with the overall purpose of
ensuring their survival and promoting their
development and welfare, in addition to protecting
women of child-bearing age. To that end, we have
valuable mechanisms for discussion and coordination,
such as the National Action Commission for Children,
which is an inter-sectoral and inter-institutional body,
and the National Action Programme for Children at the
federal and state levels.
With regard to the immediate future, we have
identified the need to continue to work in the following
priority areas: first, to reduce maternal and child
mortality; secondly, to improve information and access
to family planning services; thirdly, to expand the
coverage of basic services, including drinking water
supply and sewerage in rural and urban marginalized
areas; fourthly, to enhance the quality of education at
all levels, including basic education, with a clear
policy of gender equality; fifthly, to reduce the number
of children who are victims of physical and
psychological violence, neglect and injustice —
especially among the indigenous population.
While reaffirming Mexico’s commitment to the
great task of international cooperation to fight for the
survival and development of children, we express the
hope that the special session of the General Assembly
for follow-up to the World Summit for Children will
help to consolidate a major global alliance to achieve
our common objectives. If we are to secure lasting
success, and especially if we are to extend that success
to the most marginalized areas and people, it is
important to promote integrated programmes and more
effective measures against poverty. At the same time,
national efforts must be supported by redoubled
international cooperation. Mexico will continue to
work hard and with commitment to attain those goals.
In that spirit, Mexico has joined the sponsors of the
draft resolution contained in document A/55/L.34,
which will be introduced by Ambassador Durrant, the
Chairperson of the Preparatory Committee.

A/55/PV.62

Mr. Darwish (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to express my gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the preparatory process for
the 2001 special session of the General Assembly for
follow-up to the recommendations of the World
Summit for Children (A/55/429). I would also like to
convey my thanks to the Preparatory Committee for its
report, contained in parts I and II of document A/55/43,
and to express my gratitude for the efforts of the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and its
Executive Director, Ms. Carol Bellamy, to affirm the
rights of children and to develop their potential and
abilities. I reaffirm my country’s full commitment to
supporting every effort to give the necessary attention
to the situation of children, as they are the essence of
the future and the hope for progress.
Focusing on the physical, mental and
psychological development of children is an economic
and social duty incumbent upon all the countries and
cultures of the world, irrespective of their levels of
economic development and scientific advancement. It
also represents an investment in the future, as today’s
children are tomorrow’s leaders.
Egypt believes that the 1989 Convention on the
Rights of the Child is the basic framework for all
programmes and strategies aimed at promoting
children’s welfare and protecting their full rights
throughout the world. A matter of both pride and joy
for my delegation is the fact that, for the first time in
the history of human rights mechanisms, we have
achieved near universality in ratifying the Convention.
The attainment of 191 ratifications attests to the
international commitment to protect the rights and
potential of children, promote their interests and
safeguard their dignity.
Egypt is pleased to have been among the first
States to adhere to this international Convention on
children. Our President is also gratified to issue the
proclamation of the Second Decade for the Protection
and Care of Egyptian Children, which will be
celebrated from 2000-2010. That document included
every necessary social, cultural and legislative element
to ensure the development of children, their potential
and capabilities through the concerted efforts of
governmental and non-governmental bodies. Egypt has
stressed its commitment to promote the rights of
children by establishing the National Maternity and
Childhood Council, providing encouragement to nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) interested in the

rights, education and health of children, and making
available care and services for special children, such as
the handicapped, the sick and orphans.
Child labour is considered one of the most
important issues related to the rights of the child. In
that regard, my delegation would like to express its
reservations regarding any attempt to exploit the
humanitarian aspect of child labour in order to impose
protectionist or trade measures on the exports of
developing countries, instead of trying to find a real
solution to this social phenomenon by encouraging
Governments’ efforts to put an end to child labour and
by setting up serious programmes for rehabilitating
those children involved.
Egypt believes that it is important to deal with the
issue of child labour in a comprehensive manner, as
this issue is linked to the prevalence of poverty in
societies and to the rights of people to development.
My country’s steadfast position in this regard is
reflected in the following three elements. First, we
object to any attempt to link respect for basic labour
criteria to international trade under the guise of
children’s rights. Secondly, it is important to develop
significant vocational training programmes aimed at
children who leave the education system so as to allow
them to contribute positively to their countries.
Thirdly, we must call on donor countries to contribute
to vocational programmes.
Egypt encourages the International Labour
Organization (ILO) and UNICEF to continue to lend
their attention to child labour within the context of
cooperating with the developing countries concerned.
Part of Egypt’s promotion of the protection of children
was to ban children from taking part in hazardous work
and to develop databases to track child labour. Egypt
has also established networks of trade unions,
employers and NGOs to monitor current legislation.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of the
optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography. Despite the achievements
registered in the past decade, developments have taken
place that have adversely affected children. These
include economic crises, debt crises, the spread of
epidemics, and the exacerbation of the problem of
sexual trafficking in children and of child prostitution.

15

A/55/PV.62

One of the most dangerous of these phenomena is
the spread of armed conflict and the fact that civilians
are often most affected. This has led to international
efforts to ban the recruitment of children in armed
conflict, to protect them from organized violence, to
rehabilitate them and to return them to their families
and homeland.
I should like to point out here the importance of
the protection of children and respect for their basic
rights, in particular the right to life, physical wellbeing and development, especially in occupied
territories and in areas of armed conflict. In this
connection, I believe that an end should be put to all
violence and military acts directed against children in
the occupied Arab territories. Israeli forces continue to
kill Palestinian children and to ignore their cries for
help. Those children are living under very difficult
circumstances, and their plight weighs on the
conscience of humanity.
Finally, we would like to emphasize the
importance of bringing to a successful conclusion the
special session of the General Assembly, to be held in
2001, to follow up on the recommendations of the
World Summit for Children. We hope that this will
support the global solidarity aimed at promoting the
rights of children by encouraging cooperation between
Governments and non-governmental organizations in
this area. We further hope that the international
community will intensify its efforts to mobilize the
necessary funds and the political will to protect
children, who are the mainstay of the present and the
hope for peace for the future.
Egypt is prepared to offer its full cooperation to
this end. The children deserve no less.
Mr. Khare (India): At the outset, we would like
to commend the Permanent Representative of Jamaica
and the members of the Bureau of the Preparatory
Committee for their tireless efforts in ensuring the
success of the forthcoming special session of the
General Assembly for follow-up to the World Summit
for Children. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (A/55/429), which
clearly brings out the need for mobilization of
additional resources to break the cycle of poverty in
one generation.
India’s achievement of the World Summit goals
has been positive, if not total. Certain areas which call
for
mission-oriented
goals — for
example,

16

immunization or water supply — depend on resources
and the provision of services, whereas other goals are
more complex and require attitudinal changes at the
community level and convergence from several sectors
and civil society partners. Democratic and open
processes of decision-making and implementation
require time for consensus-building and for motivating
people.
Understandably, such processes take longer and
are more difficult to bring to fruition, although, of
course, the gains obtained in a democratic set-up, with
the participation of all, are certainly more permanent
and easier to sustain. Under these circumstances, India
has made appreciable progress towards goals such as
immunization and literacy, whereas there has been less
progress in areas such as sanitation and the combat
against malnutrition. The commitment and continued
perseverance of the Government is firm, and we are
confident that we are progressing on the right track,
recognizing the need for decentralization and
convergence as two important planks for achieving
these goals.
State programmes of action on children in all
major states were devised after the National Plan of
Action was finalized in 1992. The process of
preparation of the state programmes, in which a rightsbased approach has been adopted, has allowed
subnational planning and ownership, and mobilization
of resources at the local level. We are already
implementing the National Plan of Action for the Girl
Child, prepared in the context of the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Decade of the Girl Child (1991-2000), under which
specific goals for girl children are given special
attention.
India has undertaken, with the cooperation of the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 53
multiple-indicator cluster surveys (MICS) at the state
and union territory levels to obtain information on
more than 80 indicators relevant to the condition of
women and children. The second National Family
Health Survey and the second generation of multipleindicator cluster surveys, together with a number of
existing and ongoing data-collection systems, will
provide reliable information on progress towards World
Summit goals at both the national and subnational
levels, and for preparing future actions that are based
on more accurate data.

A/55/PV.62

We have participated actively and constructively
with other delegations in both sessions of the
Preparatory Committee in February and May this year
and have carefully read its reports, contained in
document A/55/43. During this process, we have
carefully listened to the statements of other delegations
and have learnt from their experiences. Our views on
the key issues and trends that should be the focus of
our attention as we approach the special session are
well known. We would therefore very briefly refer to
only some of them.
We believe that the outcome of the special
session should be a focused, intergovernmentally
negotiated document which must be concise, short and
action-oriented. Some of the key ingredients that we
would wish to see in this document are the following.
First, steps should be taken to implement the
unfinished agenda of the World Summit for Children,
including crucial questions related to the mobilization
of resources. Second, agreement should be reached on
the efforts required at all levels for the eradication of
poverty. The central feature of our future actions in the
twenty-first century should be to break the vicious
circle of poverty that creates, and recreates,
undernourished infants, poorly educated young
children and marginalized adolescents, and leads to
unsafe and premature motherhood, all of which
fundamentally undermine the fulfilment of individual
rights.
Third, a strategy is needed to combat malnutrition
intergenerationally in children and infants, in
adolescents, and in pregnant and lactating mothers.
Fourth, there must be a reiteration of the importance of
literacy and education, including the promotion of the
values of compassion, tolerance and caring — values
which were resoundingly endorsed by our heads of
State or Government in the Millennium Declaration.
Fifth, we must focus on improving the quality of
the water supply and on the provision of better
sanitation facilities. Sixth, a focus is also required on
the special needs of adolescents, whose increasing
numbers represent a particularly important challenge.
And seventh, attention must be given to children in
special circumstances, including those affected by
terrorism and armed conflict, as well as child labour;
street children; delinquent children; and children
affected by HIV/AIDS.

In all of these areas, special attention should be
accorded to the girl child, whose growth and
development are of paramount importance for the wellbeing of the children of the next generation. Only this
approach can possibly secure appreciable gains within
a single generation.
The involvement of the community, not only in
structuring the future programmes, but also in their
implementation and monitoring, is also of great
importance.
In the belief that the special session will
contribute to the creation of a future of hope and
fulfilment for all the world’s children, we have cosponsored the draft resolution to be introduced by
Ambassador Durrant, Chairperson of the Preparatory
Committee, and we look forward to receiving the draft
of the proposed outcome from the Bureau of the
Preparatory Committee as early as possible, to ensure
its early finalization.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): Ten years after the
World Summit, the time is now right for the world to
renew its commitment to children. With its nearuniversal ratification, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child has undoubtedly become the centrepiece for
international and national action to protect and promote
the rights of the child. Moreover, the goals of the
Convention have been significantly bolstered this year
by the two landmark Optional Protocols, on the
involvement of children in armed conflicts and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. However, global mobilization is required
to ensure the spirit of the letter is transformed into
reality. Ratification of these instruments alone will not
suffice. The well-being of children requires political
action at the highest level, action that places children at
the heart of every political, social and economic
agenda.
The special session of the General Assembly on
children next year has a decisive role to play in
providing the international community with a unique
opportunity to take stock of its achievements to date
and to prepare itself for the evolving challenges to be
faced by children in the future. More importantly, it is
envisaged to be the most representative gathering for
children the world has ever seen. In a most
fundamental manner, this in itself will act as a catalyst
to restore the momentum needed to establish a longterm strategy with updated goals, thus bringing the

17

A/55/PV.62

Plan of Action from the World Summit for Children
into the twenty-first century. The modalities for
achieving this must be reviewed in the context of
evolving challenges, on the one hand, and of lessons
learned, on the other. Additionally, we should draw
from other initiatives which attempt to define a broad
framework of action with time-bound goals for
Governments in partnership with other actors, such as
the global Polio Eradication Initiative.
The Republic of Croatia attaches particular
importance to viewing the special session as a
comprehensive process rather than just as an event per
se. We see this process as issuing a clarion call for
integral social change, dissemination and dialogue, as
well as for raising awareness among all sectors of
society. It is here particularly that the preparatory
process, such as the national governmental reviews,
will play a crucial role as a vehicle by which we will
identify and determine future policies for children.
Furthermore, the outcomes of regional events and
national efforts will substantively enrich the whole
process, as well as the final outcome of the special
session itself.
In this respect, a national working group has been
established in the Republic of Croatia with the
exclusive mandate to prepare for active participation in
and follow-up to the special session. Furthermore,
under the new Government, a programme of change in
the Republic of Croatia has been instituted which is
committed to building a civil society under which
particular attention is being given to children and youth
for their harmonious development in a secure and
favourable environment. With this in mind, the
Republic of Croatia looks forward to working closely
with all relevant actors under the competent guidance
of the United Nations Children’s Fund, as the
substantive secretariat, in concerting its efforts and
political commitment towards ensuring a successful
agenda for this special session.
Our children are the future of the world, and the
millennium that is open in front of us belongs in
essence to them. We all want to make a difference for
our future generations, and our efforts must not stop
with the special session. Hence, promoting children’s
rights must remain high on the agenda. Transforming
this global commitment into a real challenge for
children remains a task that must engage everyone. The
seeds of new approaches are often to be found in the
children themselves, and their interests must

18

considered. If we are wise enough to allow them to
play their role in the whole process — and if this is
coupled with real commitment on the part of all other
pertinent actors — then perhaps we will be ready to
make long-term investments to guarantee the best
interests of all our children in the twenty-first century.
Mr. Dausá Céspedes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We have been participating with great interest in the
preparatory process for the special session to follow up
on the World Summit for Children, which is to be held
next September. The review of the commitments
undertaken in the September 1990 World Summit for
Children Declaration regarding the survival, protection
and development of the child should lead us to a
careful evaluation of the commitments made then that
have yet to be fulfilled, of what has to be done in order
to make real progress towards their fulfilment, of the
new challenges facing our children in the new
millennium and of how the international community
can now address these challenges.
We must shoulder our responsibility for the
present and future of humanity. We must avoid leaving
our children the rubble of a modern civilization that is
succumbing to extreme poverty, curable diseases and
the tragic and ever-expanding AIDS pandemic; to
malnutrition and high rates of infant mortality; to
armed conflicts and wars of all types; to the sale of and
trafficking in minors for whatever purposes; to child
prostitution and the physical and sexual abuse of
children, paedophilia, the use of children in
pornography and sexual tourism; to the illicit sale of
human tissues and organs for transplants; to the
exploitation of child labour and the lack of future
prospects for children who wander and live in the
streets in the company of drugs and delinquency.
The statistics offer eloquent proof of the reality
that confronts many children in the world today. More
than 11 million boys and girls under the age of five die
every year from diseases that in the overwhelming
majority of cases were preventable. In the third world
64 children out of every thousand live births die before
they reach one year of age. In the developing countries
as a whole, the mortality rate for children under five is
95 per thousand live births. Two out of five children in
third world countries suffer from stunted growth, and
one out of three are underweight for their age. Two
million girls are forced into prostitution. In the
developing countries about 250 million children under
the age of 15 have to work in order to survive. In

A/55/PV.62

addition, there is the tragic effect on children and
young people of the AIDS pandemic, which to date has
taken the lives of almost 4 million children under the
age of 15, most of them in sub-Saharan Africa. At the
end of 1999, 13.2 million children under the age of 15
throughout the world had lost a mother or both parents
to AIDS. By the same date, 860,000 children in subSaharan Africa had lost their teachers to this disease.
The efforts at the national level must be
accompanied by a new philosophy of international
solidarity that will make it possible to generate the
necessary resources to help developing countries
implement their national plans to follow up on the
Summit. To this end, official development assistance
(ODA) must finally reach the goals to which the
developed countries have committed themselves. The
commitment to “collective responsibility”, undertaken
by our heads of State in the Millennium Declaration,
must be translated into reality.
If we really want to bring about a world in which
boys and girls enjoy their rights, we have to change the
unfair global economic order, which works for 20 per
cent of the population but excludes and degrades the
remaining 80 per cent. The scourge of the external debt
undermines the right to development of the countries
of the South, destabilizing their economies and forcing
them to divert their scarce resources to external debt
repayment and servicing, to the detriment of economic
and social development. As UNICEF has rightly said,
indebtedness has the face of a child, because children
pay the highest price for its damaging consequences.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report on the
preparations for the special session, globalization has
had negative impacts; it has brought about tremendous
exclusion for children. The challenge is to transform
this process into a positive force, whose benefits would
reach all on an equal footing and would bring about
economic and social development for all, and not only
for the wealthiest and most advanced countries, as it
has up to now.
The key to progress towards resolving the most
serious problems of our children is still to eliminate
poverty, malnutrition and disease. Even if we have to
redouble our efforts to bring about the harmonious and
integral development of children as human beings, we
cannot give up our efforts to bring about progress in
their education and training, in the active participation
of children and teenagers in processes of direct

importance to them, and in the struggle to secure the
requisite social services for all, a realistic objective for
a significant percentage of children in the world,
unfortunately reduced to mere survival.
In the context of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the commitments undertaken by the
international community to confront the serious
problems and needs of children and teenagers in the
world are more important than ever. In this sense, Cuba
welcomes the adoption this year of the two Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
on the participation of children in armed conflict and
on the sale of children, prostitution and child
pornography, which we have signed as part of our
policy of cooperation with human rights instruments
and as part of our firm commitment to the progress and
well-being of children.
With deep pride, we point to the progress that has
been made in my country with regard to children. From
the beginning of life, in Cuba no effort is spared to
ensure that each child — boy or girl — has access to
integral development. All Cuban children and youth
have free access to schools and teachers. Over the past
40 years, excellent doctors have been trained, as well
as paramedical personnel, who, in addition to
protecting the health and welfare of the Cuban
population on a cost-free basis, have given generous
help in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Despite the economic war waged against my
country for nearly four decades through the illegal and
criminal blockade by the United States Government,
Cuba has shown that it is possible to carry out social
assistance programmes, based on the principles of
equality and social justice. Cuba has made remarkable
achievements, such as eliminating illiteracy, raising
school attendance to 98 per cent in basic education up
to ninth grade, and reducing infant mortality to 6.4 in
every thousand live births. We also have a child
immunization programme that averts 12 diseases
preventable
by
vaccination.
The
vaccination
programme has enabled us to completely eradicate
diphtheria, poliomyelitis, neo-natal and infantile
tetanus, meningitis and tuberculosis, among other
curable diseases.
Between 9 and 13 October last, the Fifth
Ministerial Meeting on Children and Social Policy in
the Americas was held in Kingston, Jamaica. This
preparatory regional meeting for the special session for

19

A/55/PV.62

follow-up to the World Summit produced the Kingston
consensus. My country supports the consensus and is
committed to working on its basis with the other
countries of the region, to provide input for the
outcome document of the review process.
Finally, José Martí, Cuba’s national hero, said
“Children are the hope of the world”. It is our historic
collective responsibility to return hope to the millions
of children who are without it now.
Mr. Picasso (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Ten years
after the World Summit for Children, we can assert that
the Latin American and Caribbean region has made
important progress with regard to the goals set in 1990.
This should lead us to reflect that the international
community should understand that the development
and protection of the rights of children are an essential
part of human development, not only because of their
high ethical and moral content, but because the
promotion and defence of children are essential to the
social and economic growth of any society.
At the regional level, the Children’s Summit and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child promoted a
series of social changes designed to bring about greater
respect for and recognition of the rights of children and
youth, reflected in an improvement in the standards of
living of these two groups. The experience of these
years shows us that political commitment and setting
specific goals have a great mobilizing effect, to which
we can add, among other outstanding elements,
coordinated work with grassroots organizations and
movements dedicated to children and youth.
As a result of Government priorities in public
policy in the social area, successive unpublicized
ministerial meetings of persons responsible for
children were held in order to evaluate policy and share
and promote national policies and commitments at the
international level. This mechanism has been very
useful in strengthening the interest of countries in this
sensitive area, as well as in taking advantage of
experience in different societies.
In 1998, Peru was the venue of the fourth
Ministerial Conference of the Americas on Children
and Social Policies, which offered an opportunity for
the countries of the region to reaffirm their
commitment to continue applying their best efforts to
the needs and priorities of infants and adolescents. This
responsibility brought with it assumption of the task of
serving as regional temporary secretariat on children.

20

During the past two years, we have continued to need
to count on integral regional work, enabling us to know
the specific achievements and goals of the last decade.
For this purpose, we worked jointly with an interagency committee headed by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to transform this task into a
reality. With the contributions of the countries of the
Latin American and Caribbean region, we were able to
deliver this report at the last Ministerial Meeting of the
decade, held a few weeks ago in Kingston, Jamaica.
We believe that this supports our work, and we will, of
course, soon share it with all United Nations Member
States.
The outcome of the fifth Ministerial Meeting on
Children and Social Policy in the Americas, held in
Jamaica, is also relevant for having provided the region
with another opportunity to evaluate and compare
experience related to progress and problems in their
respective national programmes. On that occasion, we
adopted a document entitled the Kingston Consensus,
which not only reflects the regional plan of action on
this subject, but also contains a set of specific
guidelines for the negotiating process on the special
session on children to be held in New York in
September next year.
Children and young people in Latin America and
the Caribbean today enjoy a higher probability of
survival, of living in homes provided with basic
services, of being fed healthy food and of attending
school. We must acknowledge, however, that no
marked progress has been achieved in terms of
maternal mortality and the reduction of illiteracy.
These are spheres that involve mainly women, but
which have an impact on the family and on the life of
the nation. This reflects the fact that gender differences
continue to influence such basic areas as nutrition,
primary education and survival, among others.
On a national level, the progress that my
Government has been making to improve the quality of
life of boys, girls and adolescents in general has
depended on the valuable participation of civil society
and non-governmental organizations. This has been
articulated through the Ministry of Women’s Affairs
and Human Development. This sector assumes the
duties of a governing body of the national system for
the comprehensive care of children and youth. It works
with decentralized public institutions in the sectors of
health, education, labour, and justice, as well as with
local Governments and administrative units in each

A/55/PV.62

sector. It thereby seeks to be directly in touch with the
needs of the community in order to address its
problems and needs and to prevent violations of and
promote the basic rights of individuals, particularly
during infancy and adolescence. To that end, the
Government has designed the 1996-2000 national plan
of action for children, the 1998-2000 national nutrition
and food plan and the 1998-2002 national population
plan. The goal of the national plan of action for
children is to promote and safeguard the full
application of the rights of boys and girls and to
contribute to a poverty-eradication strategy with
survival, development and protection as its goals.
To briefly refer to the legal sphere of protection,
a new code for children and adolescents has recently
been enacted. Since 1993, public defender offices for
children and adolescents have been operating to
safeguard the rights recognized by legislation, focusing
on the elimination of child abuse and domestic
violence. They also perform counselling and
information work.
The protection and development of children and
youth entail the elimination of violence against women
and within the family, since violence is the result of the
asymmetric relationship caused by inequality. It is
therefore necessary to strengthen the status of women
and disadvantaged groups by raising their standards of
living, thus allowing them better access to and
opportunities for development.
In the area of education, the Constitution
guarantees access to mandatory education at the initial,
primary and secondary levels. Education is free of
charge in government institutions at the various levels,
including the higher level of public universities.
Among the priorities of the Peruvian Government in
this field are the elimination of illiteracy and the
promotion of intercultural education to preserve the
varied cultural and linguistic expressions of the
country. In this sense, I wish to mention that our
national literacy programme received the King Sejong
Literacy Prize from the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization in 1999 for having
introduced elements for the prevention of family
violence, reproductive health and entrepreneurial
management into the curriculum. To improve the
quality of education, we seek to expand educational
coverage, to reduce the percentage of boys, girls and
youth who are compelled to enter school at a late age,
and to lower the dropout rate.

The national programme to care for orphans of
terrorist violence was created in 1999 to offer
comprehensive protection through social, productive
and psychological development activities for children
and youth affected by the terrorist violence that was a
scourge of the country for many years.
Finally, with regard to child labour, an ongoing
subject of international debate, Peru does not permit
teenagers to work full-time. However, our reality is not
fully in accordance with the standards, since it is very
difficult to achieve a change in mentality and to outlaw
traditional practices. That is why campaigns are under
way to make the community aware of the rights of
boys, girls and youths. We are also developing
programmes to discourage child labour and to protect
working conditions for teenagers.
The interest of the Peruvian Government in
promoting and protecting the rights of boys, girls and
youths is also reflected in its recent signing of the
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the participation of children in armed
conflict and the sale of children, child prostitution and
child pornography.
Lastly, I wish to reassert Peru’s commitment to
the promotion and protection of boys, girls and
adolescents, a measure that must be undertaken with
the greatest responsibility, for it is a moral obligation
to coming generations, the citizens of the future and
the richest potential of any society.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
speak on behalf of the European Union. The countries
of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as Iceland and
Liechtenstein, align themselves with this statement.
The World Summit for Children, which coincided
with the implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child in 1990, marked a very important
and ambitious stage in the process of improving the
welfare of children in the world. The Convention on
the Rights of the Child was in itself one of the most
important outcomes of the last decade in terms of the
implementation of the rights of the child throughout
the world.

21

A/55/PV.62

The World Summit for Children stood out from
the other international conferences and meetings on
social issues held over the past 10 years, first by virtue
of the concise and specific nature of the undertakings
contained in the World Declaration and Plan of Action,
and secondly by virtue of the measures to follow up
and oversee progress achieved, in the form of both a
mid-term review in 1996 and a regular report to the
Executive Board of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) every year since 1992.
The special session of the General Assembly to
be held next year as a follow-up to the World Summit
should, like the Summit itself, be innovative in its
approach, ambitious in its targets, pragmatic in its
results and totally focused on seeking ways to improve
the situation of children.
The European Union is glad that even before the
convening of this special session significant decisions
to benefit children have been taken at the United
Nations recently. In particular, there was the General
Assembly’s adoption in May of the optional protocols
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. Similarly, the adoption by the General
Conference in June 1999 of the International Labour
Organization Convention 182 on the worst forms of
child labour is a major development for the rights of
children. The European Union calls on all States to
sign, ratify and implement these new instruments as
soon as possible.
The Millennium Declaration, adopted by the
heads of State and Government at the Millennium
Summit, contains several important commitments
concerning the rights of the child, covering access to
education; reducing maternal and infant mortality;
combating communicable diseases, in particular AIDS;
assistance for children orphaned by AIDS; sustainable
development; and protection of the rights of the child.
The Millennium Declaration also underlines the
importance of protecting children against the
consequences of armed conflict. The European Union
is convinced that these commitments, which
complement those of the World Summit for Children,
should be taken fully into account in preparations for
the special session in 2001, when the international
community will be asked to renew its determination to
improve the rights and welfare of children.

22

The European Union sets great store by the
completion
of
an
objective,
accurate
and
uncompromising review of the implementation,
10 years on, of the undertakings entered into at the
World Summit. The national reports which States have
been requested to forward to the Secretariat of the
Preparatory Committee by December will be a vital
source of information in conducting such a review. The
European Union hopes that the Secretariat will receive
many such reports, with statistical annexes, so that the
fullest and most accurate review possible can be made
with a view to discussions of the subject at the next
Preparatory Committee meeting and at the special
session itself.
The European Union believes that, as well as
reviewing the last 10 years in terms of the
commitments made and targets set at the World
Summit, next year’s special session should also take
account of the new or emerging child-related problems
which were not properly dealt with in 1990. The
emerging issues include poverty; armed conflict and
other forms of violence; discrimination, particularly
against women and girls; and AIDS and its devastating
implications for the situation of children. One of the
conclusions of a recent seminar in Africa on the
question of the rights of the child and AIDS was that
children and young people were particularly exposed to
infection owing to the lack of proper sex education.
The European Union considers it crucial that children
and pre-pubescent youngsters should be given sound
and appropriate information on their rights and their
sexual health. We also believe that we should step up
our efforts on matters on which we have been taking
action for longer, but which are still a priority, such as
combating child labour or promoting better access to
education for children, particularly girls.
The European Union, as it has already stated at
the initial preparatory meetings, hopes that all the
institutions concerned in one way or another with
children, both inside and outside the United Nations
system, will become involved. We are also keen to see
the participation of experts, research bodies and
academic institutions that take an interest in children’s
issues.
And of course children themselves, who are the
most concerned, must be able to make their voices
clearly heard in the preparation of the decisions
concerning them, and must be assured of a significant
role in the special session. That children have a right to

A/55/PV.62

express themselves is one of the commitments made by
the signatories of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
Participation by non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in the preparatory process and the special
session seems to us essential to the full success of the
session. In this context, we welcome the proposals
adopted by the Preparatory Committee on the
accreditation of NGOs. We hope that the issue of how
NGOs are to participate in the September 2001 session
will rapidly be resolved in a way which will enable
them to play their full part in a debate in which their
experience and commitment to children are
indispensable.
We feel that preparatory conferences at the
regional level can play an essential part in ensuring the
widest possible preparation for the September 2001
deadline and in effectively mobilizing all the
participants. The European Union welcomes the fact
that such meetings have been scheduled in Africa, Asia
and Latin America. As part of its own preparation, the
European Union has planned several meetings designed
to consolidate its regional approach to children’s
issues. One such meeting is the seminar I have already
mentioned, which was recently organized with the
African countries on the rights of the child and AIDS.
On 20 November, the anniversary of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, a meeting in Paris of all
European Ministers responsible for children will give a
European dimension to Universal Children’s Day. This
will provide the opportunity for an appraisal of how the
Convention on the Rights of the Child is being applied
in relation to certain jointly determined issues and to
launch initiatives to step up member States’
cooperation with regard to children. Next year further
similar meetings will be held in the European context.
We expect the special session to adopt a clear,
concise final document, which should reflect the
political will of the international community and not
only reaffirm the validity of the commitments already
entered into, but also propose the necessary measures
to
overcome
the
obstacles
encountered
in
implementing the 1990 Plan and launch new action on
the basis of the emerging issues.
In this context, the draft document currently
being prepared on the Bureau’s responsibility, with the
help of UNICEF, is of particular importance. We
understand that the draft should be sent to

Governments in the next few days so that initial
reactions can be discussed at the forthcoming meeting
of the Preparatory Committee. The European Union is
anxious to receive the draft as soon as possible to
enable it to determine its positions for that meeting.
The European Union takes this opportunity to pay
tribute once again to UNICEF’s vigilance each year in
following up the World Summit, for its decisive
contribution to the preparation of the 2001 session and
for the efficiency and dedication with which
Ms. Bellamy and her team carry out the Secretariat
duties entrusted to them.
In conclusion, the European Union looks forward
to the adoption by consensus of the draft resolution
submitted to the Assembly by the Bureau of the
Preparatory Committee, incorporating the draft
decisions adopted by the Preparatory Committee at its
last meeting.
Mrs. Stanik (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): It is a
great honour for me to speak on this subject on behalf
of the GUUAM group of countries: Georgia, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova.
Children have always been and remain at the
centre of attention and concern in human society
because they are the ones who determine its future
development. The well-being of society in turn
depends on its attitude towards children, on how it
meets the interests and needs of children, how it
understands their problems and how it responds to
them
In September 1990, heads of State and
Government met at the World Summit to examine the
situation of children in the world and to join their
efforts to ensure the survival, protection and
development of children. As a result of this meeting,
the World Declaration and Plan of Action were adopted
and then approved by 181 countries. Today, looking at
the past decade we can see what have been the
successes and failures in their implementation.
The most significant contribution of States to
protecting and encouraging the rights of children was
the universal ratification of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Quite recently, the Convention was
supplemented by two Optional Protocols on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography.

23

A/55/PV.62

The process of accession by Member States to
these documents give us reason to hope that they will
receive the same broad support as the Convention
itself.
Several of the GUUAM States have already
signed both Optional Protocols and the others will do
so in the near future.
However, in spite of efforts by the international
community, we are all still far from the day when the
rights of the child become a reality throughout the
world. Children are still the most unprotected and
vulnerable part of our population. They continue to die
from HIV infections and other diseases, are still
victims of violence and sexual exploitation, and are
sent to work at an early age and under difficult
conditions.
In some parts of the world they have no access to
medical services, nor even to food or drinking water.
Armed conflicts have a particularly negative
effect on children, as do acts of aggression and foreign
occupation. They turn them into refugees and forcibly
displaced persons. Even if they can return home great
damage is done at a moral level, which will be very
difficult to heal. Another problem is that of hostages. It
is no accident that the Commission on the Status of
Women has for several years adopted a resolution
entitled “Release of women and children taken hostage,
including those subsequently imprisoned, in armed
conflicts”, calling for the immediate and unconditional
release of all women and children who have been taken
hostage. In this connection, the GUAAM countries feel
that the special session of the General Assembly will
be a very important and a timely forum for the world
community to analyse the achievements of the Plan of
Action, to renew its obligations and to take on new
ones in the twenty-first century.
Our Governments have always considered the
problems related to the protection of the interests of
children to be a priority of our national policies. In our
countries we have established legal mechanisms to
implement the provisions of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the decisions adopted at the
World Summit. We are developing comprehensive
programmes, whose main areas are the creation of
proper conditions for overall development of children,
the assurance of legal and social protection and broadranging access to education and medical care.
Particular attention by each State is being given to the

24

most vulnerable categories of children, including
orphans, children with no parental care, invalids and
also children of very poor families. These programmes
have been rather successful but, at the same time, our
countries continue to encounter serious difficulties.
Our States have only existed for 10 years. In
trying to form a democratic society and the bases for a
socially oriented economy and to achieve integration
into world processes, we have encountered both
internal and external difficulties. As you know, we
inherited structurally distorted economies financial and
banking systems in need of reform, huge debts and
deficits in our balances of payments. This situation is
made worse by the environmental crisis in some
countries, armed conflicts in other countries, and
unstable situations along the borders of others.
Ukraine, for example, continues to be preoccupied with
the negative consequences of the Chernobyl
catastrophe, which has led to many serious and
dangerous diseases that are a threat to mothers and
children.
In our statement we have only touched upon a
few of the vital problems concerned with the situation
of children in our countries. Previous speakers have
demonstrated that each State and each region has its
own difficulties, its own specifics, and yet most of the
questions are global. Their solution is only possible by
joint efforts.
A special session of the General Assembly in
2001 should provide the impetus for concentrated and
combined efforts on the part of the world community to
deal with the obstacles of today and the challenges of
tomorrow. Our delegations expect that the results of the
forum will be directed towards specific practical
results.
The future plan of action should be innovative,
concise and comprehensive. It should take into account
the interests of the industrial developed countries and
the developing countries, as well as the countries in
transition.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
and fully share his view of the value of a
comprehensive approach to ensuring the rights and
well-being of children. We also agree with the set of
new questions which have been proposed for the final
document: enjoying the benefits and avoiding the
negative consequences of globalization; breaking the
cycle of poverty in the life of a generation; protecting

A/55/PV.62

vulnerable children; the participation of children and
young people in decision making; the well-being of
women; education of girls; and the fight against
various diseases, including HIV infection.
In connection with HIV/AIDS, I should like to
recall the recent initiative by Ukraine, supported by 97
countries, to hold a special session of the General
Assembly in June next year to deal with the problems
of HIV/AIDS. We think it is necessary to establish
close links between both international forums on
questions concerning ways to overcome this plague of
the twenty-first century. The strategies produced at the
twenty-fifth special session of the General Assembly
should be taken into account in the twenty-sixth
session in elaborating the strategy to combat AIDS
with respect to children.
The GUAAM countries highly appreciate the role
of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in
the process of preparing the forthcoming forum. Taking
advantage of this opportunity I would like to thank the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Carol Bellamy, for
her personal enormous contribution to this work.
On behalf of all our delegations, I would like to
assure the Assembly that Azerbaijan, Georgia, the
Republic of Moldova, Ukraine and Uzbekistan will
continue to participate actively in the preparatory
process for the special session and the forum.
Quite recently, the heads of State and
Government at the Millennium Summit adopted a
Declaration containing a strategy and tactics for the
construction of the world in the twenty-first century —
a world free of war and violence, poverty and disease;
a world of security, justice and happiness. Today’s
generation of children will have to build such a world,
implementing the decisions adopted by the United
Nations in these historic days.
What will these children be like? Will they be
able to meet the challenges of globalization, overcome
the environmental and economic problems and provide
social progress, rights and freedom for all people? Will
they have the strength in a few years to assume
responsibility for the future of mankind? We have a
year to work out positive solutions to these questions.
Mr. Mangachi (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation is gratified that in September next year
the General Assembly will convene a special session
for follow-up to the World Summit for Children. In this

connection, I wish to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the report on the agenda item
before the Assembly, contained in document A/55/429,
as well as the report of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) entitled “Emerging issues for children
in the twenty-first century”, contained in document
A/AC.256/3. These reports are important inputs to the
preparatory process for the special session to review
the World Summit for Children.
I wish also to express appreciation to the German
delegation for coordinating in a constructive manner
the draft resolution on this agenda item.
The special session to review the World Summit
for Children will afford us an opportunity for appraisal
of the implementation of the goals contained in the
Declaration and Plan of Action of the World Summit
for Children, adopted a decade ago. The special session
will also provide us with an opportunity to rededicate
ourselves to fulfilling the commitments we made in
1990 and to undertaking a renewed commitment to
finding new practical ways of solving problems that
continue to face our children.
The analysis done by UNICEF indicates that over
the last 10 years progress has been made in the
ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. All Governments except two have ratified this
important Convention. However, children, particularly
those in the developing countries, continue to face
serious challenges, such as deepening poverty and
greater inequality; proliferating conflicts and violence;
the deadly spread of HIV/AIDS and continuing
discrimination, particularly against women and girls.
Given this serious situation, it is imperative that the
special session should address these issues on an
urgent basis.
As we prepare for the special session, we should
especially analyse the challenges that have impeded the
attainment of the goals of the World Summit for
Children and the measures that need to be taken to
overcome those obstacles in the future.
One reason poor countries have failed to carry
out the goals of the World Summit for Children is the
prevalence of abject poverty. Children are hardest hit
by poverty. Some of the major causes of poverty in
developing countries include, among other things, debt,
declining official development assistance, lack of
market access for their goods in developed countries,

25

A/55/PV.62

low commodity prices and health problems, including
the HIV/AIDS pandemic, malaria and tuberculosis.
Concerning debt, for example, a recent survey
carried out by UNICEF and the United Nations
Development Programme found that two thirds of the
developing countries spend more on external debt
servicing than on basic social services and noted that
“to spend more on external debt than on basic
social services — when hundreds of millions of
children lack access to basic education, primary
health care, adequate food and safe drinking
water — is not just morally wrong, it does not
make economic sense”.
We therefore expect that the special session will
discuss various measures to address the abovementioned problems, including international support
for poverty eradication programmes in developing
countries.
Concerning HIV/AIDS, at the time of the World
Summit for Children, the ramifications of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic had not yet been fully realized.
Having started with the first three victims that it
claimed in 1983, when it first surfaced in my country,
the pandemic now claims one out of every ten people,
most of whom are young people. At present half of all
new infections occur mainly in the age group of people
10 to 24 years old. The cumulative effect of this
phenomenon on the nation is enormous. Furthermore, it
is generally recognized that there are three ways of
spreading infection. Transmission of the disease from
mother to child during pregnancy or breastfeeding is,
in our opinion, one of the cruellest forms of infection.
It is heart-wrenching to note that HIV/AIDS has
created 11 million orphans worldwide. It is
catastrophic that 90 per cent of these orphans are in
Africa. We hope that the special session will come up
with strategies that will aim at curtailing the spread of
the pandemic so as to reduce its impact on children. We
would like to see the special session on HIV/ AIDS,
scheduled for June 2001, feeding into the special
session on children so as to build synergies in this
respect.
The last 10 years have been fraught with conflicts
in many parts of the world. Africa, too, has had its
share of conflicts, whose impact on children has been
as wide as it has been traumatic. During times of armed
conflict we witness massive violations of human rights,
and at times children have been drawn into conflicts

26

without regard for their rights. While we applaud the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict in bringing to
light the violations of children’s rights in situations of
armed conflict, we hope that the special session will
build on the foundation laid by the Special
Representative to institute a coherent framework for
States’ conduct in times of armed conflicts.
Associated with conflict is the problem of
refugees. As a host country to refugees for over 40
years, my Government is in a good position to
appreciate the traumatic effects of conflict on refugee
children. Not only are the children uprooted from
familiar surroundings, their childhood is interrupted as
they flee to refuge, and at times they are violated while
in flight. The scars inflicted on such children
sometimes stay with them for life. We note with
concern the assertion in Mrs. Graça Machel’s report
that armed conflicts kill and maim more children than
soldiers. It is in this context that we support the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflicts. We also believe that the ratification of the
International Criminal Court Statute will provide the
critical instrument for ending impunity and human
rights violations against children.
Today the world has the knowledge, the financial
resources and the technology to be able to guarantee
support and critical interventions on behalf of children.
As the special session meets in September next year to
assess the progress of the last 10 years, we need to
harness more than resources. We need to ensure that
political will, at both the national and international
levels, is sharpened so as to harness international
cooperation aimed at breaking the stranglehold of
poverty on poor countries. We need to appreciate the
fact that while the world is not homogeneous, it
nonetheless needs concerted efforts by all stakeholders
in order to promote and protect the rights of children.
We laid a solid foundation for children in 1989
with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and in
1990 with the World Summit for Children. We hope
that the special session will afford us the opportunity to
find meaningful ways of fulfilling the commitments
towards the full enjoyment of the rights of every child.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Ten years ago, the largest
gathering of world leaders in history until that time
agreed on the Declaration on the Survival, Protection

A/55/PV.62

and Development of Children and a Plan of Action to
implement that Declaration in the 1990s. The
Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted only
one year earlier, had set the foundation for the World
Summit for Children, which in turn represented the
first global action towards its implementation. Since
1990, many positive developments have taken place at
the national, regional and international levels. Those
developments are proof of the meaningful interaction
of the World Summit for Children and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. The Convention, which has
achieved almost universal ratification, emphasizes the
child as a bearer of rights who is entitled to a life free
of discrimination, violence and exclusion, who needs
to be protected and cared for and whose voice must be
heard.
The process set up by the Convention and the
World Summit led to greater international awareness
and to ever-greater attention to children’s rights and
needs. Almost all of the major United Nations global
conferences of the 1990s and their review processes
addressed this issue. New international standards were
also established, including the International Labour
Organization (ILO) Convention to Eliminate the Worst
Forms of Child Labour, the Statute of the International
Criminal Court and, most recently, the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. At the national level, legal and policy
measures were put in place in order to implement the
Convention and to meet the targets set by the World
Summit.
Nevertheless, the situation of children around the
world is far from what was envisaged in the
Convention and in the World Summit Declaration and
Plan of Action. There continue to be major challenges
in areas such as maternal and infant mortality,
malnutrition, education — particularly that of girls —
access to safe drinking water and sanitation, the
HIV/AIDS pandemic and the lack of resources.
In a commentary entitled “The time to sow”,
contained in The Progress of Nations 2000, Carol
Bellamy, the Executive Director of United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), states that
“Poverty continues to enslave huge
populations, denying 1.2 billion people — 600

million of them children — good health and
productive lives.”
The momentum created by the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the holding
of the World Summit for Children must be kept alive if
we are to fulfil our commitment to give every child a
better future. Brazil, whose population encompasses a
very large number of children, once more reaffirms that
commitment. We have already achieved most of the
goals set by the World Summit for Children. Maternal
and infant mortality rates have been drastically
reduced. The enrolment rate for basic education is at
96 per cent, and the gender gap in education has been
closed. Poliomyelitis has been eradicated. Vaccination
campaigns have reached more children than ever, and
the goals regarding health, reducing malnutrition, and
sanitation are within reach.
We are aware, however, that there is still much to
be done. To protect the rights of children and to meet
the needs and fulfil the hopes of every child is our
ambition and our goal. To that end, the forthcoming
special session of the General Assembly in 2001 to
follow-up the World Summit for Children can make a
major contribution. It is an opportunity to address old
problems as well as new challenges, and to propose
further actions.
We are thankful to UNICEF for the guidance it
has so far provided to the national evaluation process
and for its role as the substantive secretariat for the
international preparatory process. We would also like
to express our appreciation for the manner in which
Ambassador
Patricia
Durrant,
Permanent
Representative of Jamaica, is conducting the work of
the Preparatory Committee.
We are confident that the special session will
adopt a new agenda for children that will uphold the
rights of children as the paramount focus of national
and international efforts in the next century.
Mr. Isakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The forthcoming special session of the
General Assembly, to be held next year, is called upon
not only to assess the outcome of a decade of efforts by
the international community to implement the
decisions of the World Summit for Children, but
primarily to define tasks in this sphere for the future.
In the Russian Federation the issue of protecting
mothers and children is among the specific priorities of

27

A/55/PV.62

State policy. That is why the top leaders of the country
attach paramount importance to international
cooperation in this sphere. In a personal letter to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), Carol Bellamy, Russian President
Vladimir Putin emphasized our determined intention to
develop constructive interaction with UNICEF in the
interests of all children and young people. This is the
central element of the Russian Federation’s position
regarding the preparation for the forthcoming special
session of the General Assembly devoted to children’s
issues.
It is with satisfaction that we note the
considerable work done by the UNICEF secretariat on
the preparation for the special session. We welcome the
targeted orientation of this process to seek out
consensus among a wide circle of partners on the
issues of the rights of the child and the development of
their human potential. We are convinced that, together
with UNICEF, the various organizations of the United
Nations system that are in one way or another
concerned with children’s issues should make their
contribution to the preparation of the special session
and, in particular, to the drafting of its concluding
documents. In this regard, Russia attaches an especially
important role to the regional commissions, and
primarily to the Economic Commission for Europe and
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific.
Within the framework of preparation for the
special session, it is necessary to continue actively to
involve Governments, United Nations organizations,
the Bretton Woods institutions, non-governmental
organizations and civil society partners — including
trade unions, the private sector, mass media and
universities — to develop an optimum policy in the
interest of children at the national, regional and
international levels.
The report of the Preparatory Committee
(A/55/43, part II) covers the work already done on the
preparation for the special session. With good reason, it
focuses attention on the problems of poverty,
inequality, the proliferation of conflicts, the spread of
HIV/AIDS, continuing discrimination against women
and girls and other forms of social injustice as basic
obstacles to the follow-up to the World Summit for
Children. In our opinion, it is precisely these problems
that should be at the centre of the international

28

community’s attention in developing measures in the
interests of children.
That will also require an integrated approach to
the promotion of the rights and well-being of children
and adolescents that includes three key policy areas:
creating favourable conditions for all children to have a
good start in life; providing them with opportunities to
get a good education; and creating favourable
opportunities for adolescents to fully develop their
individual capacities.
At the same time, special attention should be paid
to children in dire situations. We agree with the
report’s recommendation that clear-cut criteria be
identified for assessing progress in the implementation
of the Summit goals. It is necessary also to make more
effective use of experts to develop strategies in the
interest of children that will aim for realistic results
that can be objectively assessed. In the interest of
children, clearly, such recommendations should be
reflected in the agenda for the future and in the future
actions to be adopted at the special session.
The entry into force of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child created a solid legal basis for future
action by the international community in the interest of
children and of the protection of their rights. The final
document of the special session should aspire to full
implementation, in practice, of all the provisions of the
Convention in the interest of the children of all
Member States. We consider that the outcome
documents of the forthcoming special session should
meet the criterion of universality and should address
the problems faced by children throughout the world:
in developing countries, especially in Africa, in
developed industrialized countries and in States in
transition.
One of the key elements of preparatory work for
the special session is the holding of regional events,
enabling us to coordinate the interests of all countries
and to take specific regional conditions into account
when the international community formulates global
plans of pro-child action. In that connection, we think
it would be useful and important to hold a preparatory
event for countries of Central and Eastern Europe,
members of the Commonwealth of Independent States
and the Baltic States. Those countries share similarities
with regard to the situation of children and related
issues; these are defined first and foremost by the
economic hardships of the transition period, relating

A/55/PV.62

especially to the situation of particularly vulnerable
groups of children and of children who are in the
charge of the State social security system.
Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to address the General Assembly today on
behalf of the Viet Nam delegation to add our voice to
the discussion of preparations for the General
Assembly’s special session on children, to be held in
September next year. Let me first register my country’s
strong support for and full commitment to making the
special session a great success. In that context, I would
like to thank Ambassador Durrant of Jamaica and her
Bureau for their leading role in carrying out the work
of the Preparatory Committee, and to the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for its tireless
support throughout the whole process.

States that have not ratified the Convention to do so as
soon as possible.
The welfare of children, however, cannot be
promoted separately from a country’s socio-economic
development process. Therefore, my country is of the
view that the review and assessment of the
implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit
at all levels, as well as the future actions to be defined
by the special session, must be closely linked with
socio-economic development policies. In view of the
formidable challenges of globalization, especially for
developing countries, it is highly important for us to
find ways and means to build our capacity to sustain
our hard-earned achievements in protecting and
promoting our children’s rights and welfare, and to
move forward in the next centuries.

In 10 years of implementing the World
Declaration on the Survival, Protection and
Development of Children and Plan of Action for
Implementing the World Declaration in the 1990s, we
have witnessed remarkable progress in various areas.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child has been
ratified by 191 countries, which clearly demonstrates
almost universal political will and commitment to the
protection and promotion of the fundamental rights of
children. We also recognize many achievements in the
fields of health and education for children. But we are
not yet able to say that we have attained the World
Summit goals.

With a view to ensuring total success for the
special session on children and for its follow-up, we
support all efforts to find creative ways to mobilize
constructive participation and contributions by all
Member States, by the United Nations system, by other
international organizations and by all other relevant
actors, including non-governmental organizations, in
implementing the Plan of Action and preparing for the
special session.

Moreover, we are now faced with even greater
obstacles and challenges, such as deepening poverty
and inequity, the growing burden of external debt,
discrimination and violence, environmental problems,
the explosive spread of HIV/AIDS and the
proliferation of armed conflict. We need to step up the
review and assessment process at all national, regional
and international levels to come to a common
understanding of existing obstacles and emerging
issues for child welfare in the twenty-first century, in
order to determine appropriate future action.

Mr. Leiro (Norway): The preparations for the
2001 special session of the General Assembly to follow
up the World Summit for Children are now well under
way. Many important events have taken place that have
contributed significantly to the preparations for the
special session, and many more are planned for the
next 10 months. It is particularly exciting to note all
the activities taking place in the various regions.
However, much work remains to be done as we enter
the final months of preparation.

My country supports a rights-based approach in
our efforts to realize the goals of the World Summit for
Children. Thus, it is vital for all States parties to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child to implement
fully their obligations under the Convention. The
assessment of the 10 years of implementation of the
Convention should be an essential element in the
preparations for the special session. We also call upon

The national reports are an important component
of the preparatory process. Those reports will serve as
input for the Secretary-General’s report to the special
session. National reports should also be used by the
Bureau and the Secretariat in formulating the outcome
document. The first draft of the outcome document will
be completed prior to the submission of the national
reports. That means that the process of finalizing the
outcome document must be sufficiently flexible to

Viet Nam supports the draft resolution before the
General Assembly this year under item 42 and will
work cooperatively in the preparatory process leading
to the special session on children.

29

A/55/PV.62

allow for the inclusion of any new relevant information
from national reports.
But the preparation of national reports is a
valuable process in own right. It allows each Member
State to take stock of its own progress in fulfilling the
goals of the World Summit for Children. That in turn
facilitates the translation of the outcome document into
national strategies and plans of action. Norway looks
forward to receiving the first draft of the outcome
document, which should be ready shortly.
The views and requests voiced at the substantive
Preparatory Committee meeting are nicely summarized
in the Secretary-General’s report on the state of
preparations for the special session. Norway would like
to join others in reiterating that the outcome document
should be innovative, concise and action-oriented. It is
important that the document be one that we can commit
ourselves to with the same motivation and enthusiasm
that was displayed at the World Summit for Children.
The outcome document should build on the
results of the World Summit for Children by addressing
the obstacles that stand in the way of achieving the
goals established in 1990. It should also take into
consideration the challenges that have emerged since
then. This includes rising rates of poverty and
disparity, the proliferation of conflicts and the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. Greater attention also needs to
be given to addressing violations of children’s rights.
The outcome document must be based on the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. It must address
the principles underpinning the Convention, including
the best interests of the child, children’s participation
and non-discrimination. The Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women is also an important tool for ensuring that girls
and women are not discriminated against.
Resolution
54/93
invited
all
relevant
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
to participate actively in the preparations for the
special session. The Executive Director of UNICEF,
Carol Bellamy, invited all relevant United Nations
organizations to contribute to the Secretary-General’s
report. These contributions are very valuable for the
preparatory process.
The participation of the various United Nations
organizations should not, however, be limited to
providing input to the Secretary-General’s report. Their

30

input is necessary throughout the preparatory process,
including comments on the outcome document and
active participation in the Preparatory Committee
meetings. They should also actively participate in the
special session itself. This will ensure that the United
Nations approach to addressing children’s rights is a
coordinated one and that the whole United Nations
family feels responsible for following up the outcome
document.
The
participation
of
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and civil society has been an
important issue throughout the preparatory process. We
have established an open and inclusive process which
has given us the support of a wide variety of NGOs and
civil society organizations. Norway commends this
initiative
and
encourages
continuous
active
participation on the part of NGOs and civil society
organizations.
Much has been said to date about the
participation of children and youth, both in the
preparatory process and in the special session itself.
Participation is one of the guiding principles of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Children have a
right to voice an opinion on issues affecting them and
to have those opinions heard. The issues raised during
preparations for the special session, and at the special
session itself, will have a direct impact on the wellbeing of children. It is important, therefore, that
children and young people be given the chance to voice
their opinions and to be heard as part of this process.
The debate is very much alive on how to facilitate
the participation of children and youth. This debate
should certainly continue, but it must not get in the
way of actually facilitating children’s participation.
Norway encourages all Member States to ensure the
participation of children and young people at the local,
national and global levels, both in the preparatory
process and at the special session itself.
Finally, although our focus is now on the
successful implementation of the special session for
children, we must not view this as an end in itself. On
the contrary, it is the beginning of our continuous
efforts to ensure the well-being of children throughout
the world. Let us take on the challenge of breaking the
cycle of poverty in one generation by committing
ourselves to ensuring that children are given a good
start in life, good-quality basic education, and a safe
and empowering adolescence.

A/55/PV.62

Mr. Ocaziones (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Ten years after the holding of the World Summit for
Children and the achievement of the most-ratified
human rights instrument in history for the protection of
children, we are finding that many of the promises
made in that framework have not been kept.
Nonetheless, during the special session of the
General Assembly devoted to children, we will have a
unique opportunity to assess our achievements, review
the lessons learned, and, above all, to give fresh
impetus to the alliances that will allow us to meet the
challenge of moving from words to action.
The first substantive session of the Preparatory
Committee for the special session, held from 30 May to
2 June of this year, made clear the obstacles
encountered in the 1990s to the implementation of the
goals of the World Summit for Children, and it also
addressed various emerging issues related to children.
We have noted progress in areas such as perinatal
mortality, immunization, oral rehydration and micronutrition. We are encouraged by the success of the
Convention with respect to the monitoring of
international commitments, and by the existence of
legal instruments to protect minors, such as the Statute
of the International Criminal Court, the International
Labour Organization (ILO) Convention on the
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour and
the two optional protocols thereto.
Nonetheless, we also face great challenges — the
AIDS pandemic, maternal mortality, difficulties in the
area of education, problems in expanding the supply of
drinking water, and achieving improved health
conditions.
In addition, there is an urgent need to strengthen
the protection of minors, especially those in difficult
circumstances. I would mention in particular minors
who are victims of armed conflict, of anti-personnel
mines or of international trafficking for purposes of
sexual exploitation, and also those minors who are
affected by drug addiction or domestic violence.
We must be aware of a harsh reality that has been
a factor in non-compliance with the commitments
undertaken at the Summit: the fundamental obstacle
represented by the situation of poverty. Our efforts will
have to focus on breaking the vicious circle of poverty,
as was recently recognized by our leaders at the
Millennium Summit.

According to the annual report of the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), at least 600
million children and adolescents are growing up in
families that are struggling to survive on under $1 a
day. Poverty in developing countries causes the death
of 11 million children under the age of 5, mostly from
preventable diseases. Poverty is also clear when
children do not attend school or receive a poor-quality
education, when they work in dangerous jobs and when
their families succumb to domestic violence.
In our opinion, the goals set at the World Summit
for Children should be updated, with realistic
indicators that take this factor into account and that
allow all of us to mobilize strategic alliances at the
intergovernmental level, in the United Nations system
and in civil society. These alliances should help us to
obtain an increase in resources and to make more
effective use of the resources already available to
combat poverty and to offer universal access to basic
services. To achieve the goals of official development
assistance, greater attention is required from donors.
In this context, we consider it appropriate to
support the three-objective strategy proposed by
UNICEF in order to break the cycle of poverty in a
lasting manner, beginning with improvements in the
quality of life of children and giving priority to three
factors: first, that children should get a good start in
life; secondly, that they should all have an opportunity
to complete a basic education of good quality; and,
thirdly, that adolescents should have an opportunity to
fully develop their capacities.
These criteria can be complemented by the
agreements reached during the process leading to next
year’s special session. They can also be given impetus
by the results of the regional conferences, which have
the advantage of adapting universally established goals
to local realities. In this regard, we enthusiastically
welcome the ministerial meetings held in Jamaica this
year and in Peru last year, in the Latin American
region. We also have great expectations of the results
of the Ibero-American summit of heads of State and
Government to be held in Panama in December, whose
principal topic will be the situation of children.
Ms. Pearson (Canada): Over the last few months,
calls to turn words into deeds on behalf of children
have been intensifying, and I am happy to say that
Canada has been taking up this challenge.

31

A/55/PV.62

In September, Canada hosted the International
Conference on War-affected
Children,
where
representatives of Governments, the United Nations
and its relevant agencies, members of civil society and
young people themselves demonstrated a resolve to
work in this area. It is Canada’s hope that the Agenda
for War-affected Children, agreed to by 130
Governments and circulated as a document (A/55/467,
annex) of the General Assembly, will contribute to the
special session preparatory process and that the
outcome document of the special session will reflect
the international community’s commitment to action in
this area.
Last month, Canada participated in the Fifth
Ministerial Meeting on Children and Social Policy in
the Americas, held in Kingston, Jamaica. This meeting
served as the regional preparatory meeting for the
special session on children and provided an
opportunity for the 37 participating Governments to
reaffirm their commitment to children.
Canada’s involvement in these two meetings
underscores the priority we place on contributing to
and facilitating dialogue on the rights of children, and
we would encourage such dialogues to continue in the
months ahead.
Canada would like to emphasize the importance
we attach to safeguarding the rights of children in
especially difficult circumstances. The list of these
circumstances is unfortunately a long one and reflects
how much remains to be done for the world’s children.
Among these particularly vulnerable children are
street-involved children, child labourers, children who
are sexually exploited and trafficked, children with
disabilities, and children in conflict with the law or in
the care of the State. Refugees and internally displaced
children, minority and indigenous children and waraffected children are also in need of special protection.
With respect to war-affected children, in addition
to actions taken at the International Conference on
War-affected Children, Canada has signed and ratified
the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We would encourage all
States that have not already done so to sign, ratify and
implement these tools for the protection of children
and for the ending of impunity for those who violate
their rights in times of armed conflict.

32

Children are also victims of trafficking, preyed
upon by organized criminal groups. Canada was
pleased to participate in the successful conclusion of
negotiations on the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its two Protocols, on trafficking
in persons and smuggling of migrants. These are
important new tools to address heinous abuses of
children.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child recognizes the right of young people to
participate in decision-making on issues that affect
them. The Convention also requires that States make
certain that children’s opinions are given due weight in
accordance with their age and maturity. For this reason,
Canada is an active proponent of the participation of
children and youth in meetings focused on young
people. We welcomed and facilitated the dynamic,
meaningful participation of young delegates at the
September Conference on War-affected Children and
also at the Fifth Ministerial Meeting in Jamaica.
In Winnipeg, 50 young people, including children
from war-affected regions, were able to contribute to
both the expert and the ministerial segments of the
conference. They have committed themselves to their
own follow-up activities on behalf of war-affected
children.
In Kingston, Jamaica, some 120 children and
youth from the Americas attended the meeting as
members of national delegations or with the support of
non-governmental
organizations. The
Canadian
delegation included two youth participants, who acted
as co-chairs of a thematic workshop organized by
Canada on the issue of child and youth participation.
Our two youth delegates also lent their expertise to
Canadian negotiators working on the outcome
document.
The successful involvement of children and youth
in such meetings only serves to reinforce our
conviction that the active participation of young people
is critical to developing strategies to address the issues
that affect them. We once again invite those
Governments that have not already done so to include
young people as members of their delegations in both
the preparatory process and the special session itself.
For the outcome document of the special session,
Canada is in favour of a short and focused political
declaration followed by a set of clear, appropriate and
measurable goals. While we set goals for certain

A/55/PV.62

specific actions for child survival, protection and
development at the 1990 World Summit for Children,
additional goals to address obstacles and emerging
issues will require extra effort and commitment. The
attainment of these goals will require the efforts of
Governments, civil society and children and youth
themselves. We would like to take this opportunity to
express our support for the efforts of the United
Nations Children’s Fund to engage members of civil
society in this process.
In closing, I reaffirm Canada’s commitment to the
preparatory process for the special session. Our
national consultations with civil society and with
children and youth are well under way, as are
Government-wide preparations. It is our hope that the
special session will spur concrete action for children
and that all over the world countries will be turning
words into deeds.
Programme of work
The President: I would like to inform members
of an addition to the programme of work of the General
Assembly.
On Monday, 20 November 2000, in the morning,
the General Assembly will take up agenda item 51,
“Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)” as the
first item.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

33
