UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/3
13 February 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3854th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 February 1998 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the successful completion of the United
Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES), as described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 22 January 1998 (S/1998/59). The experience of this
multifunctional operation may be useful for similar situations in the
future.
"The Security Council commends the commitment shown by the Government
of the Republic of Croatia to the implementation of its comprehensive
programme of national reconciliation, and stresses the need for continued
progress in this regard. The Council is also encouraged by signs of
increasing participation in Croatian political life by the region's ethnic
Serb citizens, and underlines the importance of continued efforts by the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to ensure full participation by the
Serb minority in the political life of the country, including through
urgent funding of the Joint Council of Municipalities.
"The Security Council notes that, despite the positive conclusion of
UNTAES and the efforts of the Government of the Republic of Croatia,
including its request for the establishment of the civilian police support
group, much remains to be done. The Government of the Republic of Croatia
remains responsible for the rights and safety of members of all ethnic
groups within the Republic of Croatia and bound by its obligations and
commitments under the Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951) and other international
agreements. In this regard, the Council calls upon the Government of the
Republic of Croatia to intensify its efforts to promote full reintegration
of the region, in particular to resolve property issues and other problems
which are hindering the return of refugees and displaced persons, to
protect human rights, including by taking action against harassment, to
address in full uncertainties about the implementation of the Amnesty Law
and to take measures to improve public confidence in the Croatian police.
98-03354 (E)

130298

/...

S/PRST/1998/3
English
Page 2

"In this context, the Security Council emphasizes the key role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) throughout the
Republic of Croatia, including in the Danubian region. The Council
strongly supports the closest possible cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE, in particular between the OSCE mission and the
support group and other United Nations offices and agencies in the Republic
of Croatia as envisaged by the Secretary-General, and, to that end,
encourages the support group and the OSCE mission to keep each other fully
informed.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the dedicated men and women of
UNTAES, and, in particular, expresses its appreciation to the Transitional
Administrators and the Force Commanders for their leadership of the UNTAES
mission."

-----
