A/69/371–S/2014/650

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
4 September 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Items 35 and 36 of the provisional agenda*

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

The situation in the Middle East
Question of Palestine

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine
Report of the Secretary-General

Summary
The present report is submitted in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 68/15. It contains replies received from the parties concerned to the notes
verbales sent by the Secretary-General pursuant to the request contained in
paragraph 25 of the resolution. The report also contains the observations of the
Secretary-General on the current state of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and on
international efforts to move the peace process forward with a view to achieving a
peaceful settlement. The report covers the period from September 2013 to August
2014.

* A/69/150.

14-60375 (E)

011014

*1460375*

A/69/371
S/2014/650

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
68/15.
2.
On 21 August 2014, pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 25 of the
above-mentioned resolution, I addressed the following letter to the President of the
Security Council:
“I have the honour to refer to resolution 68/15, which the General
Assembly adopted on 26 November 2013, at its sixty-eighth session, under the
agenda item ‘Question of Palestine’.
“Paragraph 25 of the resolution ‘requests the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts with the parties concerned, and in consultation with the
Security Council, towards the attainment of a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine and the promotion of peace in the region and to submit to
the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a report on these efforts and on
developments on this matter ’.
“In order to fulfil my reporting responsibilities under this resolution, I
should be grateful if you would kindly convey to me the views of the Security
Council by 5 September 2014.
“Recalling the Secretariat’s obligation to observe the page limit of its
reports, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 52/214, I would like to
encourage the Security Council to limit its submission to 1,500 words. ”
3.

As at 5 September, no response had been received to that request.

4.
In a note verbale dated 10 May 2014 to the parties concerned, I sought the
positions of the Governments of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as the State of Palestine, regarding any steps taken by them to
implement the relevant provisions of the resolution. As at 31 August 201 4, replies
had been received from Israel and the State of Palestine.
5.
The note verbale dated 4 August 2014 from the Permanent Observer Mission
of the State of Palestine to the United Nations reads as follows:
“The State of Palestine reaffirms that the General Assembly resolution
‘Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine’ constitutes a principal
contribution by the international community towards justly and
comprehensively resolving the question of Palestine and securing a viable
peace. The resolution continues to define the parameters for a solution based
on international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid peace
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map.
“This resolution traditionally receives overwhelming support — with 165
votes in favour in the 68th session, underscoring a global consensus in support
of a solution that ensures Israel’s withdrawal from the Palestinian territory
occupied since June 1967, including East Jerusalem; achievement of the
solution of two States: an independent, sovereign, democratic and contiguous
State of Palestine, living side by side with Israel in peace and security on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, with Jerusalem the shared capital of the two

2/16

14-60375

A/69/371
S/2014/650

States; and a just solution for the Palestine refugees based on General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) (1948).
“This consensus has been the long-held position of the Palestinian people
and leadership, since formal acceptance of the two-State solution in the 1988
Declaration of Independence of the State of Palestine. This significant
compromise to establish the State of Palestine on only 22 per cent of our
historic homeland for the sake of restoring our rights, achieving freedom and
ending the conflict is among the boldest reflections of the Palestinian
commitment to peace. Remarkably, this commitment has prevailed, despite the
historic injustice inflicted on the Palestinian people over the decades since the
adoption of partition resolution 181 (II) in 1947 and the tragedy of Al -Nakba
of 1948, from which our people continue to suffer to this day, particularly the
Palestine refugees, who now number over 5 million people and continue to
endure untold hardships, including as a result of successive crises in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, such as the brutal military aggression and
humanitarian disaster being inflicted on the Gaza Strip by Israel, the
occupying Power, at present, as well as the many crises that have plagued the
region, including the current grave conflict in Syria.
“This consensus on the parameters of a two-State solution has also been
reaffirmed in numerous other resolutions, including resolution 67/19
(29 November 2012), which accorded to Palestine non-member observer State
status, and in declarations by political and regional groups from around the
world. In this regard, resolution 67/19, like resolution 68/15, constitutes a
serious contribution by the international community towards peace and the
State of Palestine’s rightful inclusion in the community of nations, pending
acceptance of the application for admission to United Nations membership,
which remains before the Security Council following submission by President
Mahmoud Abbas on 23 September 2011.
“The urgency of salvaging the two-State solution and attaining the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination and independence in their State
of Palestine — a right explicitly affirmed by the General Assembly — is
further reflected in the call in resolution 68/15 for the resumption and
acceleration of negotiations in the Middle East peace process towards its stated
objectives. It is a call that Palestine has fully respected and actively striven to
fulfil in all of its actions, bilaterally, multilaterally and internally. As widely
acknowledged, Palestine has consistently upheld its legal obligations and
commitments, despite the enormous challenges and manifold crises arising
from Israel’s 47-year military occupation, and this includes respect for
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions and for agreements
reached in the peace process.
“Palestine maintains that respect of the law is the key to resolving the
conflict, as it would ensure that negotiations to resolve the final status
issues — Jerusalem, Palestine refugees, settlements, borders, security,
prisoners and water — actually result in achievement of a just, sustainable
peace. Regrettably, however, the exemptions from the law that Israel, the
occupying Power, has for so long unfairly enjoyed, never being held
accountable for its violations of United Nations resolutions and grave
breaches, have prolonged and severely compounded the conflict and

14-60375

3/16

A/69/371
S/2014/650

repeatedly caused the peace process to fail and undermined the two -State
solution.
“Affirming its respect for international law, on 1 April 2014, the
Government of the State of Palestine undertook the historic decision to accede
to numerous international conventions, underscoring its intention to avail itself
of all peaceful, political, legal and non-violent tools in the international system
to achieve the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and to promote the
rule of law in Palestine. Those conventions included, i nter alia, the four
Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocol 1, the International Covenants on
Civil and Political Rights and Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the
Conventions on the Rights of the Child, on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, and against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment.
“Since the adoption of resolution 68/15, Palestine has also exerted efforts
to implement the resolution’s provisions and endeavoured to advance
conditions amenable for a peace settlement. This has included internal efforts
to develop and strengthen national institutions, achieve Palestinian
reconciliation, and promote law and order, as well as active engagement,
regionally and internationally, in all initiatives aimed at realizing a peaceful
solution.
“In specific, from July 2013, the Palestinian leadership engaged in good
faith in the negotiations resumed under United States auspices, shepherded by
Secretary of State John Kerry, with the support of the other Quartet members
of the European Union, the Russian Federation and the United Nations, the
League of Arab States Ministerial Committee, and concerned States from
around the world. The grave impact of this conflict and, inversely, the
multitude of benefits that peace would have for the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, the Middle East region and the international community as a whole
are facts widely recognized and propelling these collective efforts.
“For nine months, the Palestinian leadership cooperated fully with these
efforts, partaking in multiple rounds of direct negotiations with Israel, the
occupying Power. During negotiations, we maintained focus on the goal of
peace, mindful of the unsustainability of the status quo and that failed
negotiations would entail serious consequences, especially in terms of the
diminishing viability of the two-State solution and unstable situation on the
ground. Guided by a conviction in international law and the urgency of peace,
Palestine committed to negotiations, despite the striking imbalance of power,
Israel’s bad faith at the negotiating table, the cyclical distractions,
complications and hardships caused by its violations against the Palestinian
people, and its deliberate impairment of the Palestinian Government ’s
authority and Palestinian unity efforts.
“The Palestinian leadership’s commitment to peace was also evidenced in
the political restraint exhibited during the July 2013-April 2014 negotiations
period, despite constant Israeli provocations. Seeking to foster trust, a decision
was made to delay action on rights and privileges gained since the attainment
of observer State status. Such restraint was also connected to an agreement for
the release of Palestinian prisoners long held captive by Israel, commonly

4/16

14-60375

A/69/371
S/2014/650

referred to as “pre-Oslo” prisoners, which Israel had prior agreed to, yet
repeatedly reneged on. Significantly, Palestine’s engagement in the
negotiations was fully supported by the League of Arab States, which
remained active in its efforts to promote peace on the basis of the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.
“Conversely, during the entire nine-month period, Israel constantly
flouted the law, ignoring the global calls for an end to the occupation and a
peaceful solution to the conflict and preferring to persist with its illegal
policies, which it has never ceased during any stage of the peace process, from
the 1991 Madrid Conference to the present. Israel’s violations included, inter
alia, continuation of its illegal settlement campaign in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, including confiscation of
Palestinian land, construction of settlements, transfer of Israeli settlers, and
construction of the annexation wall; as well as its military campaign against
the Palestinian people, involving all forms of aggression, including air strikes
against the Gaza Strip, military raids on civilian areas throughout the West
Bank, and excessive force against civilian protesters, causing death and injury
to Palestinians, including children; destruction of Palestinian homes and
infrastructure; forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, particularly
Bedouin families; daily arrests of Palestinians, resulting in the imprisonment
and administrative detention of over 6,000 Palestinians, who are enduring
untold abuse and torture at the hands of the occupier; permissive policies
aiding and abetting settler terror and violence against Palestinians; the illegal
blockade of the Gaza Strip in gross collective punishment of the 1.8 million
Palestinians there; and innumerable other measures of collective punishment
against the Palestinian people, all in flagrant breach of international law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention and the human rights covenants,
relevant United Nations resolutions and the International Court of Justice
Advisory Opinion (9 July 2004).
“Not only did such unlawful Israeli practices continue in 2014, but most
sharply escalated, including, inter alia, settlement activities, with repeated
declarations about thousands of new settlement units, and incessant
provocations and incitement by Israeli government officials, settlers and
extremists, particularly regarding Occupied East Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound. Israel’s rejection of peace peaked after its decision to
renege on releasing the fourth tranche of Palestinian prisoners in March 2014
and its decision to unilaterally suspend negotiations in April 2014 in retaliatory
response to the reconciliation between the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and Hamas, leading to a dramatic destabilization of the situation.
“It must be clarified that Palestinian unity is a legitimate, necessary step,
long called for by the Palestinian people and by the international community,
which has stressed the need for unity for implementation of any peace
agreement, with this call for reconciliation reiterated in resolution 68/15. It
must also be recognized that, under President Abbas’s leadership,
reconciliation has been pursued with utmost responsibility — based on clear
reaffirmations of the Palestinian national consensus Government ’s
commitment to the agreements reached by the PLO, non-violence and
recognition of Israel — and has received the broad support of the international
community.

14-60375

5/16

A/69/371
S/2014/650

“Yet, Israel has used every cynical tactic to incite against and undermine
the Palestinian Government and has chosen once again to intensify its illegal
practices, fuelling tensions and thwarting peace efforts. Most shockingly,
following the formation of the Palestinian national consensus Government on
2 June 2014, and using the killing of three Israeli settlers in the West Bank on
12 June 2014 as a pretext, Israel launched a wide-scale military campaign
against the Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip, the third such
violent aggression against the defenceless and besieged civilian population in
Gaza in six years.
“As of the writing of this note, the human and physical devastation
caused by this aggression against Gaza has been horrific and vast, with war
crimes, crimes against humanity, and State terrorism undeniably being
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power. Attacks have been carried out by
Israeli missile strikes, artillery bombardment and live fire by air, land and sea.
More than 1,700 Palestinians have been killed, including children, women and
elderly persons, with children comprising at least a third of the victims.
Numerous families have been massacred in their entirety by the occupying
forces. In fact, at least 76 families have lost three or more family members,
some as high as 20 family members killed, in Israeli military attacks. More
than 9,000 people have been wounded, many severel y and permanently
disabled. More than 460,000 Palestinians have been displaced by the Israeli
aggression, including more than a quarter of a million people that have sought
refuge in United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) schools. Regrettably, UNRWA schools have also
again been targeted by Israeli attacks that have killed and injured innocent
civilians and Agency staff who believed they were safe under the United
Nations flag.
“The Israeli onslaught on Gaza, which intensified with a ground invasion
on 18 July 2014, has also caused the deliberate destruction of over
5,000 homes, damage to over 30,000 other homes and properties, and mass
destruction to civilian infrastructure, including hospitals, schools, mosq ues,
and water, sanitation and electricity networks. This has deepened the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, already dire due to the illegal Israeli blockade and
resultant shortages of food, medical, construction and fuel supplies, and led
the Palestinian Government to declare Gaza a ‘disaster area’. Despite
extraordinary efforts, UNRWA and other United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations have been unable to keep pace with the crisis, and,
again, the international community is being appealed to for e mergency
assistance to alleviate the human suffering arising from the vast food
insecurity, poverty, displacement, and psychological trauma inflicted on the
population and what United Nations officials declared, on 2 August 2014, as a
‘health disaster of widespread proportions’ with medical services and facilities
on the verge of collapse and inadequate water and sanitation posing serious
risks of outbreaks of infections and communicable diseases.
“As of the writing of this note, while President Abbas and the Palestinian
leadership have been continuously engaged in the regional and international
efforts to secure a comprehensive ceasefire and lifting of the eight -year Israeli
blockade, and have remained resolutely committed to the objective of peace,
Israel has chosen to continue this depraved war against the Palestinian people

6/16

14-60375

A/69/371
S/2014/650

under its occupation. Using a preposterous, baseless pretext of ‘self-defence’,
the Israeli Prime Minister and other government and military officials persist
in threatening to exact maximum punishment on the Palestinian people and
their leadership, and rejecting all calls for an end to the violence and
resumption of peace efforts.
“It is not a coincidence that this Israeli aggression was launched amid
heightened international pressure on Israel in the peace process; international
acceptance of the Palestinian national consensus Government; intense world
condemnation of Israeli settlement activities, settler terror, provocations in
East Jerusalem, the Gaza blockade and the prisoner crisis; and the growing
global calls for boycott, divestment and sanctions against Israel. It is an
obvious repeat of the crises created by Israel in the past to divert attention and
evade all efforts to advance a peaceful, just, political solution to the conflict,
as it clearly prefers to continue its colonization of the Palestinian land and
subjugation of the Palestinian people, only paying lip service to peace as it
actively sabotages it and acts with total contempt for the international
community.
“We have thus turned again to the United Nations, calling on the Security
Council to uphold its Charter duties and act forthwith to stop the slaughter of
innocent men, women and children, including by ensuring a permanent
ceasefire and providing protection to the Palestinian people, and to shoulder its
responsibilities to bring a definitive end to this conflict. While Israel, as the
occupying Power, is obligated under international humanitarian law to ensure
the safety, well-being and protection of the civilian population under its
occupation, it has clearly abdicated this right as it wilfully and wantonly
causes harm to the population and is the direct source of their insecurity,
suffering and vulnerability. We will also continue our efforts in the General
Assembly to comprehensively redress this grave injustice and will continue to
demand the implementation of all relevant resolutions. Palestine has also
called on Switzerland, Depositary of the Geneva Conventions, to convene a
conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
consider measures to enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, inter alia, to ensure protection for the
Palestinian people.
“In conclusion, heeding the calls in resolution 68/15, Palestine reaffirms
its readiness to make peace, based on the long-standing parameters and
principles of justice and human rights. We reiterate our calls on the
international community to uphold legal, political and moral obligations in this
regard, recalling the permanent responsibility of the United Nations until the
question of Palestine is resolved in all its aspects in accordance with
international law.
“We are at a critical juncture that will determine whether the solution of
two States — the State of Palestine and the State of Israel — living side by
side in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967 borders will be
achieved, or whether that solution will meet its demise under the weigh t of
Israel’s illegal policies and entrenchment of its 47-year military occupation.
For genuine progress to be made, the precarious reality on the ground and root
causes of this conflict must be seriously redressed. Respect for resolution

14-60375

7/16

A/69/371
S/2014/650

68/15 and all relevant resolutions would enhance the prospects for realizing
peace. If, however, Israel remains intransigent, peace efforts will again fail and
we will have to face the failure of the two-State solution and the onset of new
collective efforts — political, legal and popular — in pursuit of alternative
solutions to end the injustice and realize the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.
“As a last attempt to salvage the two-State solution, the international
community must therefore be vigilant in demanding a halt to Israel ’s illegal
practices and demanding compliance with international law. A firm message
must be conveyed to Israel that the price of continued occupation will be
immense, while there is much to be gained from peace. This message has been
conveyed more clearly in the recent period, including by the European Union
and other States that have predicated current and future relations with the
parties on respect for the law and a commitment to peace, but it must be
reinforced with practical actions, including consequences for continued
violations and obstruction of peace efforts.
“On its part, the State of Palestine will continue to responsibly cooperate
with all international efforts in this regard, based on its conviction in the rule
of law and the resolve to achieve a just solution that will achieve the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the P alestine
refugees, and establish Palestinian-Israeli peace, security and coexistence.
“We express appreciation for the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General,
the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
the entire United Nations system in support of a peaceful solution and in
support of Palestinian humanitarian and developmental needs. We also
recognize the important role of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People in raising int ernational awareness
and support for Palestinian rights and a just solution, especially in this
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. We further
reiterate gratitude for the principled support of all concerned States and
peoples worldwide, and urge that no effort be spared to achieve long-overdue
freedom, justice, peace and dignity for the Palestinian people. ”
6.
The note verbale dated 24 August 2014 from the Permanent Mission of Israel
to the United Nations reads as follows:
“As shown in the meeting records, Israel voted against this resolution, as
it has done on similar resolutions adopted in the past by the General Assembly.
Resolution 68/15 joins the numerous one-sided resolutions passed annually by
the General Assembly which only serve to undermine the credibility of the
United Nations as an impartial agent for the advancement of peace.
“The State of Israel continuously strives to attain a peaceful settlement of
the conflict with the Palestinians and to promote peace in the region. Time and
time again Israel has demonstrated to the international community its
commitment to finding a long-lasting conclusion of the conflict. Resolution
68/15 overlooks the steps Israel has taken, and continues to take, to end the
conflict. Resolution 68/15 fails to examine the situation objectively,

8/16

14-60375

A/69/371
S/2014/650

disregarding the role played by the Palestinians in the diffi culties in attaining a
peaceful resolution to the conflict, in particular Hamas.
“In August 2005, Israel dismantled its settlements and military presence
and disengaged from the Gaza Strip. Rather than using this opportunity for
development, Hamas took advantage of Israel’s absence to launch terror
attacks from Gaza onto Israeli citizens. Terror activities escalated further after
Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip in 2006. Despite Israel ’s withdrawal
from the Gaza Strip in 2005, Hamas has continued to target Israeli civilians
with thousands of rockets. Its unprovoked attacks are not the product of efforts
to seek redress of legitimate grievances, as some claim. Rather, they are a
product of Hamas’ guiding ideology. Hamas is a virulently anti-Semitic
organization, whose very Charter calls on Muslims to kill Jews. Hamas is not
dedicated to improving the plight of Gaza. Instead, its goal is nothing less than
the destruction of Israel, no matter the cost to the Palestinian population.
“Since 12 June 2014, the State of Israel has been under constant attack as
Hamas launched more than 3,500 rockets at civilian populations in Israeli
towns and communities. Israel’s south has been the target of bombardment for
14 years, its children constantly subject to indiscriminate attacks from Gaza.
The current operation ‘Protective Edge’ was launched as a last resort to
reinstate safety and security to its citizens, following the abduction and murder
by Hamas of three Israeli teenagers and the barrage of rockets targeting the
Israeli population that has followed undiminished since then.
“Despite the relentless and acute threats to its security, Israel has
continued to assert its commitment to achieving a permanent peace for Israelis
and Palestinians. Accordingly, the State of Israel has gone to great lengths to
extend humanitarian assistance and foster conditions for Palestinian economic
growth. Throughout 2013, cooperation intensified with the international
community and the Palestinian Authority to facilitate sustainab le
infrastructural and economic development in Gaza, in order to meet both the
short- and long-term needs of the civilian population. Two hundred twentyseven projects have been approved for implementation, alongside various
measures aimed at alleviating Palestinian economic hardships. In 2012-2013,
an average of 350 people per day entered Israel from Gaza through the Erez
crossing, an increase of 238 per cent since 2009. Permits for longer periods of
time are granted for humanitarian cases and businessmen.
“Israel has invested 80 million shekels to expand the Kerem Shalom
crossing through which commercial goods are transferred, to accommodate up
to 450 trucks daily. All civilian goods are allowed into Gaza with the exception
of weapons and ‘dual-use’ items that can easily be appropriated for terrorist
activities. Nevertheless, many restricted items are approved on a regular basis
for use in projects funded by the international community and United Nations
agencies. Israel continues to supply 125 MW of electricity to Gaza by means
of 10 electrical lines, accounting for 63 per cent of the electricity in the Gaza
Strip. Israel provides 5 million cubic metres of water per year to Gaza,
facilitates the transfer of water equipment and holds water and sewage trai ning
sessions for Palestinian professionals.
“The aforementioned steps taken by the State of Israel attest to its
commitment to a peaceful resolution to the conflict, yet Hamas has time and

14-60375

9/16

A/69/371
S/2014/650

time again chosen to invest in terror, not peace. The State of Israel reiterates its
willingness for an agreement according to the principles of the two -State
solution and acknowledges the important role played by the Quartet in this
matter. Israel calls on the Palestinian Authority to reaffirm its adherence to the
achievement of a permanent and comprehensive resolution of the conflict, by
engaging in confidence-building measures and bilateral agreements in lieu of
unilateral declarative actions in various multinational forums. ”

II. Observations
7.
In July 2013, Israelis and Palestinians resumed direct final status negotiations.
The resumption of the peace process, for the first time since October 2010, was
supported by extensive facilitation efforts led by the United States of America. In a
series of preparatory meetings at the end of July in Washington, D.C., the parties set
an agenda which covered all core final status issues and agreed on the goal of
achieving a comprehensive settlement within a period of nine months. At the same
time, the Palestinians continued to implement an ambitious State-building
programme.
8.
The first formal round of talks was held on 14 August in Jerusalem, after the
release of the first tranche of pre-Oslo Palestinian prisoners, in accordance with the
agreement for resuming the peace negotiations. On 15 and 16 August, I travelled to
Ramallah, Jerusalem and Jordan to lend support to the leaders on both sides
embarking on a process towards a negotiated solution to the Israeli -Palestinian
conflict.
9.
In late 2013, dialogue between the Israelis and Palestinians intensified and
some 17 rounds of talks were held. The negotiation efforts were, however,
complicated by the repeated announcements of settlement expansion with each
release of Palestinian prisoners. Israel’s settlement announcements in November
2013, moreover, prompted the resignation of a Palestinian negotiator. In spite of
these developments, President Abbas confirmed his intention to continue talks.
10. Since the beginning of 2014, negotiation efforts concentrated on crafting an
agreed framework on all core issues as the guiding basis for continued negotiations
towards a final status agreement. United States Secretary of State John Kerry
supported the process by engaging in active shuttle diplomacy between the sides.
11. The international community has been committed to supporting the renewed
peace talks, including through the Quartet and key Arab, regional and other
stakeholders. Deliberations at the high-level segment of the sixty-eighth session of
the General Assembly focused on advancing the Middle East peace process, with
world leaders urging a negotiated settlement of the Israeli -Palestinian conflict. The
Quartet, welcoming the resumption of the peace process, reaffirmed its
determination to support the negotiations for achie ving a negotiated two-State
solution in the prescribed time frame.
12. The United Nations has consistently encouraged the parties to advance the
negotiations towards a comprehensive settlement which must be fair and consistent
with principles on all core issues outlined in Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles — including land for peace — the road map and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative. At the Security Council open debate on the situation in the Middle

10/16

14-60375

A/69/371
S/2014/650

East, on 20 January 2014, alarmed by the recurrent violence, I reiterated the need to
provide support to Israelis and Palestinians to escape the perilous status quo, as the
lack of political progress could exacerbate negative trends on the ground.
13. On 28 March 2014, Israel postponed its decision to release the fourth and final
tranche of 30 pre-Oslo Palestinian prisoners, citing lack of progress in the peace
talks. In response, on 1 April, and following the announcement on the same day of
708 reissued tenders for settlement units in Gilo, President Abbas announced that
the Palestinian leadership had unanimously voted to join 15 international
conventions and treaties. President Abbas, nevertheless, remained committed to
continuing negotiations until the agreed date of 29 April. The negotiators continued
to meet in order to find a way out of the impasse and to agree to an extension of the
negotiation period. On 24 April, Israel suspended the talks in response to the
announcement a day earlier of an intra-Palestinian unity agreement for the
formation of a national consensus government. Israel stated that it would not
negotiate with any Palestinian government backed by Hamas, which does not
recognize Israel’s right to exist.
14. Following the suspension of talks, negative developments on the ground in
mid-2014 have severely hampered the prospects for resuming the peace talks. I have
appealed to both Israelis and Palestinians to exercise prudence and avoid unilateral
steps that would diminish the prospects for a resumption of negotiations for a final
settlement. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the Israelis and the
Palestinians in the search for a meaningful path forward in the negotiations for a
two-State solution.
15. In April, President Abbas deposited the instruments of accessio n to
13 international conventions and treaties with the United Nations, and submitted
applications for the four Geneva conventions and the Hague conventions of 1907. In
May, five of the nine core human rights treaties, plus one of the substantive
protocols entered into force, while Switzerland accepted Palestine as a party to the
four Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocol I (relating to the protection of
victims of international armed conflicts), retroactively to the submission date of its
application on 2 April. Accession to these treaties brings new obligations, and the
United Nations stands ready to assist the Palestinians, at their request, in the
implementation and monitoring of its treaty obligations.
16. On 2 June, President Abbas announced the formation of a Government of
national consensus headed by Prime Minister Hamdallah. On the basis of assurances
by President Abbas that the Government would continue to abide by the PLO
commitments with regard to recognition of Israel, non-violence and adherence to
previous agreements, I welcomed the formation of the Government and reiterated the
readiness of the United Nations to lend its full support to the Government in its effort
to reunite the West Bank and Gaza, in line with the intra-Palestinian unity agreement
of 23 April, under one legitimate Palestinian authority, including by addressing the
serious political, security, humanitarian and economic challenges in Gaza.
17. On 12 June, three Israeli students were reported missing and were believed to
have been abducted in the West Bank, which the Government of Israel blamed on
Hamas. The incident led to an escalation of tension in Gaza, characterized by an
increase in Israeli air strikes and rockets fired from Gaza at Israel, which
undermined the November 2012 ceasefire understanding between Israel and Hamas.

14-60375

11/16

A/69/371
S/2014/650

Tensions further increased following the discovery of the bodies of the Israeli
students on 30 June.
18. The reporting period witnessed alarming escalations of tension between Gaza
and Israel. The fragility of the relative calm was once again demonstrated on a
number of occasions throughout the reporting period, with a dangerous ongoing
escalation as from 8 July 2014 during the Israel Defense Forces so -called Operation
Protective Edge, which had the stated aim of destroying Hamas infrastructure and
limiting its capabilities to launch rockets into Israel. The Israel Defense Forces
carried out intensified air strikes targeting the facilities and private residences of
militants. Palestinian militants fired hundreds of rockets and mortars towards Israel,
including its main cities. On 17 July, Israel launched the beginning of ground
incursions into Gaza with the objective of destroying the tunnel network of
Palestinian militants.
19. As at 26 August, Palestinian militants had reportedly fired more than
4,500 rockets and 1,600 mortars. The Israel Defense Forces had reportedly
conducted more than 3,800 air strikes, firing more than 5,900 missiles. The Israeli
navy had fired some 3,200 shells, and Israel Defense Forces positioned at the border
had fired some 17,000 shells.
20. According to preliminary information, at least 2,104 Palestinians have
reportedly been killed. That number includes at least 1,462 civilians, of whom 495
were children and 253 were women. Eleven UNRWA staff members have been
killed. Some 66 Israel Defense Forces soldiers, four Israeli civilians, one Israeli
whose status remains unclear and one foreign national have reportedly been killed.
A few dozen Israeli citizens have been directly injur ed by rockets or shrapnel.
21. At the peak of the crisis, there were approximately 520,000 internally
displaced persons, or nearly 30 per cent of Gaza’s population. Approximately
16,700 housing units have been destroyed or severely damaged, affecting some
100,000 Palestinians.
22. The fighting has raised serious questions about respect for the principles of
distinction and proportionality in international humanitarian law. Six UNRWA
schools harbouring civilians were directly hit by shelling or affected by r ocket fire
in their immediate vicinity, with serious loss of life and injuries. On 29 July, the
premises of the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process in Gaza were hit by a number of projectiles, which caused
damage to the main building and to United Nations vehicles. International
humanitarian law clearly requires protection by all parties of civilians and civilian
facilities, including United Nations staff and premises. Violations must be subject to
accountability and justice.
23. From the onset of the crisis in Gaza, the United Nations has deployed every
possible effort, including through my personal engagement, to bring about an end to
the violence. I have spoken to Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel and Presid ent
Abbas of Palestine, calling on both sides to exercise maximum restraint and avoid
further escalation. I have also engaged with regional and world leaders, including
the King of Saudi Arabia, the Emir of Qatar, the President of Egypt, the President of
Turkey, the heads of the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the United States Secretary of State and the European Union High
Representative, in an effort to stop the fighting.

12/16

14-60375

A/69/371
S/2014/650

24. It was in this context that I travelled to the region — Qatar, Kuwait, Egypt,
Jerusalem, Ramallah, Jordan and Saudi Arabia — from 20 to 25 July to support
mediation efforts to broker a ceasefire. At every stop of my visit, I carried a threepart message: first, stop the fighting; second, start the di alogue; and third, tackle the
root causes of the conflict. I emphasized that we cannot merely return to the status
quo ante, but must reach a durable ceasefire that addresses the underlying issues of
the conflict: ending rocket fire from Gaza and weapons-smuggling, opening the
crossings, lifting the blockade and bringing Gaza back under one Palestinian
Government that accepts and adheres to the PLO commitments. These issues were
captured by core elements of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), which,
unfortunately, remains unimplemented.
25. Part of a solution is a return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. The
underlying issues plaguing Gaza stand a far better chance of being resolved if they
are part of a comprehensive effort to reunite the Palestinian territory under one
legitimate Government. Redeployment of the Palestinian Authority security forces
to the crossings in south-eastern Gaza, the so-called Philadelphi Corridor, would be
a most useful step that would go a long way towards enabling the full reopening of
the crossings.
26. On 31 July, United States Secretary of State Kerry and I jointly announced a
humanitarian ceasefire for 72 hours to allow civilians to attend to the necessities of
their daily lives so disrupted by the hostilities, in the hope that it could be extended
and built upon by the parties to allow negotiations for a durable ceasefire to take
place. However, the ceasefire was broken only a few hours after it had started. On
5 August, an Egyptian-brokered 72-hour humanitarian ceasefire went into effect
while Israel and Palestinian factions commenced indirect talks through Egyptian
mediation in Cairo on a durable ceasefire agreement. The ceasefire was extended
three times, on 11, 14 and 18 August. I welcomed the announcement on 26 August
of an open-ended ceasefire for Gaza, brokered under Egyptian auspices. The
ceasefire was still holding at the time of reporting.
27. With the focus understandably on Gaza, we must not lose sight of the bigger
picture. The Gaza escalation, coupled with the tense situation in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, is a warning of the negative repercussions on the ground when there
is no credible political horizon towards a negotiated end to the occupation a nd
settlement of the conflict. The international community must urge and support both
parties in returning to meaningful negotiations and restoring prospects for a two State solution.
28. Tensions and violence in the West Bank continued throughout the repo rting
period. The Israel Defense Forces conducted 3,124 search-and-arrest operations,
resulting in 5,582 Palestinians being arrested. In the occupied Palestinian territory,
excluding the so-called Operation Protective Edge, a total of 96 Palestinians were
killed, including 58 civilians, and 5,245 Palestinians were injured. Six Israeli
civilians and two Israel Defense Forces personnel were killed, and 79 Israeli
civilians and 92 Israeli security forces personnel were injured.
29. The increase in settlements is particularly concerning. I have repeatedly
stressed that settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is illegal under international law. During the reporting period, Israel
reportedly announced tenders for the construction of approximately 5,083
residential units in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

14-60375

13/16

A/69/371
S/2014/650

30. Settler violence remained high. Attacks by settlers resulted in one Palestinian
being killed and 155 Palestinians, including 38 children, injured during th e reporting
period. One Israeli settler was killed and 75 Israeli settlers were injured by
Palestinians.
31. The demolitions and evictions that were carried out in Area C of the West
Bank are of deep concern and were condemned by the international communit y.
Palestinians require access to a fair planning and zoning regime, so as not to resort
to the building of unauthorized structures that lead to unjustified demolitions, which
often impact the most vulnerable people. During the reporting period, 698 struct ures
were demolished, leading to the displacement of some 1,179 Palestinians, including
624 children. Overall, more needs to be done to ease access and movement
throughout the West Bank, including Area C, the Jordan Valley and Gaza.
32. Tension also prevailed in occupied East Jerusalem. Restrictions on access to
holy sites in the Old City were imposed on Palestinians, including during the holy
month of Ramadan, leading to multiple clashes between worshippers and the Israeli
security forces.
33. The abduction and murder of a Palestinian teenager from the Shu’fat
neighbourhood on 2 July led to days of violent demonstrations in East Jerusalem.
Since July 2014, clashes between Palestinians and the Israeli security forces have
spread beyond the traditional hotspots to include Beit Hanina, Shu’fat, Wadi Al-Joz
and Jabal Al-Mukaaber.
34. On 24 April, some 90 Palestinian administrative detainees, including several
Palestinian Legislative Council members, went on an open-ended hunger strike to
protest the Israeli use of administrative detention. They were joined by other
Palestinian prisoners in solidarity, including by 5,100 prisoners for one day on
8 May. In late June, the Palestinian detainees suspended their hunger strike after
reportedly reaching a preliminary agreement with the Israel Prison Service for the
start of negotiations on their demands.
35. There are currently more than 450 Palestinians held under administrative
detention, more than twice the number being held in May. I reiterate my longstanding position that administrative detention should be used only in the most
limited number of cases, for as short a period as possible, and in exceptional cases.
Those detained must either be charged and brought to trial or released without delay.
36. Palestinians continued to advance their State-building programme, albeit
limited to the territory under the Authority’s control, which excluded Area C, East
Jerusalem and Gaza. This formed an essential complement to the political process.
Despite strong international consensus that the Palestinian Authority was capable of
running a State, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee was concerned primarily about
fiscal sustainability and economic viability, owing to the Palestinian Authority ’s
fiscal difficulties during the reporting period. The Committee also maintained that
concerted action was urgently needed to stabilize the fiscal position of the
Palestinian Authority and rekindle private-sector-led economic growth. Efforts by
the Palestinian Authority towards structural reforms, inc luding fiscal containment,
as well as adequate and predictable assistance to the Palestinian Government by
donors, were considered essential to managing the deficit.
37. The full implementation of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) and
Gaza’s recovery and long-term economic growth remain fundamental objectives of

14/16

14-60375

A/69/371
S/2014/650

the United Nations. Some significant progress was made towards that goal, but
much more needs to be done. In this context, $380 million wor th of United Nations
reconstruction work in Gaza has been approved by the Government of Israel. This
has had a positive effect, not only for those receiving services, but also on short term employment. However, the economic benefits of increased employment will
end with the conclusion of the work. Deeper and more fundamental change is
therefore required to enable a functioning economy in Gaza, beginning with the
authorization of exports to Israel, as well as transfers to and from the West Bank.
Without these essential steps, Gaza’s future will remain tenuous, at best.
38. I continue to worry about the state of human rights and freedoms in Gaza. Of
particular concern are reports of arbitrary detention being carried out by Palestinian
security forces and reports of ill-treatment in detention centres in Gaza. I am also
deeply concerned about reports of multiple executions without the approval of
President Abbas, which is required under Palestinian Basic Law. I call upon the de
facto authorities in Gaza to refrain from carrying out further executions. I also urge
the Palestinian Authority to ensure that it fulfils its responsibilities with full respect
for international human rights law.
39. The Palestinian Authority has achieved what it set out to do three years ago,
and this must be noted, preserved and built upon. However, I am concerned about
the ability of the Palestinian Authority to maintain those gains in the light of its
increasingly dire financial situation.
40. I strongly encouraged the Government of Israel to take all measures necessary
to facilitate economic growth, including further easing of access and movement
within, into and out of the West Bank for both goods and persons. In a positive
development, Israel provided a considerable number of permit s for Palestinian
residents of the West Bank to visit Jerusalem and Israel during Ramadan, and
applied more flexible regulations at checkpoints and points of passage during the
Holy Month.
41. I would like to express my deep appreciation to Robert H. Serry, the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, as well as to the
former and current Commissioners-General of UNRWA, Filippo Grandi and Pierre
Krähenbühl. I also pay tribute to all United Nations staff, who work under difficult ,
and at times dangerous, circumstances in the service of the Organization. In
particular, we mourn the 11 UNRWA staff members in Gaza who lost their lives
both on and off-duty.
42. I started the reporting period with a great sense of hope that, in the lig ht of the
ongoing negotiations towards a two-State solution, we could finally bear witness to
two States living side by side in peace and security, but I ended the reporting period
seriously concerned about the lack of progress and the return to violence b etween
Israel and Palestinian militants. The search for a negotiated solution which would
bring Israel and the Palestinians closer to durable peace and security, including the
realization of the legitimate aspiration of Palestinians to a State of their own , and of
Israel to live within recognized and secure borders, remains elusive. What is
important now is for the parties to engage seriously on substance. I call upon Israeli
and Palestinian leaders to show vision, courage and determination to reach a
historical peace agreement that would meet the legitimate aspirations of their
peoples. I remain convinced that direct and meaningful negotiations are the main
avenue towards a comprehensive, fair and lasting solution, including an end to

14-60375

15/16

A/69/371
S/2014/650

occupation, an end to conflict, and a just and agreed solution to the plight of
Palestinian refugees.
43. To this end, it is my sincere hope that the parties pursue vigorously all efforts
to sustain an environment that is conducive to the peace process moving forward. In
particular, I urge Israel to cease all settlement activity in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, and to take concrete steps to further ease the numerous
restrictions in place, both in the West Bank and Gaza. I also strongly encourage all
Palestinians on the path of non-violence and unity in line with past PLO
commitments, and call upon them to pursue their efforts to improve law and order
and combat extremism and incitement against Israel, and to continue building strong
and democratic institutions that are essential for a viable, independent Palestinian
State. In a highly volatile environment, it is crucial that any outbreaks of violence
that could undermine political efforts be prevented, and that the parties refrain from
provocative steps on the ground. The international community must also play its
role by shaping a legitimate and balanced framework that offers a credible political
path forward, combined with far-reaching steps on the ground. The international
community should understand that its own efforts in pursuit of this goal will
increasingly lack credibility if it continues to fail to take the steps necessary to
enable an environment conducive to serious engagement.
44. As Secretary-General, I will continue to ensure that the United Natio ns works
towards the establishment of an independent, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace with a secure Israel in the framework
of a comprehensive regional settlement consistent with Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1860 (2009), and in
accordance with the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle of land for
peace.

16/16

14-60375
