S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4392nd meeting
Friday, 19 October 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ryan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Amin
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Krokhmal
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Rosenblatt

Agenda
The situation in Somalia.
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2001/963).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-59138 (E)

*0159138*

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Motomura (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to
participate in today’s discussion on this important
issue. I would also like to thank the Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Prime Minister of
Somalia for their statements on the current situation in
Somalia.
Let me begin by commending the Government of
Djibouti for its painstaking efforts to assist the people
of Somalia to resolve their conflict by peaceful means.
Indeed, it was at the initiative of President Guelleh that
the Somalia National Peace Conference was held in
Arta, Djibouti, last year, which led to the eventual
establishment of the Transitional National Government
(TNG) in Somalia. Today’s public meeting of the
Security Council provides a valuable opportunity for
interested Member States to review developments in
Somalia over the past year.
Before I comment on the political developments
and the humanitarian situation, I would like to
announce today that the Government of Japan has
decided to provide, through the United Nations,
assistance amounting to $4.8 million in the fields of
national reconciliation and humanitarian assistance. I
will describe how this assistance will be used in the
course of my remarks.
Deep-seated divisions among clans and the
competing ambitions of clan-based armed groups have
caused the people of Somalia unspeakable hardships,
and pose the major obstacle to the reunification of the
country. Although the TNG was established as a result
of national reconciliation efforts with grass-roots
participation, armed confrontation among the clans has
not diminished, and the power configuration among
them seems to be exceedingly fluid. Some warlords
have established coalitions to fight against the TNG. At
the same time, northern regions, “Somaliland” and
“Puntland” still refuse to engage in dialogue with the
TNG. They are also in political turmoil, with groups
competing for internal political power in their own
self-governments. Thus the situation throughout the
country is still extremely fragile and volatile.

2

Japan has long advocated a comprehensive
political settlement to the conflict and national
reconciliation, with the goal of achieving a unified
Somali State. In our view, the establishment of the
TNG is but the first step in the daunting task of
national rehabilitation. Building an effective,
permanent and functioning representative Government
will be far more difficult; and it can only be achieved
with the commitment and agreement of the Somali
people themselves, as well as with adequate assistance
provided by the international community.
Under these circumstances, the rehabilitation of
Somalia will require an approach that seeks to rebuild
the Somali polity from the bottom up, including
support to entities that emerge in different parts of the
country through a participatory process. Japan thus
attaches importance to enhancing the role of civil
society in building peace and in the subsequent
reconciliation process. Toward that end, I am pleased
to announce today that Japan will contribute $500,000
for a project to be implemented by War-torn Societies
Project, a non-governmental organization (NGO). The
contribution will be made through the United Nations
Trust Fund for Somalia.
Somalia has been ravaged by conflict, drought,
flooding, epidemics, famine and the absence of
governance. Many of its people have been displaced;
all are suffering from grinding poverty. This grave
humanitarian situation is, and indeed must be, of deep
concern to the international community.
Japan pays high tribute to the brave and tireless
efforts of the humanitarian personnel working in this
unstable and challenging situation, and insists that they
be adequately protected. The abduction by members of
armed faction groups of NGO members and United
Nations personnel from the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) in March of this year was a
despicable crime and cannot be tolerated. The
international community, and particularly the Security
Council, should call upon all parties to acknowledge
the impartiality of relief agencies and NGOs, and to
cooperate with and ensure the safety of their personnel.
I would also like to commend the extremely
effective and useful activities carried out by such
United Nations humanitarian agencies as the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

(UNHCR), the World Food Programme (WFP) and
UNICEF, which are coordinated by the able direction
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. Japan, for its part, has been providing
emergency assistance, mainly through the WFP and
UNHCR, to help ease the plight of the Somali people.
Japan attaches great importance to the
educational and training needs of children of displaced
families. In addition to helping sustain their families,
they will also have to assume the future tasks of
national reconciliation and rehabilitation. I am
therefore pleased to announce that Japan will
provide — again through the United Nations Trust
Fund — financial support in the amount of $3.9 million
for the UNICEF project in Somalia, which provides
children with learning opportunities and prepares them
for the restoration of peace, law and order. In addition,
Japan recently decided to provide emergency assistance
amounting to $420,000 in response to the WFP’s
appeal for drought-relief assistance.
With respect to the request contained in the
Security Council’s presidential statement of 11 January
2001 — that the Secretary-General prepare a proposal
for a post-conflict peace-building mission in
Somalia — Japan supports the view expressed in the
Secretary-General’s recent report that, with the security
situation being so uncertain, the establishment of such
a mission at this time would be premature.
In the meantime, Japan will continue to closely
follow the situation in Somalia. We stand ready to
respond to urgent humanitarian and emergency needs
as they arise.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union — Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well
as the European Free Trade Association country
member of the European Economic Area — Iceland —
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union warmly welcomes today’s
public debate on Somalia and the opportunity it

provides for Member States to share their assessments
of the situation in Somalia and their thoughts on the
United Nations role both there and in the Horn of
Africa as a whole.
I should like also to welcome among us Prime
Minister Galaydh of the Transitional Government of
Somalia and to thank him for his statement, which was
very useful and informative.
The Transitional Government has been in place
for nearly a year — that is, for a third of its mandate —
and has had to confront many problems, as today’s
debate has shown. The European Union renews its
appeal to the Transitional Government to pursue its
efforts towards national reconciliation in a genuine
spirit of compromise, by peaceful means and with due
respect for all entities that have achieved a certain
degree of stability. The EU encourages all parties in
Somalia that have not participated in the Arta process
to enter into a dialogue in the same genuine spirit of
compromise, with a view to advancing and completing
the reconciliation process among all Somalis.
The EU welcomes the creation of the National
Commission for Reconciliation and Property
Settlement.
This
Commission
must
function
independently of the Government and constitute an
important forum for dialogue under the ownership of
all Somalis and with the support of the international
community. As suggested by the Inter-Government
Authority on Development (IGAD) Partners Forum, the
functional cooperation between the various political
and administrative entities represents an important
confidence-building measure.
Regarding human rights, the EU believes that the
crimes committed during the civil war at the end of the
1980s should not go unpunished. The administration of
justice must be strengthened in order to make possible
a fair trial for the perpetrators of those crimes.
The EU remains deeply concerned by the security
situation in Somalia, and in Mogadishu in particular.
Attacks against civilians and the staff of humanitarian
organizations are unacceptable and must cease. Nongovernmental organizations are doing exemplary work
in difficult conditions, and we pay tribute to their
efforts. The EU is also concerned by the presence of
many anti-personnel mines in several regions. These
mines present a great danger not only to the Somali
population as a whole, but also to humanitarian staff
working there. Thus it is important that the Mogadishu

3

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

airport and port be reopened, so that humanitarian aid
can be brought in and also to avoid prolonging the
political isolation of Somalia.

parties involved should also act. New means should be
put into play rapidly to bring Somalia out of its current
impasse and to enable a lasting peace to be established.

Allow me to address an issue that is very much in
the news at the moment: terrorism. The EU urges the
Transitional Government to cooperate with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and with the
United States Government on this question. The EU is
itself currently considering how best to help the
Transitional Government respond to the counterterrorism Committee’s requests.

The European Union, both collectively and
through bilateral aid from its Member States, is
participating in the reconstruction of the country. The
Union is ready to examine possibilities for institutionbuilding and support for good governance. We have
taken note of the needs expressed by the Transitional
Government regarding police training and the
establishment of regional administrations, as envisaged
in the Transitional National Charter.

The situation in Somalia is closely linked to that
of its neighbours. So that peace may be established in
the Horn of Africa, the EU calls for the resumption of
political contacts between the Transitional Government
and its neighbours, particularly Ethiopia. States in the
region should abstain from military involvement in
Somalia or from taking any other initiative that could
jeopardize that country’s sovereignty, political
independence and unity. Traffic in arms should also
cease.

A lasting solution for Somalia remains to be
found. The parties must urgently pool their efforts in
order for peace to be achieved. Peace must come to
seem more attractive to the parties involved than the
continuation of a latent conflict which has had such
dire consequences for the population. We hope that the
United Nations, the countries of the region and other
countries interested in stability in the Horn of Africa
will cooperate fully to this end.

The EU calls once again on the countries
involved to respect the arms embargo imposed by the
Security Council. The European Union supports all
ongoing regional efforts to find a political solution to
the Somali question, particularly those of IGAD and of
the Organization of African Unity. The EU agrees with
the Secretary-General that coordination of efforts
among external actors is still needed and that a
consultative mechanism could be useful to that effect.
The Secretary-General’s idea of forming a committee
of friends of Somalia is worth examining.
The EU takes note of the recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s report. At the beginning of this
year, the Security Council had wanted a peace-building
mission to be established in Somalia and had asked the
Secretary-General to draw up a proposal to that end.
The Secretary-General currently deems that at this
stage, the conditions for sending such a mission not
been met. Security concerns remain. We agree with the
Secretary-General that a thorough review of the
security situation has to be carried out. We are in
favour of a new security assessment.
All parties to the conflict should redouble their
efforts to bring about the right conditions for the
deployment of international personnel. In parallel,
individuals and countries that have influence on the

4

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Nigeria. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): I should like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, and the Republic of Ireland, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. In the same vein, I
would like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France, for a very
successful presidency in September.
I would like take this opportunity to felicitate
Guinea, Cameroon, the Syrian Arab Republic, Bulgaria
and Mexico on their election to the Council as nonpermanent members for the period 2002-2003. Nigeria
looks forward to working closely with them, as it has
done with the outgoing members of the Council.
The important issue before the Council today is
Somalia. The situation in Somalia continues to engage
the attention of the international community, and our
Organization in particular, as it has done over the past
decade. In a presidential statement issued in November
1999, the Council reaffirmed its commitment to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation
in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and unity of
Somalia, in accordance with the principles of the

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

Charter of the United Nations. The Council also
expressed its concern at the absence of a central
authority, which had exacerbated the dire political,
economic and security situation in the country.
In considering the plight of this State Member of
our Organization, and the way forward in resolving its
problems, the Secretary-General, in fulfilment of a
Council mandate, has rendered to the Council his most
recent report on the situation in Somalia.
In the period between the issuance of the current
report, contained in document S/2001/963, and the
previous one, contained in document S/2000/1211,
issued in December 2000, significant developments
have occurred in Somalia. The internal political
situation has evolved to the extent that the Transitional
National Government (TNG), led by President
Abdikassim Salad Hassan, has begun to take hold and
put in place the infrastructures of administration and a
functioning State. A vivid and eloquent example of this
happy development is the presence among us of the
Permanent Representative of Somalia. It is, without
doubt, a good omen that, after many years of effective
representation being in abeyance, Somalia is finally
able to send an Ambassador to the United Nations. Mr.
Ali Khalif Galaydh, the Prime Minister of Somalia, is
also in this great Chamber today, participating in and
listening to this debate on the situation in his country.
My delegation would like to reiterate its support
for the peace process that has made the present
situation possible. In this regard, Nigeria would like to
pay tribute to President Guelleh of Djibouti for his
dedicated and tireless peace initiatives with regard to
Somalia, which have led directly to the establishment
of the TNG. It is worthy of note and praise that this
fruitful initiative enjoyed the support of the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity, the League
of Arab States and the European Union.
In the clearly daunting task of moving the peace
process forward and creating a more stable
environment in the country, the inclination of the TNG
to reach out and bring on board all the parties yet to
accept its authority and control over the entire country
is most commendable. Nigeria believes that all
Somalis, as stakeholders in the peace of their country,
must put aside all parochial considerations and fully
embrace dialogue. In the view of my delegation, this
will pave the way for lasting peace, stability, national
rehabilitation and reconstruction for Somalia. The

leaders of Africa, at the thirty-seventh summit of the
OAU, held in Lusaka, Zambia, in July 2001, affirmed
this position. The summit reiterated Africa’s
commitment to the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Somalia. It expressed its support for the
Arta process and called on the TNG to intensify efforts
to build upon it with the support of the United Nations,
in cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.
On the issue of the humanitarian and
development situation in Somalia, and the response to
it by the international community, the SecretaryGeneral’s report offers a grim and disturbing
assessment. Food security in the country, especially in
the southern part, has deteriorated as a result of a
combination of factors, such as drought and other
natural causes. As a consequence, an estimated 750,000
people are in danger of starvation and therefore in need
of international food assistance. This situation is
compounded by the prevalence of diseases such as
cholera, as well as a lack of water and basic
infrastructure. Although the United Nations and its
partners have contributed to alleviating the emergency
situation, much remains to be done if the humanitarian
and development challenges facing Somalia are to be
fully confronted and the TNG is to be given a fighting
chance of consolidating the peace in the country.
In this regard, it is particularly disturbing that,
according to the Secretary-General’s report, only $20.7
million — 16 per cent of the $126 million requested for
the Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for 2001 — has
been provided by Member States. This assistance, as
we all know, is required for humanitarian, recovery and
development activities in the country.
The Secretary-General’s report also asserts that
the security situation in Somalia has not improved
since February, when an earlier security assessment of
Mogadishu was undertaken. It concludes, in paragraph
72, that the time is not ripe for a United Nations postconflict peace-building office for Somalia, as there is
“no single authority in the country that can assure
security and unimpeded access to the United Nations
even in Mogadishu”.
The question that may be asked is what the
United Nations and the international community at
large can and should do to see Somalia through this
delicate and critical transition period. I am of the firm
belief that the peace process must be given full support

5

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

and encouragement. In the view of my delegation, one
definite way of manifesting such support would be
through the mobilization of necessary material
resources, as well as the taking of symbolic, yet
powerful, steps on behalf of the peace process.
Peace must be made attractive and irresistible to
all, including those who otherwise might have little
interest in embracing it. Nigeria believes that the
United Nations must lead the way and be in the
vanguard of this effort. It must see post-conflict peacebuilding as an urgent challenge in Somalia if that
country is to enjoy lasting peace.
In this regard, my delegation urges the Security
Council to urgently undertake a fact-finding mission to
Somalia in order to ascertain the situation on the
ground. These are hopeful times for Somalia. Many of us
have waited long for this moment. We must not allow
this opportunity to slip away. Somalia must never again
be allowed to witness the horrors of the recent past.
The President: I thank the representative of
Nigeria for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Yemen. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express our sincere congratulations
to you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, a presidency that will be
distinguished by your dynamism and perseverance, for
which you are well known. We also thank your
predecessor, Mr. Jean-David Levitte, Ambassador of
France, who guided the work of the Council in an
excellent manner. I also welcome the Prime Minister of
Somalia and the Representative of the SecretaryGeneral.
Yemen is linked to Somalia by the fact that we
share the same sea and have deep-rooted historical ties,
reflected in a network of cultural, commercial,
economic and political bonds. We live in a region
where we affect and are affected by what happens to
each of us.
The collapse of the central Government 10 years
ago led not only to fragmentation, factionalism, the
spread of anarchy and the erosion of the State
institutions in Somalia, but also to the creation of
instability in the region as a result of which the arms
trade seems to be flourishing. Furthermore, terrorist

6

organizations and groupings are growing in number, as
are smuggling and piracy operations on the seas. Drug
traffic has also spread, and the long Yemeni coast is
full of helpless people who risk their lives to reach the
safety of our shores. Amid this anarchy the brotherly
people of Somali are experiencing a deterioration in
their living standards, a lack of basic services and the
spread of poverty and disease. We are indeed grateful
to you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
on the deteriorating situation of Somalia at a time when
the world seems to have grown accustomed to the
collapse and indeed extinction of the Somali State.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the situation in Somalia, as well as the efforts
being made by the United Nations to restore peace and
stability and to meet the basic and humanitarian needs
of the Somali people.
The Arta process, which was hosted by Djibouti,
is a bright spot in a series of sad events in Somalia
represented by internal divisions, warring and violence
among the factions. The Arta process has raised the
flag of unity and peace. It has sought to bring together
the largest number of civil society representatives and
has emphasized dialogue as a way to restore peace and
national unity and to rehabilitate the State. Because it
represents an alternative to anarchy and war, it received
wide popular support. The international community
endorsed those steps. This was clearly evident in the
participation of President Abdikassim Salad Hassan in
the Millennium Summit and was a step towards
restoring Somalia’s sovereignty.
Today we agree with the Secretary-General that it
is incumbent on us to pursue completion of the Arta
process, despite the obstacles to the peace process and
to the rebuilding of the State. We also wish to
encourage dialogue between the Transitional National
Government and Somali factions. In this regard, Yemen
stands ready to make every effort to facilitate that
dialogue, which must be supported by the neighbouring
countries and regional organizations, including the
League of Arab States and the Organization of African
Unity, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the European Union.
We look positively on the Secretary-General’s
proposal to set up a Committee of Friends of Somalia
to emphasize ways and means to call attention to
Somalia’s needs in the area of national reconciliation,
as well as to provide assistance in mobilizing funds for

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

reconstruction and development. We also support the
proposal to establish a peace-building office in
Somalia. We may also call for a fact-finding mission to
Somalia. We emphasize once again the role of the
United Nations, particularly the role of the Security
Council, in deploying all efforts to help Somalia
restore its sovereignty and national unity so that peace
and stability prevail in that sister country.
The President: I thank the representative of
Yemen for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): I would like to take this
opportunity first to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. We also welcome the fact
that this open debate is taking place under your
presidency. I also wish to thank last month’s President,
Ambassador Levitte of France, for the able way in
which he led the Council’s work. It goes without
saying that both Ireland and France are friends not only
of Ethiopia, but also of Africa. I just want to note that
for the record.
Like other delegations before me, I welcome the
Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Ali Khalif Galaydh. I
am encouraged by the content of his statement.
A lot has been said here, and a lot has not been
said. I would like to dwell more on the few things that
have not been said.
If we look at the whole process that led to the
Arta Peace Conference on Somalia, we see that there
were, as some have indicated, previous processes, but,
as has also been indicated, these processes were also
very genuine. They took place in Djibouti. In fact, the
first one on Somalia took place in 1991. It was held in
Djibouti. Others were held in Ethiopia, Egypt, Kenya,
Libya and Yemen. In Ethiopia’s view, all these were
genuine attempts to resolve the Somali question in the
interest of the people of Somalia. We believed that they
paved the way for what happened at Arta.
I want that also to be on the record, because some
seem not to have that in their record, to judge from
what they have stated. At least that was the implication —
not by many, but by one or two speakers.

Ethiopia fully supported the Arta process from the
beginning. I want it to be on the Council’s record that
even where the meeting took place was symbolic — the
air-conditioned tent was provided by Ethiopia. It cost
us more than $250,000. To many this may not seem
like a lot of money, but for a poor country like Ethiopia
it was. We continue to support the Arta process. We
believe that that process was a step forward for peace
and reconciliation in Somalia.
We worked very hard so that this process would
not unravel. In fact, if we look at the IGAD member
States, we see that Ethiopia played a very important,
and at crucial times, leading role to ensure that all were
on board.
IGAD’s last position on this matter was adopted
in Khartoum last November, when a head of State from
Somalia took part in one of its meetings for the first
time after 10 years’ absence. So that there is no
confusion, I would like to cite the gist of IGAD’s
position, contained in a resolution stating that the heads
of State and Government:
“1. Affirm that the Arta Peace Conference
that resulted in the establishment of the
Transitional Government for Somalia constituted
a major achievement in the Somali peace process;
“2. Urge the Transitional Government and
all parties and administrations of Somalia to
create the environment that would bring into the
process those that did not participate at the Arta
Conference with the objective of widening and
deepening the process of national reconciliation;
“3. Insist that the peace process in
Somalia must continue and be completed through
dialogue and not by resorting to the use of force;
“4. Encourage Somalia’s neighbours and
the current Chairman of IGAD to establish a
mechanism that would enable them to continue to
assist the Somalis to achieve full peace, national
reconciliation, and unity”.
This is a point also taken in the Secretary-General’s
report.
The resolution continues:
“5. Affirm the need for all necessary
measures to be taken to ensure that the territory of
Somalia is not used as a springboard by groups
inimical to the peace and security of the subregion;

7

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

“6. Reaffirm IGAD’s commitment to the
unity and territorial integrity of Somalia;

group with which one can continuously take up the
issues, as we have done.

“7. Welcome the participation of the
Transitional Government of Somalia in the
deliberations and activities of IGAD, bearing in
mind that regular and continuing evaluation of
progress
towards
peace
and
national
reconciliation in the country will be carried out;

We are ready to help in this situation. Norway
suggested that Ethiopia should try to facilitate and use
its influence. We will accept this suggestion. We are
ready to do it. But when we speak of these realities,
some in the TNG — I will not say “all” — do not like
it; they are not comfortable with it. I would even say
that there are others who one could say are more
Catholic than the Pope; they even go beyond the TNG.
We will not accept this.

“8. Urgently call upon the international
community to support the rehabilitation in
Somalia through direct assistance to the
Transitional Government and the regions which
had established peace and stability through selfadministration, as long as they are committed to
the peace process.” (S/2001/120, annex II)
Well, the implication of this summit position,
which is the position of the region, including Somalia,
is that if the Transitional Government has to be in
place, then others who did not take part have to be on
board. In fact an IGAD delegation was sent to
Mogadishu to discuss this issue with the TNG and to
continue this reconciliation process. At that time, for
reasons known only to itself, the TNG rejected this. It
referred to these groups as rebels, as warlords, and
would not talk to them.
What happened as a result? Others did the same.
They expressed rejection of the TNG; they said there
was no such thing as a TNG, and therefore it was just
another faction. So the TNG could go beyond this.
We have always been transparent. We have
always been frank. I will not change that position
today. I want the Council to know that for us in the
region — in Ethiopia, in particular, and I can only
speak for Ethiopia — we see that the Transitional
Government itself is not of one mind. We believe that
there are basically three groups. There are the
extremists of Al-Ittihad, Al-Islah and the Muslim
Brotherhood. There are also those who are ready for
reconciliation. The first group, by the way, used to
have what were called the Islamic courts and their
militia, and they had longstanding, strong financial
institutions through a number of activities. There is no
need to go into the details; I think most members of the
Council are familiar with them. There is a second
group that is ready for reconciliation, but it lacks the
financial and military muscle. There is a third group
that shuttles between those two, and is used by either.
Hence, when we talk with the TNG, there is no single

8

We are not partial to anyone, whether the TNG, the
Somalia Reconciliation and Restoration Council,
“Somaliland”, “Puntland” or any other group. Ethiopia is
not for the TNG; Ethiopia is not for the SRRC; Ethiopia is
not for “Somaliland”; it is not for “Puntland”. It is for
Somalia and the people of Somalia.
At the moment we do not see, as the United
States representative once said, any group or entity that
has the political legitimacy and the support of
everybody throughout Somalia. The Arta peace process
is the best of the processes so far. But it is a still
incomplete process that IGAD speaks of. By the way,
the Transitional National Assembly and the Charter
also speak about what came out of Arta. Even those
who claim that we should not speak to this one or that
one are not right. That is not what the Arta process
said. We have the Charter; we have the positions.
Some have tried to pretend that the Somalia
Reconciliation and Restoration Council is supported by
one country, that one country established it, that one
country is behind it. That reference — let us take away
all the pretences — is to Ethiopia. This is because that
group met in a place called Awasa in southern Ethiopia.
It was the first time Ethiopia had facilitated meetings
for Somalis. They have met many times; we simply
facilitated this.
The Foreign Minister of Somalia, Mr. Ismail
Mohamoud Hurre, said of the SRRC last June:
“Ethiopia is open to everyone. Many
Somalis come to Addis Ababa and discuss
matters with the Ethiopians. The SRRC are part
of that. We are not averse to Ethiopia carrying on
discussions with them, as it is all part of the
reconciliation and peace process”.
That was what the Foreign Minister of the TNG said.

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

Today the Prime Minister, Mr. Ali Khalif
Galaydh, said that the Somali Government would
welcome every positive effort by the neighbouring
countries and the world community that can facilitate
this process. He went on to say that they were prepared
to engage those outside the Arta process through
sustained dialogue and negotiations. We welcome this
statement, but I do not welcome indications by
delegations that any support for the SRRC or any
connection to it is like revitalizing warlordism. We do
not find this at all helpful for the reconciliation
process. Nobody, least of all Ethiopia, which has the
longest border with Somalia, wants to revive that.
The biggest problems of the last ten years have
fallen on Ethiopia, a poor country. This includes
terrorism, as well as taking up the burdens of our
people, our brothers and sisters, who came from across
the border. Next to Somalia, the largest concentration
of Somalis in the Horn of Africa or anywhere in the
world is in Ethiopia, where there are over 5 million
Somalis, occupying more than one quarter of Ethiopian
territory. One of the federated states includes more than
one quarter of Ethiopia. That is where I myself come
from. I am an ethnic Somali. There are more than 5
million of us. So, next to the Somalis of Somalia, the
Ethiopians are the ones who are most affected and want
the stability of Somalia.
However, our allegiance and support is for the
people of Somalia. The TNG must encompass all
Somalis, including those who, in the words of the
IGAD summit, have not been part of the process. The
Secretary-General’s report and the Council on previous
occasions have said that those who are not already on
board have to be brought into the process.
Should we wait until all of them accept the peace
process? No. We should engage those who are ready
for reconciliation and peace, whether it is the Somalia
Reconciliation and Restoration Council (SRRC) or any
other group or faction outside the TNG. We should
disregard and isolate those who are not for peace.
Somalia’s reconciliation process will not be complete if
we do not engage all these groups that I have
mentioned.
There are one or two more points I would like to
touch on before I conclude. We would like to call on
the Security Council to enforce the arms embargo
against Somalia. This has been stated by some. We
have in the past brought attention to the fact that arms

have been shipped into Somalia by air and by sea. This
has made the situation in Somalia much worse and as a
result we have been victims of terrorism carried out on
our soil, deep inside Ethiopia, committed by groups
coming from Somalia — Al-Itihad was one of them.
They did not hide their identity and claimed
responsibility for what they had done: explosions in
several public buildings and mining and attacking rail
and road transport. These groups did not cease to exist
because it suddenly dawned on them that what they
were doing was not good. They were stopped — at
least until now — by actions taken by Ethiopia to
defend itself after it was attacked. We took action in
1997 by destroying the terrorist bases inside Somalia.
One of them was at Luuq. At least 26 multinationals
were from outside the region. I can recall a number of
them, most of whom are part of the same groups that
make up Al-Qaida. Some may try to sell the idea that
Al-Qaida and international terrorist groups are not in
Somalia; we disagree. We have ample evidence. As we
speak, my Government is taking action to provide
security for more than one foreign embassy in Addis
Ababa, as a result of threats made by these groups. We
are not going to be like those who take ostrich-like
actions. Some of you can afford to do that, as you are
not neighbours of Somalia but live thousands of
kilometres away. In that tranquillity, you can make
statements that appear fine but, in reality, do not help
the situation.
I would now like to touch upon one very serious
issue, one of immediate concern to ordinary Somalis —
a matter of life and death. Dire humanitarian needs can
be due to several factors, but arise mainly as a result of
the failure of the gu rains. These are the main rains that
usually come in summer. Hundreds of thousands in
Bakool, Bay, Gedo, Hiiraan and many parts of the
northeast of Somalia need immediate assistance. We
call upon the international community to assist if a
tragedy is to be avoided there.
In Ethiopia, we already have, in our province in
Warder, in the Degehabur, in Gode, and the
surrounding areas, the thousands who have crossed into
the Ethiopian part of the Somali region. These areas of
Ethiopia themselves have also suffered. To the best of
our ability, we are trying to assist in this particular
case.
In conclusion, I would say, let us be positive.
Look at some delegations, such as Norway, who have
also accepted what I would call the legitimate concerns

9

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

of neighbouring countries. There is nobody to take
action when such things as have happened several
times take place over a border that is nearly 2,000
kilometres long. Another suffering country is Kenya.
They will speak for themselves. Djibouti also has a
border of about 70 kilometres with a very stable part of
Somalia. Nonetheless, they have also been affected in
one way or another.
So, when you look at this, I would appeal to the
Council that the interest of the Somali people in toto
should be seen. That is why we welcome all the
positive steps that will be taken by the TNG within its
capacity. I think we should not have any delusions that
they are in a position, for example, to take actions
against terrorism, even if they wished to, because, as I
have said, there are some within the Government that
are part of that problem.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ethiopia for his kind words to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is my pleasure, Sir, to congratulate your
friendly country, Ireland, and to congratulate you
personally on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We thank you for
providing this opportunity to Member States to
deliberate once again on current developments in
Somalia with a view to finding a solution to the tragedy
of the Somali people, who for so long have suffered
war and its destructive effects.
Allow us also to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Levitte, the Permanent Representative of
France, for his presidency of the Security Council last
month. Allow us also to express our pleasure at the
presence of the Prime Minister of the Transitional
National Government in Somalia and his delegation,
who are with us.
All statements before the Security Council today
have been unanimous in stressing the need for more
attention on the part of the international community,
and the United Nations, in particular, to the continuing
difficult situation in Somalia.
The Syrian Arab Republic believes that the
ongoing tragedy of the brotherly Somali people ought

10

to have come to an end long, long ago. The civil war
visited upon Somalia for so many years has led to
devastation in all fields: humanitarian, security,
economic, social and cultural. While the international
community and the United Nations have made
strenuous efforts to find solutions to similar problems
in other parts of the world — Africa, the Balkans and
Asia — we note that the situation in Somalia has not
received the necessary attention over the past decade.
The Somali people continue to suffer the scourge
of war and its destructive effects. Dozens of resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations addressing other
conflicts and wars were not reduplicated in the case of
Somalia. Where was Somalia when the United Nations
and its various organs set out their positions on
peacekeeping, post-conflict peace-building and the
need to end massacres and violations of human rights?
In all the devastation visited upon Somalia, there
was a glimpse of hope in the success of the Conference
held in Arta, in the sister Republic of Djibouti, and
presided over by President Ismail Omar Guelleh. The
Conference drew together broad segments of Somali
society. The Syrian Arab Republic welcomed the
achievements of the representatives of the Somali
people, who created the Transitional National
Assembly and elected Mr. Abdikassim Salad Hassan
President of the Somali Democratic Republic.
In his statement during the general debate of the
General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session, Mr. Farouk
Al-Shara’, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria, stated
that these two achievements were major pillars for the
restoration of Somali state institutions. He called on the
international community to redouble its efforts to help
Somalis carry out the tasks of reconstruction and
rehabilitation.
In solidarity with our brothers, the Somali people,
the Arab Summit held in Amman on 26 and 27 March
adopted a resolution calling on all factions and sectors
of Somali society to cooperate to their utmost ability
with the elected President and his Government to
achieve security and stability and to ensure the
territorial integrity, reconstruction and rehabilitation of
Somalia. The Arab Summit set aside $54 million to
reintegrate and resettle militia members and to restore
state institutions. The Transitional National Government
has made great efforts at various levels to ensure
national reconciliation and to attract regional and world
support for its work. In this context, the 37th Assembly

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), held in Lusaka, reaffirmed the
commitment of the OAU to Somalia’s territorial
integrity, independence and unity. The OAU Council of
Ministers stressed its support for Somalia’s
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity and for all
efforts to create a National Commission for
Reconciliation and Property Settlement.
My delegation has considered the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Somalia, contained
in document S/2001/963 of 11 October 2001. We thank
the Secretary-General and his Representative for their
efforts in support of the Somali people. The report
includes a great deal of information on the various
developments that have taken place in Somalia since
last year. It accurately reflects the deteriorating
economic and humanitarian situation, as well as the
dire need of tens of thousands of Somalis for speedy
humanitarian assistance to save them from certain
death. In several paragraphs, the report stresses that
dire poverty, the lack of employment opportunities and
the total destruction of infrastructures and social
services cannot be addressed in the absence of
appropriate material and financial resources. The report
states that many programmes linked to the Transitional
National Government have obtained no assistance from
international donors, including United Nations agencies.
In the light of the importance of achieving peace
in Somalia and of preserving its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the Syrian Arab Republic is
following with satisfaction the efforts of the
Transitional National Government in Somalia. We call
on all factions and sectors in that country to cooperate
with the Government through a constructive national
dialogue aimed at restoring peace, security and stability
to Somalia. Syria appeals to all donor States to provide
all forms of assistance to that Government in order to
enable it to revitalize the institutions that were
demolished in the civil war and to rebuild the country’s
infrastructure in order to achieve normalcy in the lives
of the Somali people.
Syria believes that a Security Council mission to
evaluate the situation on the ground and to prepare
specific proposals would help to ensure a more
effective role for the United Nations and the Security
Council in helping the Government to extend its
control over all Somalia. We believe that such
assistance includes the deployment of an international
peace-building mission to help the Transitional

National Government, which would make a real and
effective contribution and demonstrate the international
community’s resolve to end the crisis in Somalia.
The Somali people has suffered for a very long
time. The Security Council must not stop at merely
hearing reports and statements or at adopting
resolutions that remain dead letter and unimplemented
on the ground. The time has come to act stoutly by
adopting positions that can attain the fundamental
objectives and fulfil the task of the Security Council:
the maintenance of international peace and security
throughout the world, including Somalia.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Qatar. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to extend to you, Sir, my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and to wish you every
success in your work. I also thank your predecessor,
the Ambassador of France, who presided over the work
of the Council last month.
The Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Galaydh, has
honoured the Council with his presence today, and we
welcome him.
The people of Somalia have suffered much as a
result of 10 years of civil war. International military
intervention was needed to restore peace. We regret
that such international efforts have not succeeded in
realizing the Somali people’s search for peace. Some
political forces in Somalia have largely ensured the
failure of any attempt by international forces to
establish peace and create a coalition Government that
would include all political factions.
Following
the
Somalia
National
Peace
Conference, held at Arta, Djibouti, in which the
Government of Qatar participated, we saw the
formation of the Transitional National Government
(TNG), led by President Abdikassim Salad Hassan.
Now, we all look forward to supporting that young
Government; we hope it will be able to establish unity
and extend its authority throughout Somali territory,
thus serving as the sole legitimate Government. That
would restore peace and security, and, under its new
leadership, the Government would be able to bring
together all parties and factions and convince them to
join in a governing coalition.

11

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

We know that the task facing President Abdikassim
Salad Hassan — the restoration of peace and security —
is an extremely difficult one in view of the present
situation in Somalia. The long civil war has had
negative social repercussions in Somalia, including the
fragmentation of civil society. It is no easy matter to
consolidate national unity in Somalia, especially given
the meagre resources available to the Government.
Somalia still needs the international community’s
support for its fledgling Government. We consider it
important that, through the Security Council and the
United Nations in general, the international community
should come to that Government’s assistance. We must
take the first step: asking the Representative of the
Secretary-General to examine the situation in Somalia
and then closely to follow developments in all their
aspects. The task is also to ensure coordination among
neighbouring countries and among relevant regional
and international organizations.
My delegation urges the Security Council to call
for respect for the territorial integrity of Somalia and to
secure commitments from other countries to refrain
from all interference in Somalia’s internal affairs and
from encouraging secessionist factions whose aim is to
undermine the security and stability of Somalia. My
delegation believes that if the status quo continues and
if the international community fails to support the new
Government, Somalia could become a haven for
fugitives trying to evade justice. Indeed, we must
eliminate all such sanctuaries and safe havens. That —
like what is now taking place in Afghanistan — would
be painful for the entire world.
I wish in conclusion to express our hope that the
Security Council will shoulder its responsibility to
return the fraternal country of Somalia to normalcy,
and that it will make every possible effort to send a
mission to that country to report on progress towards
the restoration of peace and to help Somalia become a
valued member of the international community.
The President: I thank the representative of
Qatar for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Permanent Observer of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, His
Excellency Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, to whom the Council
has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure. I invite Mr. Lamani to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

12

Mr. Lamani (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Sir,
I take this opportunity to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. We are confident that, under
your able leadership, the Council will successfully
complete the tasks before it. I wish also to thank you
for convening this open meeting, which will help
heighten the international community’s concern with
respect to the situation in Somalia. We hope that
debates of this kind will continue, because they
enhance the transparency of the United Nations and of
the Council’s decision-making process.
The international community warmly welcomes
the progress along the path of peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia that has come about thanks to
the perseverance and commendable efforts of
international and regional organizations and of
neighbouring States, notably the Republic of Djibouti,
whose active role in the quest for a lasting political
settlement of the crisis in Somalia is well known.
We reaffirm our conviction that the United
Nations should continue its search for lasting peace and
stability in Somalia, in cooperation with the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the
League of Arab States, the Organization of African
Unity and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, as well as with other organizations.
Here, let me make particular mention of the tireless and
praiseworthy efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and of the important role he is playing in this
process.
We agree with the view expressed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2001/963) on the need for a
mechanism that would facilitate a uniform approach
and exchange of information among all outside parties
with an interest in a lasting peace in Somalia. We also
welcome the Secretary-General’s proposal on
establishing a committee of friends of Somalia to focus
on ways and means of drawing attention to Somalia’s
needs in the area of national reconciliation as well as to
help mobilize resources for rehabilitation and
development. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the peace process in Somalia needs support, that the
rule of law should be established and that national
political and judicial institutions should be restored.
As the report says, the security situation in
Somalia has not improved and remains, by and large,
the same as it had been previously and that it has thus

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

not been possible to deploy a peace-building office in
the country. But it is our view that a tangible United
Nations presence in the area could help overcome the
present obstacles.
Success in the process towards peace and national
reconciliation has led to the formation of a parliament,
the Transitional National Assembly, with the
participation of all the country’s factions and views,
and to the appointment of a President, a Prime Minister
and a Government. We affirm our support for the
efforts of the Transitional National Government to
promote the process of national reconciliation and
reconstruction in Somalia, and we believe that the
international community should provide the assistance
needed to help rebuild infrastructure and administrative
and other institutions.
It is indeed fortunate that His Excellency Mr. Ali
Khalif Galaydh, the Prime Minister of Somalia, is
present at today’s meeting and that he had the
opportunity to put Somalia’s case before the Security
Council. We believe that we are all obliged to help
support the efforts of the Somali Government to regain
control over the country and to put an end to the tragic
situation stemming from the civil and tribal wars that
have long afflicted the Somali people. In this respect,
we are convinced that the primary and ultimate
responsibility for the establishment of peace and
stability in Somalia lies with the Somali people and its
leaders. Support must be provided, however, by the
international community if such efforts are to succeed.
The people of Somalia have suffered immensely
and for a long time. It is high time that the international
community assumed its responsibility in preserving
international peace and security by providing
humanitarian assistance, in view of the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation of the Somali people. It is
our hope that the United Nations agencies and its
international partners will pursue and expand their
humanitarian activities in Somalia to help alleviate the
suffering of the Somali people.
The world is undergoing turbulent times today.
Humanity is ill at ease, racked by war, terrorism,
underdevelopment, religious intolerance, tension and
instability. We all feel the upheavals in international
life. Our international community is seeking to
rearrange and reorder its priorities. This is why we say
we should not postpone solutions to any problem,
because issues of peace and security are serious, urgent

and interrelated. Thus, we believe that the situation in
Somalia demands the immediate intervention of the
international community, through the United Nations,
to support the national institutions in Somalia, so that
peace and stability can prevail and lead to economic
and social development.
In conclusion, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference reiterates the need for the international
community to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
These are principles that have been emphasized by all
the Islamic Conferences, be they ministerial or at the
summit level.
The President: I thank Mr. Lamani for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express to you, Sir, our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month. We are confident
that your wisdom and skill will ensure success for your
presidency. I cannot fail to express our appreciation to
the Ambassador of France for his presidency of the
Security Council last month.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report on the issue under consideration today, and to his
Representative for the statement he made this morning.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
sisterly country of Djibouti for the efforts made on behalf
of our brothers the Somali people to overcome the crisis
in Somalia and for creating the necessary environment to
set up the Transitional National Government (TNG).
Finally, I am duty-bound to welcome the Prime Minister
of the Transitional National Government and the
delegation accompanying him, as they represent the State
of Somalia.
We take part in the Security Council’s meeting
today to express our support to sisterly Somalia and its
people. We also express, together with all other Arab
States, our concern that Somalia become again a
united, fully sovereign and independent State able to
defend the vital interests of the Somali people,
following the attempts by evil forces — external and
internal — to tear apart the social and political fabric
of its society and destroy its economic infrastructure.

13

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

We consider our support for the Transitional
National Government a priority for achieving unity and
comprehensive reconciliation with a view to reestablishing stability and security and reconstructing
the country. We urge the Security Council in particular,
and the United Nations in general, as well as the
international community, to ensure that this matter is
taken up seriously, proceeding from the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
Such attention may solve some problems in
Somalia.
However,
translating
concern
into
programmes requires large financial allocations. We
hope that Arab States will be able to cover some of
these financial needs. In this regard, however, we
would recall the responsibility of the international
community to stand in solidarity with other States and
to provide financial assistance to Somalia, when
required, in order to enable it to fulfil its duty towards
its people. Allow me to repeat our call for a redoubling
of efforts to provide immediate assistance so as to
enable Somalia to reconstruct and rehabilitate its
society and re-establish stability and security.
The appointment by the Secretary-General of a
Representative for Somalia responsible for following
the developments of the Somali situation in all its
aspects, in coordination with the Transitional National
Government, the neighbouring States and regional and
international organizations, will surely help solve some
of the principal problems in Somalia, particularly those
relating to the parties that remain outside the circle of
national unity. It should also help in reinforcing State
institutions, through the provision of financial and
technical assistance from specialized agencies and funds.
The Government of Somalia, today more than at
any time in the past, must be dealt with through an
honest approach that is far removed from the maze of
international political sensitivities, international
polarization and narrow interests. Dealing with
Somalia at the international level, particularly at the
United Nations, in a neutral, unbiased and objective
manner, distanced from the sensitivities of the recent
past — and we trust that it shall be thus — will provide
impetus towards unifying Somali society, following a
comprehensive reconciliation. We believe that the
current Transitional National Government in Somalia is
working towards this objective.
Giving the Prime Minister of Somalia the
opportunity to speak to the Security Council today and,

14

indeed, the very holding of this open debate to allow
Member States, and Arab States in particular, to
express their points of view, are in themselves positive
developments. We hope that the Council will continue
dealing with similar humanitarian situations in the
same way, the solution of which may well contribute to
international peace and security.
After having heard the statements made by some
members of the Security Council today, we felt a clear
sense of hesitation. The reasons cited call, we believe,
rather for Council’s intervention, not reluctance and
hesitation in taking a position. As the Ambassador of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya said this morning, insisting
on the need to hesitate will not help to solve Somalia’s
problem, but merely add to its deterioration. We
therefore express the hope that the Council will adopt a
more positive position so as to assist the Transitional
National Government and the Somali people to
overcome their problems and difficulties.
The President: I thank the representative of Iraq
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Kenya. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Jalang’o (Kenya): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. Our
salutations also go to your predecessor, Ambassador
Levitte of France.
Allow me to take this opportunity to address the
Council on the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia, which was presented this morning
by his Representative. This comprehensive report is
most welcome to my delegation. We also express our
appreciation for the detailed briefing presented this
morning by the Prime Minister of the Transitional
National Government (TNG) on the developments in
Somalia and on ways and means of assisting Somalia.
My delegation wholeheartedly welcomes the
TNG back to the fold of the international community to
play its role on behalf of the people of Somalia, so long
denied of that very important and vital opportunity.
As the Ambassador of Ethiopia mentioned a few
minutes ago, Kenya as a neighbour of Somalia, also
knows only too well the problems Somalia has gone
through since 1991. We have shared Somalia’s pain and

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

tears as both a neighbour and a friend. We therefore
continue to support all the ongoing peace processes,
including the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development’s (IGAD) task of implementing the
mechanisms agreed upon at the Khartoum summit held
in November 2000.
My delegation also joins the appeal that was
made a few minutes ago by the Ambassador of
Ethiopia for immediate humanitarian assistance for the
thousands of refugees in neighbouring countries,
including Kenya.
Many efforts have been expended through IGAD,
the Organization of African Unity, the European Union,
the United Nations and others to bring about a lasting
solution to the Somalia problem, caused by the lack of
central administration during the last 10 years. At long
last, we see hope exemplified in the Transitional
National Government of Somalia; and it is in this vein
that we welcome among us, after very many years, the
Prime Minister and head of the Transitional National
Government of Somalia and the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.
The Secretary-General notes in his report that
“the security situation did not make it possible to
deploy a peace-building office in the country.”
(S/2001/963, para. 72)
However, my delegation welcomes the feasibility of
setting up a Committee of Friends of Somalia, as noted
in paragraph 66 of the report. As a member State of
IGAD, Kenya will be ready to participate in the work
of that Committee with other members of the IGAD
Partners Forum.
Finally, my delegation calls upon the United
Nations to redouble its efforts to assist the people and the
Government of Somalia to return to normalcy as soon as
possible through the establishment of workable national
institutions, security and legal organs; and above all to
facilitate economic recovery and development.
The President: I thank the representative of
Kenya for his kind words addressed to me.
I now give the floor to Mr. David Stephen to
respond to comments made and questions raised in the
course of our meeting.
Mr. Stephen: I will refer briefly to a number of
topics that were referred to me by members of the
Council in the course of the debate.

The representative of Mauritius asked about the
flow of arms, and whether we had any estimate on
whether or not the flow of arms into the country had
increased. The mandate and resources of my Office,
which is located in Nairobi, not in Somalia, unfortunately
have not allowed us to monitor the flow of arms into and
out of the country. Allegations are made from time to time
about arms coming into the country. Our practice is to
urge those making those allegations to refer them to the
committee set up under resolution 733 (1992). That is, I
am afraid, all we can do as a political office with our
existing mandate and resources.
However, members of the Council will note that
in paragraph 54 of the report, where we note that
President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya ordered a ban on
trade between Somalia and Kenya on 28 July, one of
the reasons for this ban was, according to reports, the
President’s concern about the flow of arms into Kenya
from Somalia. It is very clear that as conflict escalates,
arms become more valuable in the country. But then,
when there is little conflict it seems that arms flow out
of the country. This is one reason why the
neighbouring countries, as members will have noted,
are very concerned about the question of the flow of
arms from Somalia.
Both the representative of Mauritius and the
President, speaking in his national capacity, raised the
question of security. The representative of Mauritius
asked if I could give some estimate. As members know,
security is completely different from the political
activities of the Secretariat, and I would not presume to
offer a professional view. But, speaking of Mogadishu,
I visited the city in March one week before the taking
of the hostages, and my impression at the time was that
there was a good deal of tension in the city. I was then
unable, for security reasons, to visit Mogadishu for
nearly six months, but I returned for a brief visit on 7
September, and my impression — for what it is worth —
is that the city was much less tense and that progress
had been made in terms of policing during those
months.
The meagre response of donors to the
Transitional National Government was raised by a
number of representatives and members of the Council,
and the representative of Bangladesh specifically asked
if I would comment on this. Obviously, this question
should be directed to donors; I cannot speak on behalf
of donors. But I think that there was, at the beginning
of this process, a rather low expectation on the part of

15

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

donors. The experience of donors in Somalia in the
past had not encouraged them to think that this was a
venture that would be likely to succeed. But I believe
that a number of donors are now engaging with the
Transitional National Government, and that some
assistance is in the pipeline.
Finally, the representative of Mali and the
representative of Bangladesh asked about the group of
friends. This, as the report makes clear, is a matter for
further consultation. There is no blueprint. No scheme is
being laid down, and I am sure that the Secretary-General
will take account of the comments and remarks that
have been made in the course of the debate, including
the fact that various members have offered to participate
in this activity, as he begins the consultations.
But it is designed for two basic purposes. One is
to assist in the development of a uniformity of
approach, which has been identified as one of the
problems in the Somalia context — in other words, so
that countries with an interest can see the arguments
and understand the viewpoints of other countries; and,
secondly, simply as a question of exchange of
information in other contexts. I am thinking of Angola,
which I think the Prime Minister of Somalia
mentioned, but also in Central America — El Salvador
and Guatemala — the exchange of information has
been a very valuable function of such groups of
friends, or friends of the Secretary-General, as they
have been termed.
I think that is all.
The President: I thank Mr. Stephen for the
clarifications he has provided.
I give the floor to the Prime Minister of Somalia,
Mr. Ali Khalif Galaydh.
Mr. Galaydh (Somalia): I should very much like
to thank the members of the Council and the other
representatives, who have been very generous and
warm in welcoming me and my delegation to this open
debate on Somalia. The very kind words and the ideas
on how best to help in bringing about lasting peace in
Somalia have been very uplifting. Now we know that
just about everyone in the Council is a friend of
Somalia, so if all of its members are going to be
reconstituted as friends of Somalia, I think that would
be most welcome.
I should like to address three or four points that
really have been central to the discussion. The first one

16

is the issue of the post-conflict peace-building mission.
We know that Somalia suffers from what is called the
Somali syndrome. It goes back to 1993. The people
who authored those events are the very same people
who are still the warlords, who are outside the Arta
process. They are the very same people whom we are
being urged to engage in dialogue. We would like to,
but we would very much like the Council to be aware
that what happened in October 1993 was not the doing
of the Somali people. It was not the doing of the
Transitional National Government or of anyone
associated with the Transitional National Government.
It was the work of the warlords. They are the ones who
are still hampering peace in Somalia. From what I have
heard today, people want to hear their ideas. If they had
any ideas about peace and reconciliation in this
country, they would have been forthcoming some time
in the last decade or more.
We are caught up in a vicious circle, because if,
supposedly, the security arrangements in Somalia and
Mogadishu are not sufficient and not adequate to allow
for the sending of United Nations personnel, then there
will be no chance of promoting peace, security and
stability in Somalia, because the donors will stay away.
There will not be any meaningful assistance for
reconstruction and development, and therefore we are
caught up in this vicious circle.
I would like to submit to those who are a bit
nervous about the safety and security of United Nations
personnel — and we agree with them 100 per cent —
that we have to strike a balance between the safety and
security of a few United Nations personnel, important
as their lives are, and the destiny of a whole country.
Let me add that Somalia should not be judged any
differently from the way other countries have been, and
are being, judged.
Somalia, despite the Somali syndrome, is a
Member of the United Nations. It has been a member
of all of the regional and subregional organizations,
and all we ask is to be treated like the other countries
that have these post-conflict problems. The United
Nations has not abstained or shied away from sending
peace-building missions or peacekeeping missions to
Sierra Leone, to Liberia, to East Timor, to Kosovo, to
Bosnia — why, then, is Somalia being singled out for
the very stringent, all-embracing criteria of total safety
and security? This mystifies us.

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

What a good number of Council members have
suggested broadly, as a way around this impasse, is the
dispatch of a fact-finding mission to Mogadishu and to
Somalia. It is an important issue not only for us, the
Somali people, but also for the region and for
international peace and security. As the French
Ambassador said, it is not only a question of one
mission being sent at some stage; there is a need for a
frequent assessment of the security situation. Only then
will the Council be informed adequately.
I should like to comment briefly on the issue of
national reconciliation in Somalia. The Arta peace
process was the brainchild of President Ismail Omar
Guelleh. It has succeeded for one reason: because it
was different from the 12 others that preceded it. The
12 others were mainly tailor-made for the warlords, for
self-appointed characters who really did not have the
mandate to speak on behalf of the Somali people, or
their clans or sub-clans.
The Arta process was successful because it was a
Somali process. It was centred on the deliberations of
Somali civil society. There is no alternative to that.
I want to be very clear about this: there is no
other game in town. If anybody has any other ideas, we
would like to listen to them. It will not help to say, “We
are going to have an open-door policy. Every Somali is
entitled to be asked for his or her opinion”. That is all
well and good, but Somalia has gone through 10 long
years, and the international community has been trying
desperately to impose a solution on us. It will not work —
period. There is no alternative. I suggest that members
of this Council accept the facts on the ground: no
warlord or group of warlords can bring peace and
stability to Somalia. No couple of clan elders, or
people with fancy résumés, can bring about peace and
reconciliation in Somalia. The Somali people have
spoken. They gathered in Arta — they spent six months
there. That is the only game in town.
If there are those who think they can impose a
solution on Somalia, they had better think twice,
because that would be a futile exercise. If there are
those who think that, because they have long borders
with Somalia, a long, troubled history with Somalia or
vital national interests in Somalia, they are guaranteed
an entry into the Somali story and a role in determining
its outcome, they can take their show elsewhere. That
will not work in Somalia.

We welcome the friends of Somalia. We welcome
the help of the international community, because we
have been unable to measure up to this historic task.
We have inflicted deep wounds on ourselves. We lost
almost two generations, and we have no guarantee that
we can even save the generation or two to come. We
welcome the friends of Somalia. We welcome any
positive, constructive suggestions to help us. You, Mr.
President, have afforded us this opportunity to share
with you our ideas, concerns and apprehensions. We
feel that this Council should be treated more
respectfully in terms of being given supposed facts
produced by so-called experts.
In a great example of guilt by association, the
representative of a Member of the United Nations, our
neighbour Ethiopia, said that we knew that Al Qaeda
had operated in Somalia and, on top of that, that there
were even components of the TNG that were extremist —
that is, they were in bed with Al Qaeda. Those are very
serious allegations. Does Ethiopia have the facts? We
heard all of these innuendoes. We heard all the selfserving assertions. We would like to see the facts. We
will not shy away from discharging our responsibilities
to our own people and to the international community.
We heard of ships being sent from landlocked
Afghanistan to Somali ports bringing arms and the Al
Qaeda leadership. Those are preposterous assertions.
They do not help our case.
I do not want to engage in mud-slinging in this
Council; I feel that that would not be appropriate. But I
would be less than responsible if I did not respond to
the assertions that the TNG is in bed with Al Qaeda
and fundamentalists. We would like to do everything
possible to shoulder our responsibility in accordance
with resolution 1373 (2001). We want to do it, not to
help anybody else, but in our own self-defence — we
are not doing anybody a favour. And if we have to do it
with our bare hands, we will do so. But we would like
the international community to be better informed.
Those who are pretending to be in the know — the
supposed cognoscenti — are not offering a way out of
this difficulty, this global menace. And pointing fingers
at Member States for self-serving purposes will not
help anybody. It will not help this Council.
The call for humanitarian assistance to the
blighted Somalis is most welcome. The best foreign aid
for Somalis would be rainfall, but that has not been
forthcoming for almost two or three seasons. We are
not exaggerating; the situation is very difficult.

17

S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1)

Coupled with that is the fact that the great majority of
the Somali people are pastoralists and rely on
livestock, and we cannot export the livestock because
of the fear of Rift Valley fever. This combination of
drought and the inability to export livestock has been
very damaging to the entire livelihood of a large
percentage of the Somali people.
I would like to say one or two words about the
issue of economic and humanitarian assistance, and
what has been given to Somalia. According to the
General Assembly’s humanitarian assistance report,
Somalia has supposedly received about $100 million in
the past 12 months. More than $50 million has
supposedly been provided by United Nations agencies.
Security is the most important issue for the country and
for the Somali people, yet we are told that less than $1
million has been provided for security — for police
training, for salaries or even for food for the police and
security forces. We find that a little baffling, because if
security is the key to bringing about peace and stability
to Somalia, and if the international community has given
$100 million, we would have thought that at least a good
part of it would have been expended on security — on
the police force, or on information-gathering, for
example, to combat international terrorism. That is
what has been done in the past 12 months.
In all honesty, we do not expect much to come
from that source. We have been pushing for that, and in
all of our discussions with donors and with the United
Nations we have always said that the best way to help
us is to help establish the police and security forces.
Yet we have not received much, as indicated in the
report to which I referred earlier.
How we can shoulder our responsibility in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001)? I have had
some discussions with the Ambassadors of the United
Kingdom, France and Russia. We would like to have
bilateral discussions. If the European Union, or
countries acting bilaterally, or the United Nations can
help us with that, that is where our first priority lies.

Our second priority is in the area of national
reconciliation. Yes, the people we are dealing with are
warlords. We are dealing with people who have no idea
what is to be done for Somalia and who have no vision
for Somalia. Nonetheless, we would like to sit down
with them, but nobody can impose a solution on us.
As for what we have received in the form of
assistance from a neighbour, there are, despite the
allegations, no arms coming by ship or by air; the only
arms that are coming to Somalia are coming by truck,
and they are coming from one source. It is not only
small arms, unfortunately. It hurts me to say this:
landmines are being planted in urban areas. If that is
the gift; the signature, of a friend, it might be an
oxymoron. If friends are for that, it hurts. Those
weapons kill indiscriminately, mostly civilians.
I would like to conclude by thanking you very
much, Mr. President, for affording us this opportunity.
This has enabled us to know who has good will for
Somalia, who are the friends of Somalia and who are
not the friends of Somalia.
The President: I thank the Prime Minister of
Somalia for his concluding statement.
As I said at the outset of this meeting, it has been
a Council presidency priority for Ireland to ensure a
long overdue open discussion on Somalia. We have, I
believe, had a comprehensive and useful exchange of
views today. In the coming days, members of the
Security Council will work on a draft presidential
statement, which will draw on the full discussion that
we have just had. It is my hope that we will be in a
position to finalize the presidential statement early next
week and that the statement will demonstrate the
commitment of the Security Council to support
Somalia and the Somali people.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

18
