98

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

and thus would constitute a serious violation of the
above-mentioned Security Council resolutions imposing
sanctions against the illegal regime in Southern Rhode-

sia,
l. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America to take the necessary measures, in compliance with the relevant provisions of Security Council
resolutions 253 (1968), 277 (1970) and 288 (1970)
and bearing in mind its obligations under Article 25
of the Charter of the United Nations, to prevent the
importation of chrome into the United States from
Southern Rhodesia;
2. Requests the Government of the United States to
inform the General Assembly at its current session of
the action taken or envisaged in the implementation
of the present resolution;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to draw the attention of the Government of the United
States to the urgent need for the implementation of
the present resolution;
4. Reminds all Member States of their obligations
under the Charter to comply fully with the decisions
of the Security Council on mandatory sanctions against
the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia;
5. Decides to keep this and other aspects of the
question under continuous review.

1984th plenary meeting,
16 November 1971.
2769 (XXVI). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and all other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council on the
question of Southern Rhodesia,
Having noted the statement made in the House of
Commons on Tuesday, 9 November 1971, by the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, announcing his Government's decision to hold
the talks that are currently under way in Salisbury
with the illegal racist minority regime,
1. Reaffirms the principle that there should be no
independence before majority rule in Southern Rhodesia;
2. Affirms that any settlement relating to the future
of that Territory must be worked out with the fullest
participation of all nationalist leaders representing the
majority of the people of Zimbabwe and must be
endorsed freely by the people;
3. Decides to keep the situation in the Territory
under review.
1991st plenary meeting,
22 November 1971.
2795 (XXVI). Question of Territories under
Portuguese administration
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,

Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,2
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General concerning the item, 3
Having heard the statements of the petitioners4 and
bearing in mind the views expressed by representatives
of national liberation movements, 5
Reaffirming its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling all previous resolutions concerning the
question of Territories under Portuguese administration
adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special Committee,
Deploring the persistent refusal of the Government
of Portugal to recognize the inalienable right of the
peoples in the Territories under its domination to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Gravely concerned at the critical and explosive situation created by that Government's further intensification of its military operations and other oppressive
measures against the peoples in Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea (Bissau) who are struggling to attain their
freedom and independence,
Deeply disturbed by the repeated occurrence of aggressive acts committed by Portugal against independent African States that border the Territories under
its domination,
Deeply concerned at the continued and intensified
activities of those foreign economic, financial and other
interests which, contrary to the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly, are directly and indirectly assisting the Government of Portugal in its colonial wars
and impeding the realization by the peoples of the
Territories under Portuguese domination of their legitimate aspirations for self-determination and independence,
Deploring the policies of those States which, in disregard of the repeated appeals addressed to them by
the United Nations, continue to provide Portugal with
military and other assistance, which it uses to pursue
its policies of colonial domination and oppression of
the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau),
Deeply concerned about any use of chemical substances by Portugal in its colonial wars against the
peoples in the Territories under its domination,
Noting with concern that the constitutional changes
introduced by the Portuguese Government in 1971
are not intended to lead to the exercise of self-determination and the attainment of independence by the
African people of the Territories, but are designed to
perpetuate Portuguese domination,
2 Ibid., chaps. V and VIII.
8 A/8348 and Add.I.
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Fourth Committee, 1930th, 1937th, 1938th and 1946th
meetings.
5 /bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/
Rev.I), chap. V, annex.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Noting with satisfaction the progress towards_ national independence and freedom made by the national
liberation movements in those Territories, both through
their struggle and through reconstruction programmes
and the arrangements relating to the representation of
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bi~sau) as ~sso;
ciate members in the Economic Commission for Afnca,
1. Reaffirnw the inalienable right of the peoples of
Angola, Mozambique, Guinea <Bis~au) and other
Territories under Portuguese dommation to self-determination and independence, as recognized by the
General Assembly in its resolution 15!4 (XV),. and
the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that nght;
2. Strongly condemns the persistent refusal of the
Government of Portugal to implement resolution 1514
(XV) and all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
3. Condemns the colonial war being waged by the
Government of Portugal against the peoples of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) and the violations
by that Government of the territorial int_egrity and
sovereignty of neighbouring independent African Sta!es,
which seriously disturb international peace and security;
4. Condemns the indiscriminate bombing of civilians
and the ruthless and wholesale destruction of villages
and property being carried out by the Portug1;1ese
military forces in Angola, Mozambique and Gumea
(Bissau);
5. Condemns the collaboration among Portugal,
South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia, designed to perpetuate colonialism and oppression in southern Africa, and the
continued intervention of South African forces against
the peoples of Angola and Mozambique;
6. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to refrain
from the use of chemical substances in its colonial wars
against the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau), as such practice is contrary to the generally
recognized rules of international law embodied in the
Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of
Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Baeteriological Methods
of Warfare, signed at Geneva on
7
17 June 1925, and to General Assembly resolution
2707 (XXV) of 14 December 1970;
7. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to treat
the freedom fighters of Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau) captured during the struggle for
freedom as prisoners of war in accordance with the
principles of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949,8
and to comply with the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of 9Civilian Persons in Time of War,
st
of 12 Augu 1949;
8. Appeals once again to all States, particularly to
those members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization which continue to render assistance to Portugal,
to withdraw any assistance that enables Portugal
to prosecute the colonial war in Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea (Bissau) and to prevent the sale or supply
of weapons, military equipment and material to the
Government of Portugal, as well as all supplies, equipment and material for the manufacture or maintenance
6 See E/5051.
7 League of Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, 1929, No.
2138.
s United Nations, Treaty Serles, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.
9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.

99

of weapons and ammunition that it uses to perpetuate
its colonial domination in Africa;
9. Urgently calls upon the Government of Portugal
to take the following steps:
(a) The immediate recognition of the right _of ~he
peoples under its administration t<? self-determmation
and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other_ relevant . resolutions of the Assembly and the Secunty Council; d
(b) The immediate cessation of colonial wars an
all acts of repression against the peoples of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), the withdrawal
of military and other forces empl~yed for th~t purpose
and the elimination of all practices that violate the
inalienable rights of the African populations, including
arbitrary eviction and regroup!ng <?f the A:frican pop~lations and the settlement of 1mm1grants m the Temtories;
(c) The proclamation of an unco~ditio~aJ pol~tical
amnesty the restoration of democratic political nghts
and the' transfer of all powers to freely elected institutions representative of the population, in accordance
with resolution 1514 (XV) ;
(d) The cessation of all attacks on, and violations
of, the security and territorial integrity of neighbouring
sovereign countries;
(e) The release of the men and property being held
at present by Portugal following the attacks and violations committed against those sovereign States;
10. Calls upon all States to take immediate measures to put an end to all activities that help to exploit
the Territories under Portuguese domination and the
peoples therein and to discourage their nationals and
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction from entering
into any transactions or arrangements that strengthen
Portugal's domination over, and impede the implementation of the Declaration with respect to, those
Territories;
11. Requests those Governments that have failed
to prevent their nationals and the companies under
their jurisdiction from participating in the Ca~ora
Bassa project in Mozambique and the Cunene River
Basin project in Angola to take all the necessary measures to terminate their participation and to withdraw
immediately from all activities related to those projects;
12. Approves the arrangements relating to the
representation of Angola, Mozambique and . Guinea
(Bissau) as associate members of the Economic Commission for Africa, as well as the list of the representatives of those Territories proposed by the Organization of African Unity;io
13. Requests all States and the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system, in consultation with the Organizati~n o! African
Unity, to render to the p_eoples _of the Terntones _:und:r
Portuguese domination, m particular the population m
the liberated areas of those Territories, all the moral
and material assistance necessary to continue their
struggle for the restoration of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence;
14. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
view of the further deterioration of the situation in the
Territories of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) which seriously disturbs intemati<:mal pea~e and
security, to the urgent need t? consider takmg a~I
effective steps, in accordance with the relevant prov110 E/5051, annex.

100

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

sions of the Charter of the United Nations, to secure
the full and speedy implementation by Portugal of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and of the
decisions of the Security Council concerning the Territories under Portuguese domination;
15. Invites the Secretary-General, within the framework of the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa and in consultation
with the specialized agencies, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Governments of the
host countries and the Organization of African Unity,
to further intensify educational and training programmes for the people of the Territories under Portuguese domination, taking into account their needs for
qualified administrative, 'technical and professional
personnel to assume responsibility for the public administration and the economic and social development of
their own countries, and to include information on the
progress achieved in that regard in the report concerning that Programme to be submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its twentyseventh session;
16. Notes with satisfaction the intention of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to
send a group to visit the liberated areas of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) ;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to all States and to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on the
steps taken or envisaged by States in the implementation of the various provisions contained therein;
18. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Territories under review.
2012th plenary meeting,
10 December 1971.

2796 (XXVI). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 11
Bearing in mind the views expressed by representatives of national liberation movements, 12
Having heard the statement of the petitioner, 13
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further all previous resolutions concerning
the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the
General Assembly and the Special Committee,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, particularly its resolutions 232 (1966) of 16
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1), chaps. V and VI.
12 Ibid., chap. V, annex.
18 Jbid., Twenty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1939th
meeting.

December 1966, 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968, 277
(1970) of 18 March 1970 and 288 (1970) of 17
November 1970,
Gravely concerned at the further deterioration of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia, which the Security
Council has reaffirmed as constituting a threat to international peace and security, resulting from the failure
and refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to put an end
to the illegal racist minority regime in that Territory
and from the racialist and repressive policies pursued
by that regime in violation of the relevant resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the continued presence of South
African forces in the Territory, which constitutes a
threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
neighbouring African States,
Deploring that certain States, in particular South
Africa and Portugal, continue to collaborate with the
illegal racist minority regime in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, contrary to their specific obligation under
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations,
thereby seriously obstructing the efforts of the international community to put an end to that regime,
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom, as the administering Power, has the primary
responsibility for putting an end to the rebellion of
British settlers who organized the illegal racist regime
and for transferring effective power to the people of
Zimbabwe on the basis of the principle of majority
rule,
Deploring the intransigent attitude of the Government of the United Kingdom, as the administering
Power, which, in contravention of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Special Committee, persists in its refusal to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge
of the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly,
Noting with deep regret the decision of the International Olympic Committee to permit the participation in the XXth Olympic Games of the so-called
National Olympic Committee of Rhodesia,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure
by all the means at their disposal the enjoyment of
that right as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and in conformity with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Strongly deplores the continued refusal of the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to take effective measures to
bring down the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia and to transfer power without any delay
to the people of Zimbabwe on the basis of the principle of majority rule, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and calls upon
that Government to take such measures without further
delay in fulfilment of its responsibility as the administering Power;
3. Condemns the continued intervention and presence of South African armed forces in Southern Rhodesia in violation of Security Council resolutions 277
(1970) and 288 (1970), and calls upon the administering Power to ensure the immediate expulsion of
all such forces;
