UNITED NATIONS

CIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

“5

th
MEETING:

20 MAY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2359)

. . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . .. . . .

I

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..#.

I

Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry established under
resolution 496 (1981) (S/14905/Rev.l) . . . . . . . , . . +. . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

I

SIPV.2359 and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information
about it is given.
The resolutions
of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Secltrity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2359th MEETING
eld in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr. LING

Qing (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,

Provisional

practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2359)

I.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council
Inquiry
established under
(1981) (S/14905/Rev. I)
The meeting

20 May 1982, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda
Commission of
resolution
496

WNS urllcd to ordcs rrt 4.25 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
.fiorn Chinese):
Since this is the first meeting of the Council in May,
I should like, at the very outset, to pay a well-deserved
tribute to Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, representative
of Zaire, for his service as President of the Council
last month. Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda conducted
the work of the Council with great diplomatic skill and
distinction.
I am sure that I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing to him our gratitude and
admiration.
Adoption of the agenda

Complaint
by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry established under resolution 496 (1981)
(S/14905/Rev.l)
2. The PRESIDENT
(interprctution
fiorn Chinese):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Benin, Botswana, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia,
Egypt, Honduras, India, the Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic, Madagascar,
Maldives, Malta and Seychelles in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtio,z J%WI Chitzese):
The Council will now resume its consideration of the
item entitled: “Complaint
by Seychelles”.
4. I should like to recall that when the Council considered this item at its 2314th meeting, held on 15 December 1981, it adopted resolution 496 (1981>, by which
it decided to send a special mission composed of
three members of the Council to investigate the origin,
background and financing of the 25 November 1981
mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles, as well as to assess and evaluate economic
damages, and to report to the Council with recommendations no later than 31 January 1982. The Chairman of the Commission of Inquiry subsequently requested an extension of that deadline until early
March 1982. That request was acceded to by the Council, and the Chairman was so informed by the President on 27 January I982 [S//4&50].
5. The Commission
of Inquiry,
composed
of
Mr. Jeremy Craig of Ireland, Mr. Katsumi Sezaki of
Japan and Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos of Panama,
who served as Chairman, visited the area from 24 January to 6 February 1982 and submitted its report,
contained in document S/14905/Rev. 1, on 15 March.
6. Members of the Council have the following other
documents before them: S/15056 and S/1.5065, which
contain the texts of letters dated 6 and 10 May respectively, from the representative of Seychelles addressed to the Secretary-General,
and S/15080, which
contains the text of a letter dated 14 May, from the

!

‘-

representative of Romania addressed to the President
of the Council.

mission. We are most grateful for that, particularly
since Panama had already had the privilege of presiding
over another important
Security Council Commission of Inquiry.

7. The first speaker is the representative of Panama,
who, on behalf of the Chairman of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry established under resolution 496 (1981), will introduce the report of the Commission.

14. I take this opportunity to express the Commission’s sincere appreciation for the co-operation given
it in its work in the field and at Headquarters by the
Secretariat staff made available to it by the SecretaryGeneral. That includes the experts in military and economic affairs whose work in the field was extremely
valuable for the Commission in its efforts to fulfil its
mandate.

8. Mr. KAM (Panama)(inte~~~L~tcrtion,~~/~ Sptrnish):
Sir, it is a true privilege for the delegation of Panama
to be the first to welcome you to the presidency of the
Council for the month of May. My delegation wishes
you every success in the discharge of your responsibilities as President and assures you of its full cooperation. Your skill, tact and wisdom, qualities which
distinguish you and your great nation, are guarantees
that the presidency of the Council is in good hands.
That is reassuring to us at this very delicate time in
international relations.

1.5. As the members of the Council are well aware,
the Commission of Inquiry visited Seychelles, Swaziland and South Africa between 24 January and 6 February. Upon its return to Headquarters, the Commission made the necessary arrangements
to obtain
additional information relevant to its mandate.

9. I also wish to extend to Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda
of Zaire the appreciation of the Panamanian delegation for the excellent work he did as President of the
Council last month.

16. During its stay in Seychelles, the Commission
was welcomed by Mr. France Albert Rent+, President
of the Republic of Seychelles. Important
meetings
were also held with Mr. Jacques Hodoul, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Maxime Ferrari, Minister of
Economic Development and Planning and Mr. Ogilvy
Rerlouis, Minister of Youth and Defence, as well as
with other high officials of the Government, including
the Commissioner of Police, Mr. James Pillay.

10. My delegation wishes cordially to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Seychelles, who is here
with us, adding prestige to the debate that the Council will be holding in respect of the complaint by Seychelles.

17. With the help of the Acting Director of Civil
Aviation, the Commission
visited the airport and
inspected the damage caused to the facilities and
installations as a result of the aggression committed
by the mercenaries on 25 November 1981.

11. On behalf of Mr. Jeremy Craig of Ireland and
Mr. Katsumi Sezaki of Japan, as well as on behalf of
the Permanent Representative of Panama, Mr. Carlos
Ozores Typaldos, who presided over the Commission
and who, for reasons beyond his control, is not able
to be with us today, it is my honour to submit to the
Council the report of the Security Council Commission
of Inquiry [S/14905/Rev.l]
established under resolution 496 (1981), which was adopted unanimously by
the Council on 15 December 1981.

18. In addition to inspecting the weapons left behind
by the mercenaries and several other objects that were
seized, the Commission
heard several witnesses,
including the Captain and members of the crew of the
Air India airliner that had been hijacked. The Commission was also allowed to interview the mercenaries
who were in custody in Seychelles. The information
provided by the mercenaries constitutes an important
part of this report.

12. Members of the Council will recall that the
Council, after considering, at its 2314th meeting, the
complaint submitted by Seychelles, decided to send
a commission
composed of three members of the
Council to investigate the origin, background and
financing of the mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles committed on 25 November 1981,
as well as to assess and evaluate economic damages,
and to report to the Council with recommendations no
later than 31 January 1982.

19. On behalf of the Commission of Inquiry, I should
like to express once again our sincere thanks to the
Government of Seychelles for the excellent co-operation extended to the Commission for the fulfilment
of its mandate.
20. In Swaziland, the members of the Commission
were received by Prince Mabandla Dlamini, the Prime
Minister of the Kingdom of Swaziland, and also held
meetings with other Government officials. I should
like to avail myself of this opportunity to express once
again our gratitude to the Government of Swaziland
for the full co-operation it gave to the Commission
to facilitate these meetings and for having made the
necessary arrangements to enable the Commissien

13. Following consultations with the members of the
Council, the President of the Council for the month
of December 1981, the representative
of Uganda,
appointed the representatives of Ireland, Japan and
Panama as members of the Commission of Inquiry,
Subsequently, the members of the Commission conferred upon my country the great honour of choosing
Mr. Carfos Ozores Typaldos as Chairman of the Com2

.

hear several persons whose evidence
valuable.

to

was most

28. The conclusions of the Commission
with respect to the first part of its mandate are found in paragraphs 276 to 286 of the report and are related to the
origin, background, planning and financing of the mercenary aggression, the source of the weapons, the
possibility of the participation of South Africa and the
role played by other Governments.
Taking into account the paramount importance
of those conclusions, which I am certain that members of the Council will consider thoroughly, I will not paraphrase them
here. Nevertheless, I do want to repeat at this time
the opinion that was expressed by the Commission
when it finalized its report on 15 March that, taking
into account the immediate planning and preparation
of the aggression by the mercenaries, including the
recruitment of over 50 mercenaries by Hoare, as well
as the fact that the weapons used by the mercenaries
were tested in South Africa, it was difficult for the
Commission to believe that the South African authorities were not even aware of the preparations in this
connection. Moreover, the Commission felt that on
the basis of the information available to it at that time,
it could not reach adefinite conclusion about the scope,
degree of knowledge and responsibility on the part of
South Africa. The statement made by Mr. Hoare before
the court is relevant in this connection.

21.
As is indicated in the report, the Commission
appreciates the assistance given it by the Government
Of South Africa in facilitating
contacts with different
officials, but it regrets that it was impossible to interview the mercenaries in South Africa, thus considerably reducing the effectiveness of the Commission’s
efforts to fulfil its mandate.
22.
Lastly, the Commission wishes to express to the
Government
of India its thanks for having allowed the
captain and crew of the hijacked Air India airliner to
provide testimony to the Commission. Likewise, we
are grateful to all the Governments which co-operated
with the Commission in the fulfilment of its mandate.
23.
In carrying out the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council,
the Commission bore in mind at all times the
grave responsibilities
incumbent upon it. In its work
it was determined
to discharge its responsibilities
objectively.
The members of the Commission examined the conclusions they submitted to the Council
with utmost care. At every stage of its investigations
the Commission bore in mind the fact that, although
the number of persons participating
in the act of
aggression was small, it did represent a serious threat
to the sovereignty and independence of Seychelles,
given the small size and limited resources of that
country.

29. As regards the assessment and evaluation of the
damage caused by the aggression, the Commission’s
conclusions in this connection are found in paragraphs 287 to 292 of the report, The Commission is
grateful for the assistance given by senior officials of
the Government of Seychelles in gathering the information required and, above all, for the important
documents furnished by the Ministry of Development
and Economic Planning.

24.
In paragraphs 272 to 275 of its report, the Commission
has described the limitations
that made it
impossible
for it to obtain full information and which
it had to take into account in formulating its conclusions. Although the Commission did receive the full
co-operation
of the Governments of Seychelles and
Swaziland,
regrettably it was limited in its investigations
by not being allowed to interview the main
group of mercenaries who fled the country to return to
South
Africa in the hijacked Air India airliner. In
particular,
it was handicapped in its work by not
being able to interview the leader of the mercenaries,
Michael
Hoare.

30. On the basis of those documents, the Seychelles
Government
incurred an expenditure of 619,000 rupees, that is, approximately
$100,000, on urgent repairs needed to reopen the airport. Moreover,
the
Government estimated that it would cost 7.69 million
rupees, that is, approximately
$1.28 million, to make
permanent repairs to damaged installations
and to
replace equipment that was damaged or destroyed as
a result of the attack. While the Commission
was
unable to evaluate in every detail the damage done
at the airport, it does consider that repairs at a cost
amounting to the figure indicated in the Government
paper will be necessary to restore the airport to full
operational efficiency.

25.
The Commission also pointed out that further
significant
information could be found in connection
with its mandate after the conclusion of its report on
15 March, and in particular during the trial that took
place in South Africa.

the
31. As regards the damages to the economy,
most serious reverse suffered is likely to be a drop
in income from the tourist industry, which is highly
sensitive to political, social and economic upheavals.

26.
Undoubtedly
the members of the Council are
aware that some statements that affect the mandate
of the Commission were made, especially by Michael
Hoare,
during those proceedings which of course have
not yet been concluded.

32. Since the dates of entry of tourists to the country as given to the Commission do not enable revenue
from tourism to be precisely projected, the Commission felt that it was not possible for it to make a definite estimate of the damage done to the economy.

Those statements could not be taken into ac27.
count
in the report, and of course members of the
Council
will bear that in mind in considering the conclusions
that were drawn by the Commission.
3

40. The PRESIIlENT
(itlto’prrttrtiorl
$WIIZ Chinese):
I should like to convey to the Chairman and to the
other members of the Commission of Inquiry the Gouncil’s appreciation for the goodwill and conscientiousness with which they carried out the task entrusted to
them.

The Commission did feel, however, that there would
be adverse repercussions of a significant magnitude
upon the economy of Seychelles.
33. In paragraph 293 of its report, therefore, the
Commission recommended that financial, technical
and material assistance should be provided urgently
through an appropriate fund in order to enable the
country to deal with the difficulties it is facing as a
result of the aggression. The Commission sincerely
hopes that that recommendation
will be given the
Council’s urgent attention and that it will be implemented as soon as possible.

41. The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Seychelles, Mr. Jacques Hodoul. I welcome
him and invite him to make his statement.
42. Mr. HODOUL
(Seychelles) (interpretrrtion frwn
French): I should like at the outset to thank you, Sir,
for giving me this opportunity
to address the Council, which is meeting today to draw the necessary
conclusions from the report of the Security Council
Commission of Inquiry established under resolution
496 (1981) to investigate the origin, background and
financing of the aggression committed
on 25 November 1981 against the Republic of Seychelles, to
assess and evaluate the economic damages and to
submit to the Council a report with recommendations.

34. The other recommendations of the Commission
include a recommendation that work now under way
on an international
convention against the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries be
completed so that the convention may be opened for
signature as soon as possible.
35. The Commission also recommends that States,
and the international community as a whole, should
make every possible effort to prevent mercenary
operations, having regard to the grave threat which
these operations pose, particularly to small island
States with limited resources such as the Republic
of Seychelles.

43. On behalf of the Government it is my honour
to represent here, I should like to address to you,
Mr. President, and to all the members of the Council my sincere thanks for having met here today, despite the urgent crises with which you are dealing, to
consider the report submitted by the Commission of
Inquiry. I should like to assure you that the Government of Seychelles, which is pleased to have warm,
friendly and co-operative relations with your country, has every confidence in your ability successfully
to preside over and guide the work of the Council
which, I am sure, will not fail to consider this matter
with its characteristic wisdom.

36. The Commissipn also recommends that Governments that have information related to mercenary
activities should, without delay, communicate such
information, directly or through the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to the Governments concerned.
37. The Commission also expressed the view that,
in light of the apparent ease with which weapons can
be transported in checked baggage on commercial
airlines, the International
Civil Aviation Organization should give further consideration to preventive
measures, while taking into account the wish of Governments to facilitate tourism.

44. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, representative
of Zaire, for the competent manner in which he presided over the work of the Council last month.
45. I should like to thank the members of the Commission of Inquiry, and particularly
its Chairman,
Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos, the Permanent Representative of Panama, who is unfortunately unable to be
with US, Mr. Jeremy Craig, Deputy Permanent Representative of Ireland, and Mr, Katsumi Sezaki, Political Counsellor at the Mission of Japan. I also address
my thanks to their colleagues for the work they did
in drawing up the report. I should also like ta thank
Mr. Olara Otunnu, representative of Uganda, who
presided over the Council in December 1981, for the
Prompt manner in which he took action as soon as the
Council ‘was seized of the complaint of the Republic
of Seychelles following the aggression committed
against its sovereignty,

38. Lastly, and in light of events that have taken
place since the preparation of the report by the Commission, the opinion has been expressed that it might
be appropriate for the Commission to be authorized to
furnish a supplementary report in due course containing any further information relative to its mandate.
If the Council sees fit and if it should authorize such
a report, the Commission would be prepared to elaborate it.
39. In conclusion, we should like to express to our
good friends Mr. Craig and Mr. Sezaki our gratitude
for their valuable contribution to the work of the Commission and the preparation of the report, Their spirit
of co-operation,
which was evidenced throughout,
their dedication and their intelligence made it possible
for the Commission to accomplish the work entrusted
to it by the Council in the most effective and harmonious way.

46. The report that has been submitted to the Council and that we now have before us attempts to shed
light on the aggression committed on 25 November
and sets forth certain specific recommendations.
4

man. As it will contain the defendants’
statements at
that trial, the complete transcript of both the public
and closed sessions of the trial should enable the Commission to prepare a supplementary
report on the
origin, background and financing of the 25 November
aggression. The trial of the seven mercenaries
in custody jn Seychelles will begin on I6 June, that date
having been set at the request of the defence. A full
transcript will be sent to the Commission.

However, in the view of my Government, the report,
in spite of the evident desire of the Commission fully
to carry out the mandate entrusted to it, does not
wholly elucidate the origin, background and financing
Of the aggression against the Republic of Seychelles.
For that matter, the Commission is well aware of this,
as can be seen in paragraph 274 of its report, which
states:
Lb* . .
the information available to the Commission
is far from complete. The Commission does not
have full knowledge of the origin and background
of the mercenary aggression.”

50. The Republic
of Seychelles wishes the responsibility for the aggression perpetrated
against its sovereignty to be clearly established.
The international
community
must face the fact that mercenaries
are a
convenient too] for outlaw States which destabilize
other States whose policies are not in COnfOrmitY
With
nor subordinate
to theirs. It is only by unmasking
official complicity
that the international
community,
respectful of the fundamental
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, will be able to
take effective steps to wipe out, once and for all, the
scourge of the use of mercenaries.

47. The Government of Seychelles, while accepting
the Commission’s
recommendations,
cannot, however, be fully satisfied until the “origin, background
and financing of the , , . aggression” have been fully
established. An armed operation, carried out by foreigners coming from a foreign country, could have
been planned only with the complicity of foreign
authorities. How else can one explain the categorical
refusal of the South African authorities to accede to
the Commission’s
request to interrogate the mercenaries who returned to South Africa after their armed
intervention
against Seychelles, saying that that agression in no way concerned them? I should like to point
out to the Council that the Republic of Seychelles
facilitated
the work of the Commission by allowing it
freely to question the seven mercenaries who were
captured and are being held in Seychelles, as well as
all the witnesses involved, namely, officers in the
Defence Ministry and civil servants and other civilians. Moreover,
the Commission confirmed in paragraph 272 of its report that:

51. While the Seychellois people were able to repulse
the armed aggression of the mercenaries,
it is virtually
impossible for them to remedy the economic situation
resulting from that aggression without urgent finuncial
assistance. As the Commission
established,
the total
losses suffered by the Seychelles economy
amount
to approximately
$18 million.
That figure might seem
derisory to some countries,
but for a small island
State with few natural resources it does constitute a
considerable loss. That loss will seriously affect the
economic
and social development
of the country
unless there is prompt financial and technical assistance from Member States of the United Nations and
of other international
organizations.
I urge them to
demonstrate their solidarity with Seychelles in a specific form.

“While [it] received full co-operation from the Government
of Seychelles , . ., it was unfortunately
limited
in its investigations by not being permitted
to interview the mercenaries,”
particularly

52. In conclusion,
I should like to inform members
of the Council that the Government
of Seychelles fully
accepts the economic recommendations
made by the
Commission of Inquiry,
but it anxiously desires: first,
that an appeal be made to the Member States of the
United Nations and of other international
organizations to provide without delay, through an appropriate
United Nations fund, financial, technical and material
assistance to the Republic of Seychelles to enable it
to deal with the problems arising from the mercenary
aggression; secondly, that the Council call upon Member States to co-operate fully in the speedy drafting
and subsequent implementation
of an international
convention
against the recruitment,
use, financing,
training and harbouring
of mercenaries,
in the intcrcsts of international
peace and security; and thirdly,
that the mandate of the Commission
be extended to
enable it to complete its enquiry. The Government
of
Seychelles believes that the Commission
should submit a supplementary
report to the Council on completion of the current trial in South Africa and the
trial of the seven mercenaries
now in custody
in Seychelles.

their leader, Mr. Michael Hoare.

48. As leader of the mercenaries and one of the participants in the armed aggression against the Republic
of Seychelles,
Mr. Hoare must necessarily possess
important
information which would be useful in determining
more precisely the origin, background and
financing
of the operation. Indeed, his recent statement at the Pietermaritzburg
court implicated
the
South African regime at the highest levels both of Government
and of military command,
49. The Commission
of Inquiry itself recognized, ”
as it said in paragraph 274 of its report, that the trial
of Mr. Hoare and his mercenaries on hijacking charges
in South Africa could provide further information
relating
to its mandate. In this connection, the representative
of South Africa in his letter dated 22 January addressed to the Chairman of the Commission,
expressed his willingness to have the transcript of the
trial now under way in South Africa sent to the Chair5

53. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France)
(inter~rvf~lfion from French): Sir, I should like first of
all to congratulate you on your assumption for the
month of May of the difficult responsibilities of the
presidency of the Council. By the active role you have
played outside the official meetings of the Council,
you have already shown how well fitted you are, by
your experience, your intelligence and your wisdom,
to discharge your responsibilities effectively.

circumstance. That is why my delegation wishes
today most firmly to reiterate its condemnation of the
armed attack by mercenaries on 25 November I981
against the Republic of Seychelles.
60. But the international
community
cannot limit
itself to condemnation of that attack. France believes
that two conclusions’can immediately be drawn from
the report of the Commission of Inquiry.

54. Nor must I omit to congratulate most particularly
your predecessor for the month of April, Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda of Zaire. All my colleagues here know
with what flair he guided our work last month, which
was a particularly busy month for the Council. Thanks
to the calm, the intelligence and the brilliant initiatives of the representative of Zaire, the work of the
Council was conducted in a most satisfactory way.
The delegation and Government of France thank him
sincerely.

61. The first concerns the need for an international
convention. The Commission of Inquiry has quite
rightly stressed the grave danger posed for small
States such as Seychelles by possible mercenary
intervention. In the face of that danger, the international community must continue its efforts in the Ad
Hoc Committee which, on a Nigerian initiative, the
General Assembly has entrusted with the drafting of
an international convention against the recruitment,
use, financing and training of mercenaries, France
sincerely hopes that that Committee may as soon
as possible succeed in drafting an effective convention aimed at prohibiting and putting an end to the
activities of adventurers against small independent
States.

55. On 15 December last, the Council, in its resolution 496 (1981), unanimously condemned the armed
attack by a band of mercenaries against the Republic
of Seychelles. By the same resolution, it was decided
to entrust to a Council Commission the task of enquiring into the origin, background and financing of
that operation, of assessing and evaluating the economic damage suffered by Seychelles, and of presenting to the Council a report with recommendations.

62. I should like moreover to recall that international law prohibits any State from allowing its territory to be used for purposes that threaten the independence and sovereignty of other States. In this
connection, all States must refrain from financing,
encouraging or tolerating armed subversive activities
aimed at changing by violence the regime of another
State. Any State failing to meet that obligation would
in so doing be responsible under well:established conditions of international law; in other words, such a
State would be duty-bound to redress the consequences of unlawful acts it had itself committed or
incited.

56. That report was submitted to us on 1.5 March
at the conclusion of an inquiry that was conducted by
the Commission in as complete a way as possible,
in spite of the difficulties that it faced in the accomplishment of its mandate. During its stay in the region
from 24 January to 6 February, the Commission spoke
with Government officials of several States; it heard
many witnesses, and right in the Seychelles, it heard
the mercenaries who had been captured there. Lastly,
I would note that, aware that it had not had access to
all sources of information, the Commission in its recommendations
envisages the submission of a supplementary report if the Council so desires.

63. The second conclusion concerns the assistance
to be given to the Republic of Seychelles. France has
close relations with Seychelles, based on mutual respect, friendship and co-operation. This was demonstrated, infer da, following the armed attack committed by mercenaries on 2.5 November last, when,
without delay, France provided aid and support,

57. I listened very attentively to the statements of
the Chairman of the Commission of Inquiry and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Seychelles. For my
part, I should like to recall the position of France and
at this stage in our discussion to draw two initial concfusions.

64. We are aware of the importance that the Republic of Seychelles attaches to its economic development and social progress, and we are also familiar
with its efforts in this connection. The armed intervention by mercenaries dealt those efforts a harsh
blow. It therefore seems important to us that the international community at large affirm its solidarity with
the Republic of Seychelles in these difficult times by
helping it to recover from the damage caused by
unscrupulous adventurers. Towards that end, France
believes that it would be desirable, upon the initiative
of the Council, for a voluntary contribution fund to
be established, in the framework of which we are
prepared to play a special role.

58. The position of France is clear and firm. My
country, which is particularly attached to the principles of respect for the territorial integrity and political independence of States, regardless of their size
and geographical situation, as well as to non-interference in the internal affairs of States, feels that these
essential principles must be fully respected by all
States.
59. Moreover,
cenary activity,

France condemns all forms of meranywhere, at any time and in any
6

65. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Mr. President, as this
is the first time we have met in an open meeting this
month, even though it has been a very active one
under your very wise leadership and wisdom, I wish
to extend to you the sincere congratulations
of my
Government on the outstanding qualities you have
shown throughout the Council’s meetings and various
activities during May, It is particularly gratifying to
me to congratulate our President as a loyal son of the
great People’s Republic of China, with which my
country, Jordan, the Arab nation and indeed the entire
Arab world have close and traditional ties of friendship going back milleniums.

turism and aggression against the Seychelles,
caused
extensive material damage to the people of the Republic of Seychelles. The report enumerates
some of
the material damage seen and testified to by the members of the Commission.
But we should never overlook the equally if not more extensive psychological
damage, especially with regard to the area of tOurism,
which was inflicted by this act of aggression by the
mercenaries, inasmuch as in all similar circumstances
tourists have been frightened off and tourism is one
of the basic industries of the Republic of Seychelles.
71. Furthermore,
this act by a powerful
country
against a small Republic constitutes a very dangerous
and ominous precedent.
Since the Council is the ultimate guardian of international
peace and security,
I think that it should act promptly
and decisively.
lt
should act in various ways. First of all, it should condemn this act of aggression in the strongest terms.
Secondly, I fully subscribe to the view expressed by
the representative
of France and the Minister
fol
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles that a
process should be initiated to work out a convention
aimed at safeguarding small countries against dangerous and unlawful acts of aggression such as the attack
on the Seychelles.

66. I wish to take this opportunity also to extend my
appreciation to the outgoing President, Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda, for the very able and exemplary manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Council
during the month of April, which was equally busy.
67. I take this opportunity to express the appreciation and congratulations of my delegation to the Security Council Commission of Inquiry established under
its resolution 496 (1981) for the work it has done.
I must say that its report is very meticulous and thorough, even though the Commission of Inquiry was
handicapped by its inability to get to all the basic
sources of information to which it was entitled as a
Security Council commission. And yet, in spite of that,
the Commission of Inquiry has, under the chairmanship of our colleague Mr. Ozores Typaldos of Panama
and with the membership
of Mr. Craig of Ireland
and Mr. Sezaki of Japan, really acquitted itself excellently in the job assigned to it by this body.

72. I also fully support the suggestion that the United
Nations should consider establishing
a special fund to
assist the Republic of Seychelles and enable it to get
back on its feet after the extensive damage it has suffered as a result of this untoward,
unjustified
and
illegal act of aggression. Of course, this would be a
voluntary fund, but one to which all Member States
would be morally bound to subscribe.

68. I have read the report, which is, as I have said,
thorough, and I have also listened with great attention
and profound concern to the solemn statement made
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Seychelles. Now, without assuming the very stringent strictures of judicial function, all evidence in the
report points to the fact that the act of aggression
committed
by the mercenaries against the Government and people of the Republic of Seychelles, a small,
peaceful island, emanated from and was closely linked
to the Government of South Africa, both directly and
indirectly.

73. Finally, since the Commission,
despite all its
efforts, was not able to interrogate
the mercenaries
who perpetrated
the act of aggression,
perhaps a
supplementary
inquiry is called for, even though it
might encounter the same kind of obstacles as the
Commission
faced in preparing the report before us.
I believe that we should at least make an effort to get
at the root of the matter.
74. This was a very reprehensible
act of aggression,
and I wish to express Jordan’s solidarity
with the
Republic of Seychelles and its intention
to support
all endeavours to compensate
the people and the
Republic of the Seychelles for the grievous and extensive damage detailed in the report and also to support
the establishment
of machinery
with a view to ensuring that there will be no repetition
of such acts of
aggression in the future.

69. A great deal of what happened cati be ‘put in the
category of covert action; yet all the circumstantial
evidence indicates that the entire reprehensible
act
committed
against the peaceful small island of the
Seychelles was the work of the Government of South
Africa and its surrogates. South Africa obviously
wanted to have control over that island and thereby
undermine
the independence
of the Republic
of
Seychelles.

75. The PRESIDENT
(intclp~.ctoti~~,r?~.oI,?
~‘/~i~l~~~~~);
The next speaker is the representative
of Egypt,
who
Wishes
to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman Of the Group of African States at the United
Nations for the month of May, I invite him to take a
Place at the Council table and to make his statement,

70.
Even though the operation itself did not assume
massive
proportjons,
it was no less serious in its
implications,
for, after all, those mercenaries,
who
planned
this act of unprovoked and reckless adven7

84. Secondly, the immediate
preparations for and
planning of the mercenary aggression, including the
recruitment of over 50 mercenaries by Hoare, took
place in South Africa. A number of these mercenaries
were reservists in the South African Defence Force
(SADF) to whom call-up papers had been issued.

76. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): On behalf of the
Group of African States at the United Nations and on
my own behalf, I should like first of all to express our
sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month of May. Your
abilities are of course highly esteemed, and we are sure
that under your able leadership the Council will fulfil
its role in the serious matter under consideration today.

85. Thirdly, Martin Dolinschek,
an intelligence
officer with the South African national intelligence
service, was among the seven mercenaries captured
by the Seychelles Security Forces following the mercenary aggression. According to his testimony to the
Seychelles authorities
during interrogation,
he obtained a passport officially under his pseudonym
“Anton Lubic”. In answer to a question in the South
African Parliament on 19 February, the Minister of
the Interior admitted that the authorities had indeed
issued a new passport to Martin Dolinschek under the
alias of Anton Lubic.

77. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation and admiration for
your predecessor, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda of
Zaire, our African brother and colleague, who last
month, in trying circumstances, fulfilled his mandate as President of the Council in an excellent manner.
78. The Council is meeting today to consider the
report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry
established under resolution 496 (1981), which is contained in document S/14905/Rev. 1. In this regard I wish
to express our sincere appreciation to the members
of the Commission-Mr.
Carlos Ozores Typaldos
of Panama, Mr. Katsumi Sezaki of Japan and Mr. Jeremy Craig of Ireland-for
their efforts and dedication.

86. Fourthly, Mike Hoare, testifying at the hijack
trial, made the following revelations. The aggression
was carried out with the knowledge of the South
African intelligence service and with men supplied
by the SADF. A delivery invoice of weapons and
ammunition to be used in the coup and delivered to
Hoare’s home was submitted as evidence in court.
Hoare was informed that the South African Cabinet
had decided in principle in September 1981 that the
invasion attempt using mercenaries should go ahead.

79. The Commission of Inquiry fulfilled its mission
regarding the assessment of the economic consequences of the 25 November 1981 mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles. To that effect
the report has made specific recommendations
to
offset the economic consequences, namely that
financial, technical and material assistance should
be provided urgently by Member States and international organizations to enable the Government of
Seychelles to deal with the difficulties it is facing because of the mercenary aggression. Such contributions could be channelled through an appropriate fund.
We support these recommendations,
in particular
the establishment of a special fund for the Republic
of Seychelles to be supplied by voluntary contributions through which assistance should be channelled
for economic reconstruction.

87. Fifthly, the Speaker of the South African Parliament refused a request on 4 May from the opposition Progressive Federal Party to hold a special
debate on the involvement of the South African Government and the South African Army in the aggression against the Seychelles.
88. Sixthly, South Africa released 39 of the 44 mercenaries last December without charging them or even
disclosing their identities after they had forced an
Air India plane to fly to South Africa. The extremely
irregular behaviour by South Africa with regard to
this matter has invited even its friends to cast serious
doubts and suspicion on its protestations of innocence. Subsequently, the Government of South Africa
reversed itself and charged the mercenaries. HOWever, the verdict can almost be predicted.

80. However, the report of the Commission
of
Inquiry contains no specific recommendations as to
the origin, financing and organization of the aggression.
8 1. There is every reason for us to believe that
South Africa was involved in the aggression. The
South African regime’s own actions so far show that
it had a hand in the organization of the invasion,
82. In that connection,
the following elements.

89. In the light of these developments
it imperative to affirm the following.

we should like to underline

we consider

90. First, the report which has been submitted
the Council is an interim report,

83. First, South Africa did not permit the Commission to interview the mercenaries who returned to
South Africa aboard the hijacked Air India plane. In
particular, the Commission was handicapped by not
having an interview with the leader of the mercenaries, Michael Hoare.

to

91. Secondly, we cannot exclude that further significant information relating to the mandate of the Cornmission may become available, particularly
during
or after the trial on the hijacking charges in South
Africa or at the one that will take place on 16 June in
Seychelles.
8

92. Thirdly,
a thorough investigation
should be
carried out by the Commission with a view to digging
out the facts about the origin and background of the
mercenary aggression. Therefore we hope that the
Commission
will be authorized to furnish a supplementary report in due course containing any further
information relative to its mandate.

their work has greatly facilitatkd the task of the Council at this stage of its consideration of the complaint
by the Government of Seychelles.
97. My Government
has carefully considered the
recommendations
agreed by the Commission and set
out in paragraph 293 of its report. My Government
endorses all those conclusions and recommendations.

93. The discussion at this meeting could not but
lead to a vigorous condemnation of the racist rCgime,
which has violated every principle of international
law. Unless the world community in general and the
Council in particular face seriously and effectively the
situation in southern Africa, the Pretoria rkgime will
continue to pursue its policy of aggression and suppression against the people of South Africa, its illegal
occupation
of Namibia
and its acts of aggression
against the neighbouring countries, thus posing a grave
threat to international peace and security,

98. With regard to the question of the reconstruction
of the airport, to which the representative of Panama
referred in his introductory remarks, my Government
informed the Government
of the Seychelles that it
would look sympathetically
at any request for assistance in repairing the damage and I understand that
discussions have been going on in order to take up that
offer. We also ,undertook to implement immediately
an aid agreement to the amount of 21.5 million.
99. Turning to the second recommendation
concerning the work on the drafting of an international
convention against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries, my delegation co-operated
fully in the recent session on this subject of the General Assembly’s Ad Hoc Committee
on the Drafting
of an International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries.
The attack on the Seychelles did not, of course, pass
unnoticed by the Committee and its Working Group A,
under the chairmanship of the representative of Barbados, considered language which would make clear
that a new convenfion would apply to an attack such
as that suffered by the Seychelles. The draft convention wouId also help to give effect to the third and
fourth recommendations
of the Commission.

94, We should like to assure the Government
and
the people of the Republic of Seychelles of our total
support for and solidarity with their just cause, and
that the Group of African States stands ready to
shoulder its responsibilities towards that goal.
95. Mr. WHYTE
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I shnuld like to start by expressing, in common
with others who have spoken this afternoon, the appreciation
and admiration of my delegation for the
manner in which you have conducted the affairs of
this Council during this month, and the manner in
which Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda of Zaire presided
over the Council last month. I know it is customary
to address such felicitations to those who preside over
this Council, but during this month and last there has
been nothing customary about the responsibilities
which you have been called upon to shoulder. I suspect that the representative of Zaire, in particular, did
not fully realize when he woke up on the morning
of I April just what was about to descend on his
shoulders. My own delegation has been in a position to
be more than usually aware of the energy, the determination
and the skill with which both you and he
‘have faced up to and have discharged these truly
onerous responsibilities,
and we express our profound
appreciation.

100. The Commission
also recommended
that it
should be asked to furnish a supplementary
report.
My delegation considers that this suggestion should
be accepted by the Council. As is well known, further
information
about the attack is becoming available
from the trials of persons charged with criminal offences in connection with the attack. At the same
time, the full effect of the attack on the economic position of the Republic of the Seychelles cannot be fully
assessed. In these circumstances,
a supplementary
report would, in our opinion, help to complete the
knowledge of the Council about the raid and about its
effects.

96. I should like now to turn to the matter under
consideration
and join others in thanking the representative of Panama for having introduced the report
of the Commission
of Inquiry. I should also like to
pay tribute to all the members of the Commission for
their excellent work. They have clearly carried out
conscientiously
and thoroughly the mandate given
to them in resolution 496 (1981), which was to investigate the origin, background and financing of the
attack by mercenaries on the Seychelles. They have
also made an assessment and evaluation of the eco-’
nomic damages. They have acted prudently and judiciously.
They have presented a wealth of evidence
from a variety of sources. It can truly be said that

101. In conclusion, I should like to repeat the concern which my Government expressed to the Government of the Seychelles at the time of the attack. We
are confident that with the support of the Council the
people of Seychelles will be able eventually to put this
atrocious episode in their history behind them and be
able to go forward on the path of development,
102. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtinn
jhrn
CkiIZL~.SL’):The next speaker is the representative of Malta,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
9

103. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Mr. President, I am very
grateful to you and to the other members of the Council for allowing my delegation to express its views on
the attempted coup against the Republic of the Seychelles.

more in the future. We want no form of subversion,
least of all any insolent attempt at overthrowing a
legitimate and popularly elected Government through
the use of mercenaries or through any other form of
outside interference in our internal affairs,

104. The exemplary relations between your country and mine are such that they need no eulogies on
my part. I will therefore limit myself to complimenting
you on your assumption of the presidency for the
current month under difficult circumstances and to
expressing my appreciation for the excellent relations
between our two Missions. The same considerations
apply to the outgoing President, the representative of
Zaire.

110. We therefore compliment
the Government of
Seychelles on its success in foiling the attempted
coup. We also appreciate the immediate and favourable response to the request of the Republic of the
Seychelles provided by the Council. The Commission of Inquiry has been extremely thorough and
objective in the investigation it has held so far, and
my delegation is grateful for the report it has submitted, which we have studied attentively. It seems
to us that the report speaks for itself and needs no
detailed comment on my part.

105. The clash of conflict is disquieting wherever
it is heard. At the moment, world attention is centred
elsewhere-in
all too many areas of the world, and
more particularly
in the South Atlantic. While we
express distress at the deteriorating situation there,
and our hope that peaceful counsel can still prevail,
we cannot overlook other past events which are of
as much concern to other friendly countries as they
are to us.

1Il.
We trust that the international
response to the
assistance for the Government of Seychelles proposed
by the Commission of Inquiry, for repairing its damaged airport infrastructure, will be positive and generous. I welcome, in this connection, the statements
just made by the representatives of France and the
United Kingdom. We also feel it would be useful if
the first report of the Commission of Inquiry were
supplemented by the results of further investigations
so as in fact to determine the origin, background and
organization of the aggression carried out against
Seychelles last November, which was originally the
main purpose of the enquiry.

106. We do not really have much to add to the store
of knowledge on the item now before the Council;
nevertheless we are moved to speak, since the matter before the Council affects in particular the destinies of small countries, vulnerable to all forms of
intimidation.
For us small countries-constituting
more than a third of the United Nations membership-the defence of our security entails preoccupations often not even sensed by other, more powerful
countries.

112. Even though the case against the mercenaries
is still sub judice, there cannot but be strong suspicion-indeed,
there can be little doubt-both
from
the evidence so far supplied and from the persistent
and by now traditional prevarication
of the South
African authorities towards the Council, that officials
of the South African Administration
were either directly or indirectly involved in the preparation for the
attack, of which they had foreknowledge and which,
instead of stopping, they encouraged and abetted.

107. The winds of historical change in the past have
often blown in the same direction for Seychelles as
for Malta. Our peoples share many common characteristics. In particular, we are both small, island developing countries, situated in strategic positions,
lacking mineral resources and trying to utilize OUI
natural assets-the
sun, the sea and our mild climates-to
promote growth in peaceful commerce
and tourism. We are both friendly and open peoples,
and we cannot but be concerned when our friendliness and openness are ruthlessly taken advantage of,
or even jeopardized,
by ill-considered
illegitimate
actions of outsiders. Malta itself is not immune to
this experience, and we are vehemently against it,

113. Prevention is so much better than cure. It would
therefore be useful if the Council were to utilize this
opportunity to devote some attention to strong recommendations which would guard against a repetition of
such reprehensible action in future; it might be considered that States should be urged to do everything
in their power to prevent mercenary operations, and
even to alert in advance both the Council and the GOVernments concerned if any such preparations are
either suspected or in fact discovered. We also hope
that work will be expedited to draw up by consensus
an internationally
respected convention against mercenaries.

108. Our peoples and our Governments want to be
friendly with all countries, but to be subservient to
none. We want to live in dignity as small nations,
concentrating
on trying to improve the social and
economic well-being of our peoples and willing to
share our peaceful habitat with others who openly
come to savour it, but not with guns hidden in their
possessions or evil intentions in their minds.

114. It would be trite to mention that actions such
as those perpetrated against Seychelles show a cornplete disregard of the principles of international law
and of the Charter of the United Nations. Many countries have their own means of defence. We, the small

109. We have suffered enough from the colonialist
attitudes of the past; we do not wish to suffer any
10

countries, cannot but seek and continue to seek the
support of the United Nations, in whose capability we
place our trust.
115. We therefore take the liberty on this occasion
of reminding all countries that peoples always have
the right to determine in full freedom when and as
they wish their internal and external political status,
without external interference, and to pursue as they
wish their chosen political, economic, social and
cultural development. This is a fundamental principle
which bears repetition, and I think it is particularly
appropriate that it should be mentioned on this occasion and in these troubled times.
116. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion
fiotn Chinese): The next speaker is the representative of India.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
il7. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): I should like to offer
my delegation’s congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of May,
which has proved to be a trying period for the Council and, indeed, for the United Nations. We are confident that your personal abilities and skill, reinforced
by the ancient wisdom of your great country, will stand
you and the Council in good stead during these critical times. The world is looking to the United Nations
and to the Secretary-General with the hope that a way
may yet be found to prevent further bloodshed and
destruction in the South Atlantic and to facilitate the
search for a peaceful negotiated solution.

The events of 25 November 1981 have been carefully
reconstructed, the identity and motives of the mercenaries involved in the crime have been established
beyond doubt and the culpability of South Africa in
the entire operation has been recognized, notwithstanding the deliberately obstructionist attitude of
the Government of South Africa towards the Commission. There is sufficient evidence in the report to
indicate that South Africa had a major role in the mercenary aggression against Seychelles, even if it did not
carry out the operation itself. The immediate preparation for and planning of the mercenary aggression,
including recruitment, took place in South Africa:
most of the mercenaries had military experience in
South Africa; a number of them were reservists in
the SADF to whom call-up papers were issued; the
weapons used by the mercenaries were obtained and
tested in South Africa; and one of the mercenaries
was found to be a serving member of the National
Intelligence
Service of South Africa. It is not inconceivable that the unidentified sources offinancing could
also be traced to the South African Treasury itself.
121. The Commission, by its own admission, was
unable to complete its task not because of any lack
of earnestness on its part but because it was not permitted to interview the mercenaries who had sought
refuge in the congenial embrace of South Africa, As
anticipated by the Commission in paragraph 274 of
its report, significant information relating to its mandate has started to come to light in the trial on the
hijacking being held in South Africa. The revelations
made by the leader of the mercenary gang have rendered futile the attempts by South Africa to cover up
its involvement in the aggression against Seychelles.
According to reports, he testified that the aggression
was carried out with the knowledge of South African
Intelligence and with arms and men supplied by the
SADF. A delivery invoice of weapons from the South
African Army to the mercenaries was produced in the
court as evidence. It was also revealed that the South
African Cabinet had decided in principle, in September 1981, that a mercenary aggression against
Seychelles should take place. In the light of the evidence that has now accumulated to suggest the complicity of South Africa, and even of powerful forces
outside it, it has become imperative for the Commission to complete the investigation that it so ably initiated. We would therefore wholeheartedly support
the request made by the Republic of Seychelles that
the Commission
should be authorized to furnish a
supplementary
report, with additional information
leading to conclusions and recommendations.

118. My delegation feels gratified that, even while
the Council is preoccupied with dramatic events of
the present, it has found it possible to meet today to
give attention to the report of the Security Council
Commission
of Inquiry established under resolution 496 (1981) on the mercenary aggression against
the Republic of Seychelles, which was an equally
dramatic and shocking event enacted on 25 November
1981. I am grateful to you and to the other members
of the Council for inviting me to participate in this
discussion.
119. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles has given a poignant account of
the wanton act of terrorist aggression perpetrated
against his country and the damage done to its economy. India shares the concern of this friendly neighbour in the Indian Ocean to preserve its independence
and territorial integrity and to promote the welfare
of its people.

122. The report of the Commission contains an
assessment and evaluation of the economic damage
sustained by the Republic of Seychelles as a result of’
the mercenary aggression. Apart from an amount
of $US 100,000 spent by the Government of Seychelles
for urgent repair works needed to reopen the airport,
it is liable to cost more than $US 1.2 million to make
permanent repairs to damaged installations and equip-

120, The report of the Commission of Inquiry, contained in document S/14905/Rev.l of 15 March 1982,
which was so competently presented to the Council
a little while ago by the representative of Panama,
bears testimony to the painstaking efforts undertaken
by Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos of Panama, Mr. Jeremy
Craig of Ireland and Mr. Katsumi Sezaki of Japan.
I1

relations. A representative to the Organization from
a nation the most glorious pages of whose history
recount the epic struggles it has waged against the
invader in the past and today, in order to strengthen
its independence and to assure the well-being of its
people, you, Sir, we are convinced, will preside over
these meetings with the firmness and tranquillity
characteristic of you, and will lead our debates to a
successful conclusion.

ment. Less quantifiable,
but more far-reaching, are
the losses anticipated on account of the fall in tourist
traffic consequent upon the aggression and its aftermath. The adverse impact on the Seychelles economy
of a drop in the tourist traffic can indeed be significant, as the young Republic is greatly dependent on
tourism for its economic sustenance. It is incumbent
upon the international
community,
particularly
the
friends and well-wishers of Seychelles, to contribute
their mite to lighten the economic burden on Seychelles
caused by the aggression. We urge that an appropriate
fund be set up to channel voluntary contributions from
Member States, and stand ready to make our own
contribution within our capacity and resources.

128. 1 should also like to say to your predecessor,
the representative of Zaire, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, that we greatly appreciate the outstanding
manner in which he presided over the work of the
Council last month. His mastery of the facts was
absolute, and his inborn sense of compromise was
equalled only by his love of justice.

123. The other recommendations
of the Commission, such as the early conclusion of an international
convention against the recruitment,
use, financing
and training of mercenaries, adoption of measures
for the prevention of mercenary operations, supply
of information
relating to mercenary activities, and
so on, are of immense value. We are painfully aware
of the threat that mercenary activity poses to the independence and territorial integrity of smaller nations.

129. Five years later, when the bitter memory of
the ignoble and barbarous armed imperialist aggression of Sunday, I6 January 1977, against my country,
the People’s Republic of Benin, is still fresh in the
minds of all; five years later, when we can still hear
echoing in our ears the outraged voices that were
raised in this very chamber to condemn that odious
crime; five years later a small, third-world country,
the Republic of Seychelles, a defenceless country
facing the harsh realities of poverty and underdevelopment, has also been the victim of an equally traitorous and dastardly aggression.

124, The hijacking of our Air India aircraft following
the frustration of the aggression against Seychelles
demonstrates also how vulnerable innocent civilians
are to the terrorism
associated with such activity.
India will continue to work for the elaboration of a
convention to control this menace.

130. Once again, a peaceful and hard-working people has seen its young persons killed and their names
inscribed on the list of the peoples’ martyrs whose
only crime has been to wish to live, free and independent, in peace.

125. The inevitable conclusion about the complicity
of South Africa in the mercenary aggression against
Seychelles should come as no surprise to the Council. The Council is only too familiar with the criminal
record of the racist regime in Pretoria, which practises
the repulsive policy of spar-theid, occupies Namibia
illegally in defiance of the United Nations, launches
aggression against neighbouring
African States and
constantly engages in destabilizing activities in African
States, particularly
Angola and Zimbabwe. Would it
be too much to hope that the Council might some
day gather the necessary political will to bring South
Africa to book?

131. Once again, an attempt has been made to stab
in the back a democratic people’s revolution that
desired, above all, to give effect to the legitimate aspirations of its people to a decent standard of living and
social well-being and to build a socialist society free
from any exploitation of man by man.
132. However, like the militant and invincible people of Benin, the people of Seychelles routed the ag
gressors. Armed with their courage and their patriotic
faith, the intrepid people of Seychelles, after hard
fighting and at the price of the supreme sacrifice of
many of their sons, triumphantly
drove back those
base invaders, some of whom, as happened also at
Cotonou, saved their skins only by a hasty departure
by airplane, this time a hijacked one, and, by the vse
of criminal arms forcing it to transport them to that
safe haven now known to all.

126. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretntion
from
ChiIILJSC): The next speaker is the representative of Benin.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
127.

Mr.

SOGLO
(Benin)
(interpretation
jktn
First of all, I must express to you, Mr. President, my appreciation
for the great honour you do
me in allowing me to speak here before the representatives of the States members of the Council on behalf of the People’s Republic of Benin. It is a good
omen that the debate on the criminal
aggression
against the brother people of Seychelles is being conducted under your able guidance. You are, indeed, a
worthy representative of a great country, China, with
which Benin is happy to enjoy very close and cordial
Frcjrwh):

133. Allow me to address to the martyr people of
Seychelles and to their Government the deep sYmpathy and active solidarity of all the people of Benin,
of its avant-garde party, the Party of the People’s Revolution of Benin, and of its National Executive Coup
cil. We, having been victims of the same kind of thing,
12

understand more than anyone else their feelings of
disgust and revulsion at such an act of barbarism. We
have had the same experience, and we therefore understand more than anyone else what they have suffered. We respectfully bow our heads in respect for
their sons and we pay to their intrepid courage the
tribute of a brother people that has been a victim of
the same ignominy.
134. The entire international
community
was outraged, and in response to that outrage the Council,
endorsing the complaint of the Seychelles Government, unanimously
adopted resolution 496 (1981)
which, while condemning the mercenary aggression
against the Republic of Seychelles, decided to send
a Commission
of Inquiry composed of three mem-*
bers of the Council to investigate the origin, background and financing of the aggression by mercenaries
against the Republic of Seychelles on 25 November
1981 and to assess and evaluate the economic damage
and submit to the Council its report and recommendations.

“The recent experience of our country, the People’s Republic of Benin, in its resistance to aggression by the imperialist army of mercenaries has
enabled us, with documentary support, to draw two
fundamental
lessons. First, the mercenaries, who
are the dregs of a capitalist society already in an
advanced state of decay, are in truth special and
anonymous detachments of the regular troops of
the imperialist armies, since they are recruited, led,
trained and armed by regular officers specially assigned to that sordid task. One cannot therefore but
denounce and combat the use of international
mercenaries without unmasking the forces which organize and arm them, set them in motion and assign
them their clear-cut targets.
“In the second place, the use of armed groups
of mercenaries is a new weapon of mass destruction
which has entered into the global strategy of international imperialism
for the colonial reconquest
of the States of the third world.“’
139. The dastardly and villainous aggression perpetrated on 25 November last against the people of
Seychelles and their revolution is not only a vile crime
against a small defenceless country by a gang of mercenaries that fear neither God nor man; it is above all
part of the political blindness of a State, South Africa,
whose racist and inhuman regime has as its basic
policy the denial of the most basic human rights and
as its programme
of action destabilization
and the
perpetration of the most evil and abject crimes against
several African States. It relates also and above all
to the Machiavellian
nature of international
imperialism which, faced with the irreversible rising tide
of the peoples’ fight for their liberation and their independence, has developed a new strategy, of which the
mercenaries
are the favoured instrument cynically
employed on the one hand to perpetuate exploitation
and oppression of peoples still under foreign domination, and on the other hand to carry out the colonial
and neocolonial reconquest of those young States by
destabilizing
their progressive
and revolutionary
regimes, thus preventing them from devoting themselves fully to economic, social and cultural development.

135. The Council was thus creating the means to
verify in the field, through the Commission of Inquiry,
the well-founded suspicions of the Seychelles Government as to South Africa’s participation,
despite its
confused and highly unconvincing
denials, in the
preparation and organization of the aggression.
136. I should like to quote from a few paragraphs
of the report of the Commission of Inquiry circulated
in document S/14905/Rev.l
of 15 March 1982, which
state, inter diu, that the immediate preparations for
and planning of the mercenary aggression took place
in South Africa, that the South African authorities
were thus generally aware of such intentions to overthrow the Government of Seychelles and that the
Commission
finds it difficult to believe that the South
African authorities did not at least have knowledge of
the preparations of the mercenary operation of 25 November.
137. If, on the basis of the information available to
it when it prepared its report, the Commission
was
unable to reach a definitive conclusion in respect of
the degree or level of responsibility of South Africa,
that is not the case today, following the major revelations made by the mercenaries during the course of
their trial in South Africa itself, and particularly after
the extremely enlightening testimony given by the
gang’s leader, Michael Hoare, an old and incorrigible
mercenary who, with supporting evidence, has directly
implicated
his employers, the South African secret
services of the National Intelligence
Service, and,
thus the South African authorities themselves.

140. In addition, we would add that Seychelles is of
vital or strategic interest in the Indian Ocean, as some
would say, who would clearly prefer to see there, as
in the past, a puppet Government in the pay of imperialism, without any national ambitions or aspirations.
141. After the bitter experiences of the Congo
-Leopoldville
in 1961-and after the numerous and
futile plots hatched against Guinea and Angola, the
people of Seychelles in turn have triumphed
over
international
imperialism
and its vile instrument for,
enslaving the peoples-the
mercenaries.
This is a
victory that will be inscribed in letters of gold among
the glorious laurels of the peoples who through a noble
struggle have won their freedom and independence

138. This trial corroborates the analysis that the
head of State of Benin, our great comrade-in-arms
Mathieu
Kerebou, made of the phenomenon of mercenarism when he said on 26 March 1977:
13

from the grip of the inveterate
ism and neocolonialism.

supporters of colonial-

authorize the Commission to submit a supplementary
report taking into account all the information to which
it did not have access earlier.

142. The peoples of the world who love peace and
justice will appreciate once again the real and growing
danger represented by the international
system of
mercenaries developed and financed by international
capitalist monopolies and cynically manipulated
by
the secret services of the major imperialist Powers
to crush the revolutionary
movement which is now
taking place in the world and to restore colonial and
neocolonial hegemony over the small and defenceless
countries of the third world.

146. Ready
tinues.

for the revolution-the

struggle

con-

147. The PRESIDENT
(iiztr/prL’ttrtio,l
jwn
Chi~.se): The next speaker is the representative of Argentina. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
148. Mr.

ROCA (Argentina)
(interpretation
jkorn
First of all, Sir, I wish to congratulate you
for the work you are accomplishing as President of
the Council. I can bear witness to your fine intelligence, your skill and your highly developed sense of
fairness.

Spmish):

143. The facts are there: they are overwhelming,
and they clearly point to the South African racist
rCgime and show us our double duty. First, we must
refuse to be accomplices of this evil crime, by most
forcefully condemning South Africa, thus making it
even more of an outcast from the international community. Secondly, we have a duty of solidarity. The
moral and material damage done to the people of
Seychelles is tremendous. No action by the international
community,
however generous,
however
sweeping, can ever fully compensate for it. The people
of Seychelles expect more than kind words from the
international community, more than the adoption of
noble resolutions condemning that perfidious aggression to which they have been subjected. They expect
from us, above all, effective, vigourous, concerted
and truly generous action that can help them heal their
wounds. They expect the Council to take the necessary specific measures to help them, if not to repair
the moral damage done, at least to repair the serious
damage done to their infrastructure and economy.
In doing this, the Council will do no more than reflect
the feeling of justice and active solidarity that all peoples of the world feel in view of the vast work of
reconstruction that the people of Seychelles will have
to undertake.

149. I should also like to express my respect and
that of my delegation to the previous President of the
Council, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, for his warm
courtesy, his tireless attention and his fairness as
President of the Council, a11 of which I can attest to.
150. My delegation has asked to address the Council in order to express its concern at the situation described in the report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry established by resolution 496 (1981)
and to add its voice to those who have forcefully condemned attacks against the territorial integrity and
political independence of the Republic of Seychelles.
15 1. The Council as far back as last December condemned the aggression committed
by mercenary
forces against Seychelles. That illegal act has also
been condemned by the international
community.
Nonetheless, we must be aware that conditions still
exist for such actions, which are direct threats to international peace and security, to be repeated. This
warning has been given by the Commission of Inquiry
itself in its recommendations.

144. The report of the Commission of Inquiry has
one merit-it
has arrived at recommendations
that
everyone can support. These recommendations
are
indeed a minimum when one considers on the one
hand the enormity of the material and moral damage
done to the people of Seychelles and, on the other
hand, the urgent need to eliminate from our society
this scourge of mercenarism, which is a serious threat
hanging over the sovereignty and independence of
States, particularly
the small, developing
States,
through the preparation of and adoption by all States
of the international
community
of an international
convention against the recruitment,
use, financing
and training of mercenaries.

152. My delegation believes that the clarity of those
concIusions is a further imperative reason for the
Council to assume the responsibilities conferred upon
it by the Charter of the United Nations and to make
every effort to avoid the repetition of actions such
as the one that we are studying today, actions which
with a view to financial profit, combine two acts condemned by the United Nations: intervention in the
internal affairs of other States and the attempt to reestablish colonial situations.
153. The process of decolonization
and liberation
is an irreversible historical reality which cannot he
countered by the reactionary interests of former
colonial Powers. ‘The United Nations has played a
fundamental role in the process of decolonization,
and that decisive contribution
is recognized and defended by the large number of Member States to whose
political independence it contributed. None the less,

145. To that end, there cannot be too many studies,
too much information-particularly
in respect of the
aggression against the Republic of Seychelles. That is
why my delegation would appreciate it if the Council
were to accede to the request made by the Seychelles
Government and the Commission of Inquiry itself, and
14

the responsibility to defend access to that independence and to those new living conditions still exists,
and it is up to the Council, at this very moment, to
reaffirm the principles of the Charter.
154. It is fitting to recall here the adoption by the
Council Of resolution 405 (1977), in which it con.
demned “all forms of external interference in the
internal affairs of Member States including the use of
international mercenaries to destabilize States and/or
to violate their territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence”.
I should like also to mention the
adoption by the General Assembly by consensus of
the Declaration on Principles of International
Law
concerning Friendly
Relations
and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, which states, in its preamble, that
“Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing
or encouraging the organization of irregular forces or
armed bands, including mercenaries, for incursion
into the territory of another State”.*

Nepalese origin and directed by native sub-officers
and British officers. They were used in the siege of
Delhi in 18.57 and in the Boxer Rebellion in 1900. They
took Part in a number of battles in the First World
War and in the campaigns during the Second World
War in Burma, North Africa and Italy. We can also
see that following India’s independence, the United
Kingdom decided to send the Gurkhas to its colonial
bastions of Hong Kong, Singapore and Malaysia.
Because of its training and warlike spirit, the regiment
is used for particularly dangerous missions. Therefore the international cotnmunity is shocked to see
that for the first time, in 1982, mercenary forces are
being introduced into Latin America in order to bring
about the restoration of a colonial situation.
158. The action which the Council is considering
today is SO serious that I need make no further comment on it. Moreover, the Council is independently
considering the question of the Malvinas Islands.
I wish to mention this today only as a clear example
of activities which must be condemned now more
than ever.

155. There are many legislative precedents in the
Organization which forcefully condemn mercenary
activities, but I shall not cite them here. It is sufficient
to mention the latest resolution, adopted by consensus on 4 December 1981 by the General Assembly,
resolution 36/76.

159. My delegation believes that the Council cannot evade that responsibility. Its resolution 496 ( I98 1)
demonstrated the Council’s sensitivity to the seriousness of the situation faced by the Seychelles. The
threat remains, and the conclusions of the Commission of Inquiry are very clear. Mercenary operations
must be ended, and the difficulties faced by the Commission of Inquiry in its mission must be overcome.

156. I do believe that it is relevant at this time to
recall the opinion of many delegations in the Ad Hoc*
Committee on the Drafting of an International
Convention against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing and
Training of Mercenaries. At its session last year, those
delegations affirmed, as is reflected in the Committee’s
report, that

160. My delegation regrets that as the Commission
of Inquiry indicates in paragraph 272 of its reports
“it was unfortunately limited in its investigations by
not being permitted to interview the mercenaries who
returned to South Africa”. It is clear that the fundamental way to determine responsibility for that illegal
action is direct contact with those who committed it.
Therefore, we deeply regret the decision of the Government of South Africa not to allow the Commission
access to the mercenaries, and above all to their leader,
Michael Hoare. The conclusion in paragraph 282 is
also a source of grave concern to my delegation. It
says:

“the use of mercenaries had always been linked with
the planning and perpetration of aggressive acts by
imperialist and reactionary circles . . . Although a
number of States had special laws prohibiting the
recruitment or use of mercenaries, some of the
Governments of those States simply disregarded
such laws when a threat arose to imperialist domination.“.’
157. History shows that the African continent has
been the principal victim of mercenary activities.
The case which brings us together here today is one
more example of the unceasing struggle that Africa
must wage against colonialism. But that painful privilege was extended to Latin America just a few weeks
ago--to be more precise, on Wednesday, I2 May,
when we learned through the press that a Gurkha
infantry battalion had embarked on the liner f&cJ(‘lz
Eiizrrherh II and was moving towards the Malvinas
Islands. If we consult the Encyclopedirr Am&wl
we see that a Gurkha is “a Nepalese mercenary soldier in the British or Indian army”. The Neltj St~~nd~~~d
Dictionary of the Eqlish Lrrngurlge points out that a
Gurkha is not a British subject. The Gurkhas constitute a mercenary force composed of persons of

“Given the tight and effective control exercised
by the security authorities in South Africa, and the
nature of the preparations for the mercenary operation of 25 November 1981 in South Africa, particularly the procurement and test-firing of the weapons, the Commission finds it difficult to believe
that the South African authorities did not at least
have knowledge of the preparations in this matter.”
161. Another very telling point is the natiOna]itY of
the mercenaries listed in annex V of the report: 25 of
them are from the Republic of South Africa and 12 from
the United Kingdom.
162. I should like to conclude by reiterating our
appeal for immediate and effective action by the Coun15
1

cil, and by expressing our gratitude for the work done
by the members of the Commission of Inquiry.
163. The PRESIDENT
(inferpr~trrtion jhm
ChiIZPS(J): The next speaker is the representative of
Madagascar. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
164,

Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (interpretaFrench): We are now going through a very
exceptional period, in which even those who have
peremptorily
condemned the United Nations and
who have spared no criticism of it seem to have rediscovered it, along with its usefulness as an effective
instrument for diplomacy and the resources it makes
available to States for the settlement of the most
serious crises.
tionfiorn

165. Your assumption of the presidency of the Council, Sir, at this time-which
is, despite everything,
fraught with threats to international peace and security-is
a source of comfort for us, for we are convinced of the dedication of your country, the People’s
Republic of China, to strengthening the Organization’s
moral and political authority, with strict respect for
the Charter and in defence of the legitimate interests
of the third world.

Cotonou in January 1977. The similarities are striking,
as to the progressive policies of the target Governments, the choice of the means for carrying out the
aggression, the circles from which the mercenaries
were recruited, and the haste with which all those
involved sought to deny the evidence at hand-with
regard also to the implication of agencies which quickly disavowed their agents, and even the reactions of
those who wished to reduce the problem to the dimension of an internal question and who would have been
quite content to leave the Governments that were
victims without real recourse, since attempts to establish the facts came up against the unbreathable wall
of the sovereignty of States.
170. With the exception of one wretched stooge,
the Cotonou mercenaries literally disappeared into
thin air and they got off with a condemnation in principle by the international community. The wish of the
Government of Benin, expressed to all States through
the Council, to see those mercenaries brought to
justice has apparently been ignored by all to this day.
And the impetus which developed in the United
Nations for the rapid adoption of an international canvention against the recruitment,
use, financing and
training of mercenaries has been dulled on the legal
arcana and quibbles which ill conceal ideological
stands.

166. I take this opportunity to address to Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, representative of Zaire, my
delegation’s sincere congratulations on the remarkable competence with which he carried out the duties
of President of the Council last month.

171. Happily-if
I may use that word-there
are
elements in the present case which allow of more
positive action by the international community.
172. The identity of the mercenaries is known, and
we know where to find them. Some of them, whom the
Commission
of Inquiry
heard, made statements
implicating South African official services, and that
information has been more than corroborated by subsequent revelations made, inter ulia, by the mercenary
Michael Hoare.

167. The African countries have no greater desire
than to see the authority of the United Nations exerted
to put an end to the persistence of influences which
have subjected the peoples of the continent to colonial
domination,
racial humiliation
and the shameless
exploitation
of their labour and their natural resources. This is true as regards Namibia and the situation in South Africa, issues which are rightly of concern to the international community. It also applies to
cases which are unfortunately becoming ever more
numerous, of which the 25 November 1981 invasion
of the Republic of Seychelles is the latest example.
These cases indicate the relentless way in which
enemies of an independent and aware Africa seek to
maintain their sway, to render meaningless the achievements of the anti-colonial struggle, and to continually
destabilize
the region-our
region-the
better to
control it.

173. According to those revelations,
the South
African Government approved the plan aimed at overthrowing the President of the Republic of Seychelles,
Prime Minister Botha ordered that the Military Intelligence Service rather than the National Intelligence
Service be in charge of carrying out the operation.
Thus, Michael Hoare was put in contact with two officers in the Military Intelligence Service who, after
certain formalities, gave him weapons against a receipt
and designated the place where the recruits were to
be trained. The same officers decided on the number
of South African nationals who could be recruited for
the operation, the rest of the team to be made UP of
foreign mercenaries, As to international ramifications,
Michael Hoare has indicated that the intelligence
service of a foreign country was kept informed of the
plan.

168. We pay a tribute to the work carried out by the
Commission of Inquiry. But how are we to approach
our consideration of the report which ,has just been
introduced by the representative of Panama without
having a very strong feeling of dt;jri vu, the certainty
that history is repeating itself7

174. The quality of these revelations lies not in their
accuracy but in the fact that there has been no denis
and that they were made in circumstances in which

169. Indeed, the invasion of Seychelles is different
only in details from the mercenary intervention at
16

Hoare drew’the wrath rather than the favour of South
African authorities. As far as we know, neither the
South African Prime Minister nor any one of his subordinates has since these revelations felt able to repeat the statement made on 3 December 1981, that
the South African Government had neither initiated,
approved of nor known about the attempted coup

of Seychelles, whose presence here we welcome, of
our full solidarity and of our determination
to continue, ~i~-ir-~li.y the Government and people of ,Qychelles, the same policy of good-neighbourliness
and
suPPort in safeguarding the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a sister country in order to
ensure the triumph of the ideals of liberty, justice and
social progress that inspire the two sister revolutions.

d’e’tat.

175. We note that the Commission of Inquiry had
serious doubts as to the sincerity of Botha’s statement
and says, in paragraph 282 of its report, that it “finds
it difficult to believe that the South African authorities did not at least have knowledge of the preparations . . .” for the invasion.

181 s I cannot conclude without thanking you most
sincerely, Mr. President, and through you the members of the Council, for being so kind as to enable
my delegation to take part in this debate,
182. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Chinc>scj): The next speaker is the representative of Cuba.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.

176. In the absence of information from Hoare and
his accomplices, the Commission of Inquiry pointed
out that it could not come to a final conclusion as
regards the degree of South Africa’s awareness of or
responsibility for the action, We believe that the “further information”
that, according to paragraph 274,
was needed by the Commission in order to make a
judgement is now available, and that, in accordance
with the sixth and tinal recommendation,
it might be
authorized to furnish a supplementary report containing any further information
relative to its mandate, including the revelations of Michael Hoare and
other elements that might emerge from the Pietersmaritzburg and Mahe trials. Of course, my delegation
will not be opposed if, overcoming any legal formalism
and on the basis of information that is now in the public domain, the Council were to decide without further ado that South Africa was involved in the planning
and execution of the invasion, that it thus bore responsibility, and that it should be condemned for an
act of aggression against the Republic of Seychelles.

183.

Mr. LOPEZ DEL AM0 (Cuba) (interpretdon
Permit me first of al1, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of May and to wish you
every success in your work as the head of the Council in particularly complex international circumstances.
I also wish to express well-deserved gratitude to the
outgoing President, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda.
I thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council, for permitting me to speak today.

from

184. I must express my delegation’s gratitude for
the efforts made by the Commission of Inquiry,
headed by the Permanent Representative of Panama,
Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos. As the representative
of Panama has this afternoon informed us, the Commission was unable to complete its work because of
the refusal of the South African Government to grant
its request to interview the mercenaries who had
returned to South Africa,

177. My delegation welcomes the pride of place
that in its report the Commission has given to considerations regarding the material damage done to the
Seychelles economy as a result of the invasion of
25 November 1981.

185. There is no need to repeat here everything the
world already knows about the nature of the Pretoria
regime. The maintenance of the shameful system of
trpclvtheid and the colonial occupation of Namibia,
the implementation
of a policy of State terrorism
against its neighbours in southern Africa and, in particular, the continuous acts of military aggression
against heroic Angola-are
all examples of the international behaviour of the South African racists.

178.

Aggression is, of course, the responsibility of
author, and we have no doubt concerning the
obligations incumbent upon the South African authori ties.
its

’

Spanish):

179. In the circumstances, we consider the recommendation
of the Commission
of Inquiry inviting
States and international
organizations to give economic and financial assistance to the Republic of
Seychelles, in particular by making voluntary contributions to the special assistance fund created for that
purpose, to be realistic and worthy of support.

186. Today the Council is considering a report
on
yet another act of aggression committed
against
another African country, a country that is small in
size but great in its moral values, which has been the
victim of a mercenary attack organized and carried
out by the Government of South Africa. We Can only
wonder how long the international
Community will
tolerate the acts’ of the South African racist clique,
which constitutes a permanent offense to human
dignity and a threat to regional and international Peace
and security.
!

180.

My delegation did not take part in the discusthat led to the adoption of resolution 496 (]98]),
SO I should like, on behalf of my Government and the
people of Madagascar, to assure Seychelles through
Mr. Jacques Hodoul, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
sions

/

17

195. Africa has had many silent wars, of many kinds.
One of the most persistent and perhaps most ignored
by the West has been that waged by mercenaries
-that despicable breed which deals in human lives,
disregards national sovereignty, insults national independence and defies international law.

187. Why is it that the South African racists are so
arrogant, disregard the resolutions of the United Nations and the continuous appeals of the international
community and continue to pursue their reprehensible
policy of adventurism? Last September the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, which is
based in Brussels and, as is well known, has Western
leanings, published a pamphlet entitled I/?lJestments
in Apartheid. According to that pamphlet, the United
States and four countries of Western Europe control
80 per cent of foreign investments in South Africa.
Half of them, with a total value of approximately
$ IO billion, are investments of United Kingdom firms.

196. Mercenaries epitomize imperialism,
colonialism
and racism. The motives and the consequences of
their acts are the same. In some cases, they have
acted as scouts and forerunners: in others, as camp
followers, waiting like vultures to feast on the dead;
and in yet others, as a rearguard. And they have operated for financial and political profit.

188. These figures show what soil nourishes the
roots of the evil system of upurth&d, whose representatives were received only a few months ago in Washington by the highest ranking members of the United
States Administration as friends and allies.

197. Most mercenary activity has taken place in
Africa, a continent whose riches have always lured
Western civilization to its coasts. Europe exported to
us its social tensions and imported from us the rich
resources of our lands.

189. South Africa and those who support it do not
pardon those who take independent stands and make
sacrifices and fight for their rightful place in the sun.
That is why one day there is an attempt to punish
Mozambique,
another day, Zambia and Zimbabwe,
and still another day, Seychelles. Attempts are made
to destabilize and overthrow Governments embodying
the anti-colonialist, independent and libertarian spirit.

198. The most recent example of mercenary activity
in Africa took place not too long ago in the Republic
of Seychelles. Although most mercenary activity has
the blessing of some imperialist Power or another, the
mercenary attack on Seychelles was one of the more
flagrant and brutal violations of territorial integrity
and sovereignty in our times.

190. For the merchants of death and exploitation,
everything boils down to gross geopolitics of domination and terror to restore serfdom, be it through direct
aggression or by means of mercenaries.

199. This particular episode, which took place in
November 198 1, was not merely the adventurism of a
group of unscrupulous and greedy men. No, it was
part of a comprehensive and calculated master plan
concocted, developed and executed by the illegal
racist rkgime of South Africa against an independent
country which is a member of the Organization of
African Unity and a Member of the United Nations.
There is ample evidence that the racist rCgime approved the invasion of Seychelles, with plans to overthrow the legitimate sovereign Government of President France Albert RenC; the racist Ministry of
Defence provided arms to the mercenaries and gave
them logistic and operational support; the racist armed
forces trained the mercenaries; and some of the “mercenaries” were closely connected to the racist military and intelligence structure,

191, My delegation reiterates its strongest support
for the Republic of Seychelles and the just claims
brought before the Council by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of that country, Mr. Jacques Hodoul, and calls
upon the Council to adopt appropriate measures to
prevent a resumption of aggression by South African
racists and ensure that the Republic of Seychelles
receives the clear sympathy and international solidarity which it deserves.
192. The PRESIDENT
finterpretation
jh7
Chinest?): The next speaker is the representative of Angola,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

200. The racist rCgime continues to violate the territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola by
constant aerial bombardment
and land attacks, by
destroying buildings,
massacring civilians,
raping
women, brutalizing
and kidnapping
children and
carting off civilian property, including livestock.

193. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Sir, on behalf
of my delegation I should like to extend to you our
greetings on your assumption of the presidency.
I should also like to express our appreciation to your
predecessor for his work as President of the Council
for April.

201. The racist regime has been in illegal occupation of Namibia for decades. It has continued to
plunder Namibian resources, all the while creating
hurdles in negotiations for Namibian independence,

194. There are loud wars and there are silent wars.
We have become so geared to conventional warfare
that the other kind of war arouses little attention,
sympathy or intentional action. Its effects are known
only to the victims, while the rest of the world concentrates on troop-ships, missiles and war zones.

202. There is no place in Africa for colonialism,
imperialism or mercenarism.
The People’s Republic
of Angola, in keeping with the guidelines of our revo18

lution, has always taken a strong position,
brought to international attention in 1976.

which we

to the representative of Zaire, who successfully presided over the Council last month.

203. We welcome the report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry, but we must point out that
it is incomplete in various ways, We support the creation of a special fund to help rebuild the airport and
other buildings damaged by the mercenary activity in
Seychelles. We request the Council to remain seized
of the matter and to prepare a complementary report,
in addition to the one now before it.

210. After a long intermission, the Council is again
considering the fully justified complaint
by the Go”ernment of the Republic of Seychelles, Use has been
made of the interim by the Security
Council Commission Of Inquiry established under resolution 496 ( 1981)
to investigate
in detail the dangerous events that took
place at Seychelles international airport
on 25 November 1981. Although the report submitted by the
COmmission
of hqUiry
in document S/l49()5/Rev, I
COntahS
valuable faCtLId information, we share the
view that for the time being the Commission has not
been able to fulfil its mandate under paragraph
3 of
resolution 496 (1981).

204. United Nations Headquarters will soon be host
to the second special session of the General Assembly
session on disarmament. The international community
must use that occasion also to condemn South Africa
and its allies for their policy of militarism, adventurism
and destabilization-all
of which are connected to the
subject of arms and disarmament.

21 I. In the light of the facts that could be ascertained, it is obvious that the act of military
aggression against the Republic of Seychelles undertaken
on 25 November by a group of heavily armed mercenaries Sent from South Africa constituted orgdnized
action by mercenaries aimed at overthrowing the
lawful Government of the Republic of Seychelles,
one of the full Member States of the United Nations.
This is fully substantiated by the views of Mr. Jacques
Hodoul, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Seychelles,
as expressed in paragraph 127 of the report of the Commission of Inquiry as follows:

205. The People’s Republic of Angola has often
brought its own case to the Council and we have often
appeared here in support of progressive causes and
peoples. We are proud of it. All I can do at the moment is to quote Publius Syrus of the first century
B.C., who said: “Judcx dcrmnatur cm rwc’ens ~rlm~lrlit!l/.“-the
judge is condemned when the guilty is
acquitted.
206. We do not come to the Council for mercy, compassion or sympathy: we come for justice-and
by
justice I do not mean the sort by which established
injustices
are sanctioned through the backing and
support of peaceful allies. If the Council is to play its
role in international peace-keeping, then it must take a
very strong position on actions which are so obviously
intended
to destabilize national Governments that
oppose uprrrtheid in South Africa, especially when
such actions are in clear violation of the Charter of the
United Nations. None of us is safe as long as South
Africa and its partners feel free to carry out their
reactionary
policies and plans in Africa. And for
those countries which feel safe from South African
threats and removed from problems such as those
faced by Angola, Namibia and Seychelles vis-ri-vis
South Africa, I would only quote Horace: “Nam tlla
IYJS ugitw, pnries wtn proximus rrrdet “-it
is your
business when the wall next door catches fire.

This position has surely been reaffirmed even more
eloquently in his statement today, to which we listened with great attention.

207.

212.

b,. . . South Africa had very good reasons to want
to destabilize Seychelles and overthrow its present
Government.
In the first place, it would like to
see in Seychelles a regime more favourable to its
own interests and to its policy of qwthcid.
South
Africa, he said, had a well-established tradition of
committing
aggression against countries that purdression
sued an independent policy, and that
was becoming more violent as the independence
of Namibia drew nearer. Another reason for South
Africa’s displeasure with the Seychelles Government could be the active campaign pursued by that
Government in favour of turning the Indian Ocean
into a zone of peace.”

Czechoslovakia has no doubt that behind this
were the immediate interests of the South
African racists and those in other associated Political
circles interested in destabilizing independent countries whose peoples desire to pursue their sovereign
interests freely and without any external intervcntion. The aggression against Seychelles was not and
is not an isolated act. More than 100,000 South African
soldiers and police are waging an open colonial war
against the people of Namibia and an undeclared war
against neighbouring
independent
and sovereign
States. Furthermore, South Africa is resp!jnsible fol
wide-ranging
aggression against Angola, aimed at

A lutrr continual; CI vitorirr e certa.

aggression

208.

The PRESIDENT
(interprctrrtion ,fionz ChiThe. next speaker is the representative of
Czechoslovakia.
I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

~SCJ):

209.
Mr. SUJA (Czechoslovakia): I should first like
to congl.atulate
you, Sir, on the assumption of the
office of President for the current month. you are a
very experienced
diplomat
with high professional
qL~aljtjes, and I wish you success in your responsible
1vot-k. We should also like to express our appreciation
19

guished record of service with the British Crown in
accordance with agreements openly and honourably
arrived at with the Government of Nepal.

undermining the foundations of the Angolan revolution and preventing the peaceful constr&tion of that
country, All this is part and parcel of thtcontinuing
aggressive, adventurist course pursued by the racist
regime of Pretoria. The repeated acts of aggression by
South Africa, to which can be added the planned but
unsuccessful mercenary aggression against Seychelles,
confirm once again very emphatically that, flagrantly
violating generally recognized norms of international
law and disregarding the resolute condemnation of the
international community, the racist regime of South
Africa intends to persist in its aggressive course and
to continue a policy of State terrorism. This course is
inherent in the very nature of the racist regime, which
in itself represents a constant threat not only to peace
and security in the region of southern Africa but to
peace and security throughout the world. This regime
would not dare to pursue such a course without the
all-round economic, political, military, financial and
diplomatic support provided to the regime by those
in reactionary imperialist circles.

219. I do not know what is the lexicon to which the
representative of Argentina referred, but if we are
going to be serious we should have a little precision
in this matter, The only internationally
agreed definition of who is a mercenary is to be found in Additional
Protocol 1 of 19774 to the Geneva Conventions of
1949. That definition excludes anyone who is “a
member of the armed forces of a party to a conflict”.
The Gurkhas comprise units of regular troops: they
form a fully integrated part of the United Kingdom
forces; they perform the same duties at home and
abroad as other forces. In no way can they be classified as mercenaries.
220. Secondly, my delegation is frankly astonished
that this slur should have been made here in the Council by the representative
of the Government
which
unleashed armed aggression in the South Atlantic on
1 April, and which remains openly defiant of the
mandatory resolution-502
(1982)~adopted
by the
Council on 2 April.

213. Czechoslovakia
categorically
condemns the
provocative act of aggression against the Republic of
Seychelles, using armed mercenaries as a gross violation of the generally recognized norms and principles
of international law and of the Charter of the United
Nations and as a concentrated form of international
terrorism threatening international peace and security.

221. Thirdly, there is an analogy, which is valid,
between the situation that we have been discussing
this afternoon and the situation to which the representative of Argentina referred, and that analogy finds
its expression in the sympathy that my delegation feels
for small island territories which suddenly find themselves the victim of armed aggression.

214. The racist regime of Pretoria and those that cooperate closely with it bear the full responsibility
for this act. Therefore the aggressor must compensate
fully for all the economic and material damage caused
by this mercenary aggression.
ii
: ..-1
215. We also share the vi+ that the Council should
adopt effective measures to prevent the recurrence
of similar acts of gross violence, whether against
Seychelles or any other sovereign State. The mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles,
a country with which Czechoslovakia entertains
friendly relations based on mutual respect and co-operation, highlights among other things the necessity for
the early adoption by the United Nations of a convention against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries.

222. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretrrtim
fi.0177
Chi~L’sc): The representative of Argentina has asked to
speak in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
223.

Mr.

ROCA (Argentina)
(intcrpr~~ttc/tion .fi~~w
The representative of the United Kingdom
has endeavoured to reply to my earlier reference to
the use of mercenary forces in the Malvinas Islands
region. However, the facts to which I referred are so
well known to everyone that I need not repeat the
historic military tradition of the Gurkhas and their
well-known association with the United Kingdom,
which does not deserve further comment.
Sptrnish):

2 16. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtation
jkm
C/IiI call on the representative of the United Kingdom, who has asked to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.

IZPS(J):

224. With regard to the legal argument made by the
representative of the United
Kingdom
concerning
the mercenary nature of the troops, I shall simply
read out the definition of “mercenary”
in the report
of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment,
Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries. A mercenary,
according to the definition, is one who:

217. Mr. WHYTE (United Kingdom): I should like to
make three comments on the remarks by the representative of Argentina earlier this afternoon.
218. First, my delegation totally rejects the analogy
which he drew between the mercenaries referred to
in the report that we have been debating this afternoon
--I refer to Mike Hoare and his associates-and those
regiments of Gurkhas who have a long and distin-

“Is especially recruited locally or abroad in order
to fight in an armed conflict or who engages in acts
of aggression against sovereign States or who
engages in attempts to destabilize foreign States.“’
20

225. With regard to the second comment made by
the representative of the United Kingdom, my delegation believes, as does the whole world, that it is the
responsibility of the Council to preserve peace and
security, and, as such, more than mere professions
of respect for peace, such as those we have just heard,
are expected of Council members. That responsibility
requires one to refrain from bombing of islands and
from hostile acts such as those which the United
Kingdom has ceaselessly been committing
in the
region of the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia and the
South Sandwich Islands, in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and resolution 502 (1982) of
the Council.

cil, and the hour is getting late, I know, but, very
briefly, frankly, on the mercenary point, the proposition which has just been put forward by the representative of Argentina misses the point altogether.
229. The definition which I have referred to is the
definition of mercenaries, and the quotation which he
has used is not applicable to the Gurkhas as defined
in the definition that I have quoted. That definition
is the one which has generally, by consensus, emerged
as the only definition in the United Nations Ad Hoc
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and
Training of Mercenaries to which he has referred.

226. My delegation and my Government, through
its highest authorities,
has expressed its continued
willingness to implement that resolution. What it has
not been able to accept is the interpretation placed
by the United Kingdom on the principle of self-defence.
The Council having adopted measures, nothing authorizes the British Government to cause hundreds of
deaths in order to maintain a colonial outpost without
complying with resolution 502 (1982), which the United
Kingdom representative has invoked and which, for
our part, I repeat, we have never stated an unwillingness to comply with. On the contrary, our conduct
in the Organization clearly demonstrates that, without prejudice to our readiness to defend our rights
in all fields, we have never, in keeping with my country’s tradition of peace and negotiation, refused to
hear complaints on this point.

230. Secondly, and more importantly, I would only
say that my delegation and my Government, since
the adoption of resolution 502 (19X2), as every member of the Council extremely well knows, has been
absolutely meticulous in reporting to you, Sir, and to
the Council, every measure that we have taken in
exercise of the right of self-defence under Article 51
of the Charter.

NOTES

227. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpwtation
fiorn Chirzrsc): I call on the representative of the United Kingdom, who has asked to speak.

1 Qffi~icrl

Rmwds

of

flu

Gcn~rrrl

Assonhly,

Thirty-sewnd

Sassior~, PIerwry Meetings, 30th meeting, para. 45
2 General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), umex.
.’ A/AC207/L&/Add.
1, para. 4.
4 United Nations, Trccrty.Prk~, vol. 1125. No. 17512, p. 4.
5 OJjXr/
Rec(miS of t/w GCIIPIY~/ Assay A/y. S//pphWnt
No. 4.7 ,
(A/36/43), para. 56.

228.
Mr. WHYTE (United Kingdom): I have no wish
’ unnecessarily to prolong the proceedings of the Coun-

21

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.
KAEC

COMO

IIO;IYZIZITh

CONSEGUIR

H3,!&AHNII

PUBLICACIONES

Lx publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nucva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

OPrAHIi3AI[HM

et les agences
a : Nations

OWIaE~pfHEHHJdX

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
esten en venta en librerlas
a su librero
o dirljase
a: Nacioncs

00400

UNIES
depositaires
du
Unies, Section

HAUMH

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccicin de Ventas,

88s60989-October

19fi94~~
