General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

80

shall also be empowered to receive contributions from international organizations, both governmental and non-governmental,
and from other private sources.
2. Contributions to the Fund may also be made by means
of pledging conferences convened by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, the first pledging conference to be convened
not later than twelve months after the adoption of the statute
of the Fund. Contributions as pledged to the Fund shall be
payable within the twelve months following the pledge.
3. Cash contributions shall be made in convertible currenc\es or in currency readily usable by the Fund.
4. Contributions shall be made without limitation to a
specific recipient country.

Article 4
ORGANIZATION AND SUPERVISION

1. The policies and procedures of the Fund shall be formulated by a Board of Governors, composed of representatives
of thirty-six States Members of the United Nations or members of specialized agencies or of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, elected by the General Assembly keeping in
view inter alia, the need for balance among the representation
of the beneficiary land-locked developing countries and their
transit neighbours, on the one hand, and potential donor
countries, both developed and developing, on the other. States
elected to the Board of Governors shall do their utmost to
ensure that their representatives possess the expertise required
for the efficient operation of the Fund.
2. The members of the Board of Governors shall be
elected for a term of three years, provided, however, that,
of the members elected at the first election, the terms of one
third of the members shall expire at the end of one year and
the terms of a further one third of the members at the end
of two years. Retiring members shall be eligible for re-election.
3. The Board of Governors shall report annually to the
General Assembly through the Economic and Social Council.
The comments of the Council on the report shall also be
transmitted to the Assembly.
4. The Board of Governors shall meet at least once a year
and as often as may be necessary for the conduct of the work
of the Fund.

5. The Board of Governors may, in the light of requirements, establish an Executive Committee which shall supervise
the operations of the Fund on a continuous basis and report
to the Board on its activities at regular intervals. Beneficiary
land-locked developing countries and their transit neighbours,
on the one hand, and potential donor countries, on the other,
shall be represented on the Executive Committee in proportions
similar to such representation on the Board of Governors.
Article 5
QUORUM AND VOTING

and the Executive Committee, if established, in whose deliberations he will participate without the right to vote. He shall
exercise over-all responsibility for the day-to-day operations of
the Fund and shall report directly, on a regular basis, to the
Board of Governors, or through the Executive Committee, if
established, on the operations of the Fund.
3. The Executive Director shall be assisted by a small
secretariat within the framework of the United Nations Secretariat. The Fund may enter into management contracts with
the competent international organizations, including the regional development banks, to conduct its operations. The
contracts shall ensure the full and effective control, at all
times, of the Fund over the operations. The Executive Director
shall make effective use of the existing facilities of the United
Nations Secretariat, including those of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the regional commissions
and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
as well as those of the United Nations Development Programme. Where appropriate, the Fund may also use the
facilities of the specialized agencies.

Article 7
MODES OF OPERATION

1.

To carry out its purposes as specified in article 1, the
Fund is empowered to make grants and Joans, including loans
on concessionary terms, and, as appropriate, to participate in
investments and to allocate assistance in kind under its control
and direction.
2. The Fund shall ensure an equitable distribution of its
resources, taking into account the needs of each of the landlocked developing countries as well as relevant problems at
the regional and subregional levels.

Article 8
RESPONSIBILITIES OF GOVERNMENTS OF RECIPIENT COUNTRIES

Governments of recipient countries shall ensure the effective
utilization of the resources provided by the Fund, shall maintain the records required by the Fund in connexion with the
administration of its financial and technical assistance and
shall report fully on the utilization of such assistance.

Article 9
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION

1. The financial regulations for the Fund shall be drafted
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in consultation
with the Executive Director of the Fund, for approval by the
General Assembly on the recommendation of the Board of
Governors. In the preparation of these regulations, account
shall be taken of the special requirements of the operations of
the Fund.
2. Pending the approval by the General Assembly of
financial regulations for the Fund, the Financial Regulations
and Rules of the United Nations102 shall apply.

1. A majority of the members of the Board of Governors
or of the Executive Committee shall constitute a quorum.
2. Each member of the Board of Governors and each
member of the Executive Committee shall have one vote.
3. Decisions on all questions shall as far as possible be
made on the basis of consensus. In the absence of consensus,
decisions shall be made by a majority of the members present
and voting. For the purpose of the present article, the phrase
"members present and voting" means members present and
casting an affirmative or negative vote. Members which abstain
from voting are considered as not voting.

Article 6

Article 10
FUTURE INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

The General Assembly shall review, in the light of experience, the effectiveness and further evolution of these institutional arrangements with a view to deciding upon such changes
and improvements as may be necessary in order to meet fully
the purposes of the Fund.

31/178.

Implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 2626 (XXV), 3202 (S-VI),
3281 (XXIX) and 3362 (S-VII)

MANAGEMENT

1. The chief executive officer of the Fund, who shall be
appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
subject to confirmation by the General Assembly, shall be the
Executive Director of the Fund.
2. The Executive Director shall discharge his functions
under the guidance and supervision of the Board of Governors

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
10 2 ST/SOB/Financial Rules/1/Rev.1

and Amend.1-5.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 3506 (XXX) of 15
December 1975 on the implementation of the decisions
adopted by the General Assembly at its seventh special
session,
Recalling further its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24
October 1970 containing the goals, targets and policy
measures of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
which have been complemented and strengthened by
its resolutions on the establishment of a new international economic order and its resolution 3517 (XXX)
of 15 December 1975 on the mid-term review and
appraisal of progress in the implementation of the International Development Strategy,
NotinR the reports on the fourth session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
held at Nairobi from 5 to 31 May 1976, 103 and the
interim report of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, 104 as well as other relevant reports,
Noting further the pertinent decisions on the establishment of the new international economic order
adopted at the Third Ministerial Meeting of the Group
of Seventy-seven, held at Manila from 26 January to 7
February 1976, 105 the Fifth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 197 6, 106 and the
Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at Mexico City from 13 to 22
September 1976, 101
Considering with deep and increasing concern that
parts of the developing world are still subject to foreign
aggression and occupation, apartheid, racial discrimination and colonial and neo-colonial domination, which
constitute major obstacles to the economic emancipation and development of the developing countries as
a whole as well as major threats to international peace
and security,
Noting the regret expressed by the developing countries that the developed countries have yet to display
the necessary political will to implement these fundamental decisions of the United Nations and fulfil their
commitments and obligations and to adjust their policies
for this purpose,
Deeply concerned that during the current Second
United Nations Development Decade the terms of
trade of the majority of developing countries have
deteriorated, together with unprecedented and growing
balance-of-payments deficits, that the burden of debt
has reached unmanageable proportions in many developing countries and growth in the developing countries
is expected to fall short not only of the 6 per cent
target of the International Development Strategy but
103 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10);
A/31/276.
104 A/31/282, annex.
105 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. T, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10),
annex V.
1oasee A/31/197, annex JJ.
101 See A/C.2/31/7.

81

also of the rate of growth achieved in the First United
Nations Development Decade and that, for many
developing countries, particularly among the least developed, land-locked, island and most seriously affected developing countries, real per capita income
could, if present trends persist, be lower in 1980 than
at the start of the Decade,
Considering that the inequity in economic relations
between the developed and the developing countries
is one of the primal issues confronting the international
community, a situation which could adversely affect
international economic co-operation and the promotion of world peace and security,

I
1. Affirms that its resolutions on the establishment
of a new international economic order reflect a commitment on the part of all countries to ensure equitable
economic relations between developed and developing
countries and a deliberate, sustained and planned effort to contribute to the development of the developing
countries;
2. Emphasizes the conclusions reached in the midterm review and appraisal of progress in the implementation of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade, contained in its resolution 3517 (XXX), which specificallv identified serious shortfalls in the implementation
of frs resolution 2626 (XXV) during the first half of
the Decade;
3. Expresses its deep concern and disappointment
at the failure of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation to achieve thus far any concrete
results;
4. Reaffirms that urgent, more vigorous and concrete steps and actions still remain to be taken, collectively and individually, by all members of the international community to end without delay all forms of
foreign aggression and occupation, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and neo-colonialism and
that it is also the duty of all States effectively to support and extend assistance to the countries, territories
and peoples subjected to them so as to restore their
national sovereignty, their territorial integrity and their
inalienable and fundamental rights in order to promote
development and international co-operation, peace and
security;
5. Expresses deep concern, despite some progress
in certain areas, at the slow pace of progress in the
implementation of the measures specified in the resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly adopted
at its sixth and seventh special sessions and at the
limited nature of agreements reached at the fourth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development;
6. Urges the international community, particularly
the developed countries, to display the necessary political will in the ongoing negotiations in different United
Nations forums and elsewhere so as to reach the concrete and urgent solutions necessary to promote the
establishment of a new international economic order;

II
1. Decides to undertake during the course of its
thirty-second session a detailed assessment of the prog-

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

82

ress made in the implementation of its resolutions 2626
(XXV), 3202 (S-VI), 3281 (XXIX) and 3362
(S-VII) under a single item entitled "Assessment of the
progress made in the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 2626 (XXV), 3202 (S-VI), 3281
(XXIX) and 3362 (S-VII) entitled, respectively, 'International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade', 'Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order' 'Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States' 'and 'Development and international
economic co-operation''';
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Committee on Review and Appraisal to prepare
a preliminary assessment, for considerati_on by th~ Ge?eral Assembly at its thirty-second session, beanng m
mind the provisions of the preceding paragraphs and
the reports at the sectoral and regional le~el ~ubmitted
by the United Nations organs and orgamzations concerned, and such other developments as may take place
in the interim;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the heads of
the United Nations bodies and organizations concerned,
in preparing for the review and assessment, and M~mber States, in preparing their national reports on the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
to take fully into account the provisions of the present
resolution, in particular section II, paragraph 1.
J06th plenary meeting
2 J December 1976

31/179.

United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3251 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974 and 3461 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order, and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Noting the recommendations made at the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19
August 1976,108 and at the Conference on Economic
Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at
Mexico City from 13 to 22 September 1976,109
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 2023 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
Recalling further the relevant decisions adopted by
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme at its eighteenth, 110 nineteenth, 111
108 See A/31/197.
109 See A/C.2/31/7.
110 Official Records

of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5543/Rev.1),
para. 224.
111 fbid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/5646),
para. 164.

twentieth, 112 twenty-first 113 and twenty-second114 sessions,
Taking note with appreciation of the statement made
by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme emphasizing the _importanc~ of technical co-operation among developmg countries as an
integral part and a new dimension . of mutual cooperation for development and ?f his ~ssurance of
making a great success of the Umted Nations Conf_erence on Technical Co-operation among Developmg
Countries, 115
Further taking note of the reports on the first and
second sessions of the sessional Committee on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries, contained in the report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme on its twentysecond session, of the reports of the participating and
executing agencies of the United Nations development
system and of the conclusions of the regional meeti?gs
on technical co-operation among developing countries,
held in Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and Africa,
1. Decides to convene the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries at Buenos Aires from 27 March to 7
April 1978;
2. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, in view of the importance of the Conference, to act as the SecretaryGeneral of the Conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
( b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of all
international conferences convened under its auspices,
in the capacity of observers, in accordance with Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974;
( c) Representatives of the national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity, in the capacity of observers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX)
of 10 December 1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate as an observer;
( e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the regional commissions, as
well as interested organs of the United Nations, to be
represented at the Conference;
(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers;
(g) Interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to be represented by observers;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of the representatives
referred to in paragraph 3 ( b) and ( c) above, including the requisite financial provisions for their travel
expenses and per diem;
l1 2 /bid., Supplement No. 2A
113 Jbid., Sixty-first Session,

(E/5703/Rev.l ), para. 332.
Supplement No. 2 (E/5779),

para. 302.
114 fbid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ), para. 512.
115 Ibid., para. 462.
