Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

first session, in 1964, and contained in annex A.T.2 of
the Final Act of the Conference ;21
2. Requests that the Convention on Transit Trade
of Land-locked States be signed by 31 December 1965
and ratified or acceded to as soon as possible in order
to promote the economic and social development of
the land-locked countries through international trade;
3. Requests the Secretary--General of the United
Nations and the Secretarv-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to be
guided by the terms of the present resolution and the
nbove-mentioned Convention in assisting the landlocked countries to overcome their difficulties regarding
transit trade.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2087 (XX). Financing of economic development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1318 (XIII) of 12 December
l 958 entitled "Promotion of the international flow of
private capital" and 1710 (XVI) of 19 December 1961
fntitled "United N ::itions Development Decade: a programme for international economic co-operation",
Taking into account the recommendations contained
in anneX: A.IV.2 of the Final Act of the United Nations
Conference on Trade nn<l Development, 22
Having considered the recommendations on the promotion of private foreign investment in developing
countries, contained in annex A.JV.12 of the Final Act
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 23
Noting with interest the fourth and fifth reports of
the Secretary-General on the promotion of the international flow of private capital,2 i
Rea.ffirming that private foreign investment may contribute to the economic diversification and development
of private-capital-importing developing countries and to
the accelerated transfer of technical and managerial
know-how to these countries, where such investments
are made in terms that are satisfactory both to thr
capital-exporting countries ;md the capital-importing
countries,
1. Asks Governments to give serious consideration
to the recommendations contained in annex A.IV.12
of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development;
2. Calls upon Governments to give due consideration
to the measures and actions for the promotion of private
foreign investment in developing countries recommended by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, always taking into account the relevant laws and regulations of each country, and the
need of respect for the sovereignty of the host countries ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep in view
the above-mentioned measures and actions in the preparation of his further studies on the promotion of the
international flow of private capital, as. called for under
the annex mentioned in paragraph 1 above, as well as
under General Assembly resolution 1318 (XIII) and
21 Ibid., p. 25.
22 Jbid., p. 43.

49.
Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 10, documents
E/3905 and Add.1; ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda
item 8, documents E/4038 and Add.I.
23 Ibid., p.

24 Official

27

Economic and Social Council resolution 922 (XXXIV)
of 3 August 1962;
4. Looks forward to the early publication of the
~eerrt:1ry~General's findings in this field.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2088 (XX). Accelerated flow of capital and technical assistance to the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recallin_r; its resolution 1938 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, which requested the Secretary-General to
review the conceptual and methodological problems in
the measurement of capit.11 flow and aid and to submit
proposals for making the presentation of the relevant
data as meaningful and purposeful as possible,
Tahng into account the recommendation contained
in annex A.IV.2, section ITT, of the Final Act of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development2" that each economically advanced country should
endeavour to supply financial rrsources to the developing countries of a minimum net amount approaching as
nearly as possible 1 per cent of its national income,
having regard, however, to the special position of
certain countries which are net importers of capital,
Taking also into accri11nt the recommendations contained in annex A.TV.4 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development26 setting forth the objectives to be met in removing the diffirnltie~ experienced by the developing countries under
aid programmes of government-to-government transfer
of capital through lwns and in the availability of supplier,;' credits to developing countries, owing, inter alia,
to short periods of repayment, high rates of interest,
limitations on the tying of credits to specific projects
and to purchases from countries providing the capital,
N otinq the recommendations contained in annex
A. T\'.S °of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 27 relating to the
prohlc>m of debt service in developing countries and the
fact that the servicing of external debt constitutes an
increasing burden on their resources,
Takinq note of Economic and Social Council resolution 10~8 A (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, which recommended that the Governments of developed Member
States give early and sympathetic consideration to
making their lending terms substantially more favourable to the developing countries by such methods as
extending the period of repayment, reducing interest
rates and providing a period of grace for both interest
and repayment of principal,
Taking note also of Economic nnd Social Council
resolution 1088 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 regarding
the financing of economic development and, in particular. the problem of concepts and methodology in
the measurement of the flow of capital and nid to
developing countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1089 (XXXIX) of 31 July 1965, which, in paragraph 1, urged the States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and particularly thP developed countries:
~ See Proccedi11_q:; /1( the United Nations Conferenre on
Trad£' and Development, vol. I, Pinal Act and Report (United
'-rations publication. ~a!Ps No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 43.
26 Ibid., p. 44.
27 Ibid., p. 46.
