S/PV.8614

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8614th meeting

Tuesday, 10 September 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Polyanskiy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Mevian Miaga
Mr. Michon
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Clay
Ms. French

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (S/2019/664)
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress made with regard to the
stabilization and restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau (S/2019/696)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-27413 (E)
*1927413*

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

Following the successful holding of legislative
elections on 10 March, renewed political tensions
resulted in a stalemate over the composition of the
Executive Bureau of the National People’s Assembly
and delayed the appointment of a Prime Minister and
the formation of a new Government. The situation was
further complicated by the conclusion of President José
Mário Vaz’s five-year term in office on 23 June, amid
differing opinions regarding interim arrangements for
the office.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2019/664)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
progress made with regard to the stabilization
and restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2019/696)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Guinea-Bissau
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department
of Peace Operations, and His Excellency Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/664, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, and document
S/2019/696, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the progress made with regard to the
stabilization and restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
brief the Council today on developments in GuineaBissau and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
2/19

10/09/2019

The decision of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) of 29 June addressed those
issues, enabling the swearing in of a new Government
on 3 July and determining that President Vaz would
remain in office until the holding of the next presidential
elections, with limited powers, leaving the management
of national affairs to the new Government.
Allow me to commend the Government for the
unprecedented achievement of gender parity and the
appointment of some highly qualified young people
in the new Cabinet. That opens a new window of
opportunity for inclusive governance in the country.
The 31-member Government is composed solely from
the majority alliance, reflecting the results of the
legislative elections. However, the recent nomination
and replacement of senior officials in key positions,
including the new Commander of the National Guard,
Rear Admiral Agostino Sousa Cordeiro, who is under
European Union sanctions for his participation in the
2012 coup d’état, have triggered negative reactions
from national and international stakeholders.
Meanwhile, the Government has adopted a sevenmonth emergency plan aimed at providing relief to key
sectors, namely the education, health, infrastructure
and public services sectors. It has also submitted its
programme to the National Assembly for approval.
However, given the current tensions within and among
political parties, including within the majority alliance
led by the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cabo Verde, the approval of the new Government’s
programme by the National People’s Assembly will
be a testament to the majority alliance’s strength and
ability to govern the country.
Since the inauguration of the Government, the
political arena has been dominated by preparations
for the presidential election. Several political parties
have organized primaries to select their candidates,
while some independent candidates have also emerged.
19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

As we approach the 25 September deadline for the
submission of candidacies to the Supreme Court for
validation, we will continue to witness the emergence
of new candidates.
Meanwhile, the electoral process remains fraught
with challenges. Some political actors have expressed
concern about the correction of the voters’ register to
regularize approximately 25,000 persons who were
disenfranchised in the legislative elections, owing
to their fear of fraud. They have also questioned the
creation of the new position of Secretary of State for
Electoral Management.
There is a general feeling of mistrust among national
stakeholders surrounding the electoral process, which
must be addressed before the election if we are to ensure
a peaceful and consensual process and an outcome that
is accepted by all. To address that, the group of five
international partners in Bissau — the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), ECOWAS, the European Union and the United
Nations — has advocated for enhanced procedural
control, transparent measures, information-sharing
mechanisms and the development of a communication
strategy on the voter register correction exercise.
Ultimately, the joint message is that the country must
remain focused on ensuring the timely holding of the
presidential election.
Moreover, yesterday, 9 September, an ECOWAS
ministerial delegation visited Bissau to assess
progress in the organization of the election. In its final
communiqué, it insisted that in the absence of consensus
among all political parties on the voter register
correction exercise, that the same voters register used for
the legislative elections be applied for the presidential
election. It also took note of the decision of the electoral
bodies to hold the election in 2019, including the second
rounds, if needed. The communiqué also requested a
clarification of the responsibilities of the Secretary of
State for Electoral Management. In its response, the
Government indicated today that the correction process
will proceed for now but that the actual register will be
updated only if the presidential candidates agree during
an upcoming meeting at the Parliament.
Meanwhile, the initiatives taken by the Government
and the electoral management bodies — the National
Electoral Commission and the Technical Support
Office for the Electoral Process — to enhance general
communication and consultations with political parties,

S/PV. 8614

are steps in the right direction. To support that, the
United Nations recommends the establishment of an
all-inclusive stakeholders platform of national actors for
information-sharing purposes. In the meantime, civil
society organizations, including women’s groups, have
begun preparations for the establishment of a situation
room to jointly monitor the election. They have also
put in place coordinated efforts for the preparation and
implementation of a code of conduct for the election.
The Government has developed a consolidated
election budget that amounts to $5.3 million. The
United Nations is working closely with the authorities
and the electoral bodies to fine-tune and finalize the
budget. Additionally, the Government has committed
to contributing to the electoral budget to cover initial
expenses for the presidential election, amounting to
$730,000, in addition to paying the outstanding debt of
$1.6 million incurred from the legislative elections.
The voter register correction exercise, which
started on 24 August, is the first of the major electoral
activities and is expected to end on 24 September.
However, less than one-quarter of the funding required
for that exercise has been disbursed thus far. To address
this, the United Nations Development Programme has
contributed $100,000 to the basket fund, while the
Government has contributed approximately $160,000
directly to both electoral management bodies: the
National Electoral Commission and the Technical
Support Office for the Electoral Process.
Efforts to mobilize resources from the international
community have yielded limited results so far. Several
pledges and indications of interest have been made, but
with no actual contributions. We expect the first batch
of financial contributions from international partners
to arrive before the first week of October. Should the
funding arrive, it will be applied to the training of civic
educators and of polling-staff trainers during October.
With 75 days left until the presidential election, it
is important that funding be made available now, either
bilaterally or through the United Nations Development
Programme-managed basket fund, to ensure that
electoral operations in the month of November — namely,
the training, deployment and payment of polling
and security personnel, as well as the movement of
materials to all polling stations — are completed in a
timely manner. I therefore wish to take this opportunity
to encourage international partners to extend their
generosity to Guinea-Bissau to provide the necessary

19-274133/19

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

financial support for the election with urgency. Time
is of the essence. The partner’s contributions will be
instrumental in ensuring the holding of the presidential
election on 24 November.
Since the formation of the Government, UNIOGBIS
has developed, with the Minister for Women, Family
and Social Solidarity, a programme to promote the
visibility of the eight women Ministers, support their
outreach to the population and discuss key public
administration programmatic areas from a gender
perspective. UNIOGBIS has also supported a civil
society network, including women organizations, in
monitoring and advocating for key reforms during the
post-electoral period.
The political environment continues to negatively
impact the economic performance of the country and
the living conditions of the population. The human
rights situation continues to be negatively impacted by
socioeconomic tensions, including targeted restrictions
on freedom and civil liberties. Upholding these rights
remains crucial to sustaining peace, stability and
development in Guinea-Bissau.
Meanwhile, drug trafficking and organized crime
continue to pose threats to peace and security in the
country and beyond. The seizure by the judicial police
of about 1,869 kilogrammes of cocaine on 2 September
signals that Guinea-Bissau remains a transit route
for drug trafficking, but also illustrates the enhanced
capacity of the judicial police to combat the scourge.
The signing on 2 August of a memorandum of
understanding between Guinea-Bissau, The Gambia
and Senegal to combat drug trafficking and organized
crime along their borders is a commendable effort
to tackle the cross-border threat. I appeal to the
international community to provide financial and
technical support to the Government of Guinea-Bissau
in its fight against drug trafficking and organized crime
in order to prevent losing the gains achieved thus far.
Pursuant to resolution 2458 (2019), measures have
been put in place for the United Nations transition
plan for the prospective closure of UNIOGBIS by
31 December 2020. As a first step, one regional office
has been closed and the remaining three will follow
by 31 December this year. Additionally, coordination
structures to oversee and plan for the transition have
been established in Bissau and at Headquarters.
The development of the United Nations transition
plan, including a preliminary mission drawdown plan,
4/19

10/09/2019

is ongoing. A full-scale transition implementation will
be launched in close coordination with the United
Nations country team, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the national
authorities following the conclusion of the presidential
election. The United Nations presence in GuineaBissau has also engaged with the Government on the
gradual transfer of the UNIOGBIS residual mandated
tasks to the United Nations country team, UNOWAS
and other partners.
With the arrival of the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly
in Bissau, as of 5 September, scaled-up engagement
with the Government is planned, in particular after
the presidential election. Meanwhile, UNIOGBIS
and UNOWAS have already started strengthening
their information-sharing arrangements and Special
Representative Chambas of UNOWAS has increased his
engagement with UNIOGBIS on the political process,
having also visited Bissau twice this year.
The year 2019 is pivotal for Guinea-Bissau in terms
of seizing the opportunity to end the recurring cycle
of instability that has hampered its socioeconomic
development for decades. The risk of further instability
in the period leading to the presidential election is high,
with political rivalries and poor economic prospects for
the population. The role of national political stakeholders
in ensuring stability cannot be overemphasized. All
national actors must be mindful of their duties towards
the people of Guinea-Bissau and the need to transcend
narrow individual and party interests.
All efforts must be made to ensure the timely holding
of an inclusive, credible and peaceful presidential
election. Both the Government and the international
community should abide by their commitment to
providing resources for the election. In the longer run,
key institutional reforms, including a constitutional
review, will remain critical to consolidating the
country’s stability. Collaboration between all branches
of power and in the National People’s Assembly will
therefore be vital in preparing the ground for an
inclusive reform process. The sustained engagement of
international partners will also be crucial to accompany
Guinea-Bissau in its path towards lasting stability.
I would like to conclude by commending ECOWAS
for its leading role and steadfast commitment to ensuring
stability in Guinea-Bissau, including the maintenance
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, despite
19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV. 8614

other security challenges facing the region. My sincere
appreciation also goes to all partners, including the
African Union, the CPLP and the European Union, for
their valuable contribution to stabilization efforts in
Guinea-Bissau.

commitment to the Conakry Agreement, underscoring
the urgent need for the appointment of a Prime Minister
and stressing the importance of holding transparent,
credible and peaceful presidential elections in 2019, in
accordance with the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.

The new Government was formed three and a half
months after the election, following the agreement
reached during the Summit of Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, held on 29 June. The efforts
undertaken by ECOWAS demonstrate its pivotal role
in supporting political stability and the consolidation
of democracy in Guinea-Bissau. The members of the
configuration also welcomed Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) investments in Guinea-Bissau, particularly in the
context of the legislative elections and the UNIOGBIS
drawdown. They stressed the importance of ongoing
PBF projects aimed at empowering women and youth,
especially in the areas of fostering their participation
in political advocacy and decision-making, conflict
resolution and sustaining peace efforts. Finally, they
commended the important work done by the then
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, José
Viegas Filho, and by the UNIOGBIS staff.

I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou
Keita for her comprehensive briefing today.
Guinea-Bissau is facing a critical moment on its
path to consolidating democracy and strengthening its
institutions. In spite of all the difficulties, legislative
elections were successfully held in March. The
country is now preparing for the presidential elections
scheduled for 24 November, with a second round,
if needed, foreseen for 29 December. A peaceful
transition of power would be an historic achievement
for the people of Guinea-Bissau. The steadfast support
of the international community is therefore crucial at
this important juncture.
I welcome the recent appointment of Ms. Rosine
Sori-Coulibaly as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). I have already had the opportunity
to hold a fruitful and cordial exchange with her, in
which I reiterated the readiness of the PBC to support
her mission.

Today, we have heard Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita introduce the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/664). The PBC welcomes the report
and commends the UNIOGBIS team and its leadership,
as well as the Department of Peacebuilding and
Political Affairs, for their support for the country’s
peacebuilding efforts and for the progress made in the
planning of the mission’s drawdown.

The PBC configuration has been closely following
the political situation in Guinea-Bissau and the
planning process for the transition and drawdown
of UNIOGBIS, as mandated by resolution 2458
(2019), adopted on 28 February. During its most
recent meeting, on 6 May, the configuration received
updates from Mr. José Viegas Filho, the then Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the UNIOGBIS, and from Mr. Tanou Koné, Permanent
Observer of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to the United Nations.

The PBC welcomes the appointment of a new
Prime Minister and the subsequent formation of a
new Government. While taking note that 11 women
have been appointed to the Government, we encourage
further progress towards achieving gender parity
and similar progress in other institutions. We also
encourage the national authorities and the people of
Guinea-Bissau to ensure transparent, credible and
peaceful presidential elections. We thank international
partners who are providing the necessary financial
support for this ballot, and we encourage partners to
consider making further contributions. As I said, that
will represent a milestone towards the stabilization of
Guinea-Bissau.

Following that meeting, the Peacebuilding
Commission issued a statement calling on the political
stakeholders of Guinea-Bissau to sustain their

Please allow me to highlight some key elements
of the report that are particularly relevant to the
peacebuilding agenda.

19-274135/19

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

In that regard, I welcome the work done by
UNIOGBIS in supporting the effective participation
of women in national affairs within the framework of
the women and peace and security agenda. UNIOGBIS
collaborated with the United Nations country team and
the Peacebuilding Fund in contributing to strengthening
the active involvement of women in civil society
consultations and facilitation efforts, thereby helping
to encourage political dialogue in Guinea-Bissau.
Projects funded by the Peacebuilding Fund continue
to play a critical role in supporting political and
institutional stabilization processes in Guinea-Bissau.
Under the Peacebuilding Fund portfolio, consisting
of 10 projects worth $10.9 million, UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team have supported the
implementation of mutually reinforcing initiatives,
including on dialogue, national reconciliation and the
strengthening of the justice and media sectors.
The projects contributed to more inclusive and
participatory legislative elections in March by providing
election training for women and youth candidates,
supporting the monitoring of the elections by domestic
observers in collaboration with the European Union,
empowering the media to provide more objective and
non-partisan reporting on the elections, and financing
multiple live radio broadcasts of meetings between the
general public and political candidates.
With regard to the reconfiguration and drawdown
of UNIOGBIS, the PBC has taken note of the guidance
provided by the Security Council in resolution 2458
(2019) of 28 February. In our discussion at the meeting
of 6 May, some PBC members encouraged flexibility
concerning the reconfiguration, referring to the need to
maintain the current configuration of UNIOGBIS until
the conclusion of the presidential election. A suggestion
was made to consider past good practices, including
the possibility of supporting the development of a
peacebuilding plan, as was done during the drawdown
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, as a tool to
support the country after the UNIOGBIS drawdown.
I reiterate the readiness of the PBC to support
the reconfiguration exercise and provide timely and
specific advice to the Security Council in that regard. I
also thank the Peacebuilding Fund for its commitment
to continuing to support key initiatives to ensure that
ongoing peacebuilding priorities supported by the
mission are not left unattended.
6/19

10/09/2019

The presidential election in November will
complete the electoral cycle in Guinea-Bissau. That,
we expect, should enable the national authorities and
the people of Guinea-Bissau to focus their attention on
the national development agenda and implement the
reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement. In that
regard, the PBC will continue to serve as a platform
for the country to mobilize international support,
including for the implementation of the development
programmes identified in the Government’s strategic
development plan for the period from 2015-2025,
known as Terra Ranka. The PBC will also continue to
support the international community, in consultation
with the Government, in considering ways to strengthen
national institutional capacity to deliver peacebuilding
and development objectives.
I also plan to visit Guinea-Bissau in October to
engage with the Government and local stakeholders.
The objective and the agenda of the visit will be
discussed with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and PBC members, as per usual
practice. I will share the report of my visit with the
Security Council, in accordance with the PBC advisory
role to the Security Council.
Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity to brief the Security Council. I look
forward to our continued cooperation in support of
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Vieira for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing on
developments in the situation in Guinea-Bissau and
thanks Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their excellent briefings.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the progress made by the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau in resolving the crisis,
in particular the peaceful holding of the legislative
elections on 10 March, the appointment of a Prime
Minister and the formation of a new Government on
3 July. My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
decision of President José Mário Vaz on 18 June to set
the date for the presidential elections for 24 November.
19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Those positive developments are the outcome of
continued and robust dialogue among the stakeholders
of Guinea-Bissau. They were also made possible
through the support of the international community, in
particular the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). ECOWAS has indeed remained
constant in its support for the ongoing political process,
while remaining firm in its call for all stakeholders to
respect the commitments freely entered into under the
Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS Road Map for
the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau.
Despite the encouraging progress made in recent
months, the sociopolitical and security situation remains
fragile, as evidenced by the resurgence of tensions a
few weeks before the presidential election. My country
therefore urges all political actors in Guinea-Bissau
to join forces to organize an inclusive, credible and
peaceful presidential election on 24 November as a
crucial step towards the conclusion of the electoral
cycle and the preservation of achievements in the crisis
resolution process. The steadfast commitment of local
actors to forging a path to peace and stability should
be supported by the international community and
development partners, who must strengthen their level
of mobilization around Guinea-Bissau.
With regard to the activities of UNIOGBIS, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the mission’s support of political
dialogue, the national reconciliation process and the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS Road Map. Furthermore, it notes the definitive
cessation of the activities of the Bubaque regional
office on 21 June, which marked the starting point for
the closure of all regional offices by 31 December, in
accordance with resolution 2458 (2019). In addition,
my country welcomes the ongoing transition planning
process and encourages the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
to seize this opportunity to strengthen their cooperation
with UNIOGBIS with a view to ensuring ownership of
the activities to be transferred to the country and better
management of post-election institutional reforms.
Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its full support for the
United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and ECOWAS, whose decision, taken at the
55th Summit of Heads of State and Government on
29 June, to extend the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau until April 2020 is welcome. Côte
d’Ivoire urges them to increase synergies in support
of the implementation of the Conakry Agreement and

S/PV. 8614

the ECOWAS Road Map. My country also expresses its
appreciation to Mr. José Viegas Filho, outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau, UNIOGBIS staff, the United Nations country
team and the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel for their commitment to peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call on all
political actors in Guinea-Bissau to prioritize dialogue
as a means of resolving their political differences and to
resolutely join in the international community’s efforts
to promote a definitive and lasting solution to the crisis.
Mr. Mevian Miaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): It is with great satisfaction and enthusiasm
that Equatorial Guinea welcomes the convening of this
meeting, which allow us once again to analyse and share
perspectives on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. My
delegation would like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa, Ms. Bintou Keita, and Ambassador
Vieira for their comprehensive and useful briefings. We
also welcome the presence of Ambassador Da Silva at
this meeting.
This a crucial year in terms of Guinea-Bissau
moving quickly from the current political and
institutional crisis to a phase that offers opportunities
to promote the political and economic transformation
of the country. I once again welcome the peaceful
holding of legislative elections in March and commend
the people of Guinea-Bissau on the great sense of
responsibility and civic-mindedness it showed. Those
were elections in which 21 political parties took part and
more than 760,000 people — representing 85 per cent
of the electorate — turned out to vote. The population’s
civic involvement has been amply demonstrated by
what are remarkable and encouraging statistics for any
political process. We welcome the election results and
the work done by the National Electoral Commission,
which, by remaining transparent throughout the
process, has ensured that the results are credible and do
not give rise to post-electoral incidences.
It is well known that the elections were crucial
to ending the political stagnation experienced by
the country since 2015 and to paving the way for a
process of democratization, stabilization of peace
and economic recovery. In addition, the massive
participation of women masse in the electoral process
should be praised. There has never been a greater
number of women candidates or voters in the country’s

19-274137/19

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

entire history. The importance that the authorities have
ascribed to women is reflected in the composition of
the current Government, in which women account
for 35.48 per cent. This represents a significant step
forward in gender equality and makes Guinea-Bissau
the first country in West Africa to have an inclusive
and balanced Government, thereby giving both sexes
the opportunity to showcase their ability to improve the
population’s living conditions.
However, the legislative elections were the first
step to these ends and, as stressed in the seventeenth
preambular paragraph of resolution 2458 (2019),
“all stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau should work
to ensure short, medium and long-term stability
through clear commitment and genuine inclusive
political dialogue aimed at creating conditions
conducive to finding viable and sustainable
solutions to the country’s social, economic,
political and military problems, which would
facilitate the implementation of key reforms and
the strengthening of State institutions.”
The consolidation of these achievements through
the stabilization of the country should translate into an
obligation and responsibility for the new Government
to organize credible, free, fair and peaceful presidential
elections on 24 November. In this regard, it should be
noted that, as was the case with the legislative elections,
a fundamental element of successful presidential
elections is international mobilization to ensure that
the necessary funding is allocated to the smooth
completion of the electoral process. Just yesterday in
Guinea-Bissau, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) assessment mission and
Prime Minister Aristides Gomes met to discuss the
matter. We therefore encourage all partners and friends
of Guinea-Bissau to spare no effort to that end and to
fulfil their commitments.
In line with the press release of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 11 June,
Equatorial Guinea expresses its deep concern at the
growing trend of drug-related crimes in GuineaBissau, which continue to be a major security concern
and contribute to ongoing instability in the country. In
that regard, the Government of Guinea-Bissau should
strengthen national laws to better combat drug-related
crimes. In that connection, we highly appreciate the
joint efforts of United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau the (UNIOGBIS), the Judicial
8/19

10/09/2019

Police and the National Guard, which led to the burning,
three days ago, of more than 1.8 tons of cocaine seized
on 2 September. That was the largest drug seizure in
the history of the country. Guinea-Bissau is certainly
not a narco-State. Like all other States, however, it
is unfortunately affected by that phenomenon. We
continue to commend the determination of the Judicial
Police to neutralize drug traffickers.
With regard to the closure of UNIOGBIS at the end
of next year, our position fully aligns with resolution
2458 (2019), which stresses the need to guarantee an
efficient transfer of tasks and responsibilities from the
mission to the United Nations country team, as well as
to the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and other partners.
I conclude by stressing that Guinea-Bissau is
a country with great biodiversity wealth and many
assets, considering its relatively small size, and should
be easier to manage. Unfortunately, persistent longstanding institutional problems do not help to promote
economic development and ensure a bright future for
all its citizens.
Guinea-Bissau can also boast that its elections
have all been endorsed by the international and local
communities. The problems always arise after the
elections. The real difficulty is managing the postelection period. My country’s Government does not
want to see election results disputed again in the wake
of the next presidential elections. We hope that citizens’
votes will be respected.
As the Secretary-General stressed in his report
(S/2019/664), the security situation could be adversely
affected if political tensions persist in the midst of a
worsening socioeconomic environment, currently
characterized by strikes and long-standing claims by
civil servants. We reiterate our call for the armed forces
to remain neutral with regard to the political process
and to protect the constitutional order.
That is why, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, Ambassador
Anatolio Ndong Mba intends to make his second and
final visit to Guinea-Bissau before the presidential
elections of 24 November and days before the start of
the electoral campaign.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): First, I
wish to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant-Secretary19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

General for Africa, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the positive developments in Guinea-Bissau and to
encourage the Bissau-Guinean actors to continue their
efforts to consolidate the still fragile advances.
France in particular welcomes the holding of
legislative elections in March, which was a major step
forward. Although the post-election situation remains
fragile, the responsible and commendable behaviour of
all Bissau-Guinean civilian and military actors created
a good environment for the elections.
These developments are indicators of the
effectiveness of international community support. In
that regard, I would like to acknowledge the decisive
role of the Group of Five — the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the European Union and the United Nations — in
achieving those results. I would like to pay tribute to
ECOWAS in particular, whose unwavering political,
economic and military commitment has borne fruit,
and which remains very involved in supporting its
neighbours. I would also like to highlight the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission, under the leadership of
Ambassador Vieira, and that of its Fund.
The Security Council sent a mission to the country in
February, co-organized by Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea, which was important because it showed the
Council’s support for the holding of elections under
good conditions. Those developments show that the
tools we have collectively deployed in response to this
crisis, including sanctions, have been effective.
As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) enters the last
year of its mandate, France expresses its support for the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, who
can count on our support in her efforts to support the
Bissau-Guinean actors and implement the UNIOGBIS
transition plan agreed in the Council.
Despite the progress I have mentioned, the political
process in Guinea-Bissau must be consolidated. In
particular, it is critical that the presidential elections
be held in a peaceful atmosphere on the scheduled
dates — the first round on 24 November and the second

S/PV. 8614

round on 29 December. Adhering to that electoral
timetable is key to avoiding a new political crisis. We
therefore expect the Bissau-Guinean authorities to
continue to mobilize fully in the technical preparations
for the elections. In particular, it is absolutely essential
to ensure the proper organization of the National
Electoral Commission and to rapidly reach consensus
on the revision of the electoral lists. Those elections
will close the electoral cycle, and their success, in
our view, is a necessary precondition for progress on
the sanctions front, as mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/664).
In addition, the restoration of lasting peace and
stability in Guinea-Bissau requires progress in other
areas. In that regard, I would recall the importance of
the swift implementation of all the political reforms
provided for in the 2016 Conakry Agreement.
Moreover, as several speakers have noted, the fight
against organized crime, in general, and drug trafficking,
in particular, requires a resolute commitment from the
Bissau-Guinean authorities and the continued support
of the international community. The seizure of a large
amount of cocaine, as mentioned by Ms. Keita, is also
an encouraging sign of that commitment.
Finally, the reform of the security sector, which has
already begun, with the support of UNIOGBIS, is key.
Recent history has shown that there can be no longterm stability in the country without comprehensive
security sector reform.
We are therefore at a pivotal moment. The coming
weeks should allow us to confirm that Guinea-Bissau is
truly on the road to lasting stabilization. The supporting
role of the countries of the region and, more broadly,
of the international community and the Council will
be critical in the coming period. The Bissau-Guinean
authorities can count on France to support their efforts.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, and Ambassador Mauro
Vieira for their briefings.
At the outset, we would like to congratulate the
Government of Guinea-Bissau for having held peaceful
legislative elections on 10 March. The results have
been characterized by international observers and
by civil society as fair and credible. We welcome
the appointment of the new Prime Minister and the
establishment of the new Government.

19-274139/19

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

We commend the efforts of international partners,
such as the African Union, the United Nations, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
European Union and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
for their support in the preparation of the most recent
elections. The fact that the security environment has
remained relatively stable during this period bodes well
for the next step — presidential elections in November.
We also note that socioeconomic instability is
closely related to political tensions. We would urge all
the parties involved not to interfere so as to allow for
the achievement of the priority goal. We also urge the
Government to spare no effort to reach an agreement
on a political framework that covers all key electoral
issues.
Drug trafficking and organized transnational
crime continue to pose a threat to the stability and
national security of Guinea-Bissau. We wholeheartedly
support the efforts of UNIOGBIS to serve as a
partner to the Government, which has demonstrated
its renewed commitment to improve the national
response mechanism to combat drug trafficking and
related crimes.
We also welcome the progress made in the
prosecution of those responsible for gender-based
violence and for intercommunal clashes fuelled by land
disputes. However, impunity continues to give rise to
a lack of trust in the justice system and dissatisfaction
among the population vis-à-vis the authorities. Putting
an end to impunity and strengthening the justice system
is essential to building a peaceful and secure society in
Guinea-Bissau.
The Dominican Republic commends the training
efforts carried out by UNIOGBIS as well as the
integration of women into human rights defenders
teams, which are a key part of promoting a fairer and
more inclusive society. In February, UNIOGBIS, in
cooperation with the National Network of Human
Rights Defenders, trained human rights defenders,
including women from various regions of the country.
This kind of training helps to raise awareness about
the human rights dimension of the Stability Pact and
the Code of Conduct and Electoral Ethics for the
legislative elections.
10/19

10/09/2019

The maintenance of peace and stability in GuineaBissau must be shored up through the promotion and
upholding of human Rights.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to start by thanking the Assistant
Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, and Ambassador
Vieira for their comprehensive and detailed briefings
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
We wish to focus on two points today: first, the
political situation in Guinea-Bissau, and, secondly, the
future of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
Belgium welcomes the successful holding of
legislative elections in March, shortly after the visit
carried out by the Council, which enabled us better to
understand the challenges that country is facing. We
welcome in particular the high level of participation
and the strong mobilization of women, which are the
indications of the democratic vitality of the society of
Guinea-Bissau.
The appointment of a Prime Minister and a
Government, especially the announcement that
presidential elections will be held on 24 November, are
encouraging news. We invite the Government to take
the measures necessary to organize credible, free, fair
and peaceful presidential elections. However, tensions
and a climate of mistrust continue to characterize the
political landscape. This is for us a source of concern,
as we should not overlook the fact that political
stability will contribute to socioeconomic recovery
and to the combat against trafficking. The time has
come for national political actors to play a positive and
constructive role. In that regard, we believe that the
sanctions regime remains appropriate.
Concerning UNIOGBIS, we would recall
the importance of respect by all parties for all
provisions of the Conakry Agreement, and also of the
implementation of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) road map. Belgium believes
that in order to ensure an orderly transition, it is vital
to avoid proceeding with undue haste if conditions on
the ground are not suitable. The transition process of
the United Nations presence in no way means that the
international community is abandoning Guinea-Bissau.
For these reasons, we call for a greater involvement
on the part of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, United Nations Office for West Africa and the
19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Sahel and the strengthening of the country team and of
the resources provided to the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
In the immediate future, Belgium calls for
coordinated action between UNIOGBIS and the
Group of Five international partners represented in
Guinea-Bissau: the African Union, ECOWAS, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
European Union and the United Nations. The followup provided by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the support provided
by the Peacebuilding Fund are also important elements
in the new chapter that will begin in Guinea-Bissau.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Belgium’s
full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sori-Coulibaly, in the exercise
of her functions.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting. We
would also like to express our appreciation to the
briefers for their comprehensive inputs.
Foremost, let me express our appreciation and
greatest support to the former Special Representative,
José Viegas Filho, and his team, including the United
Nations country team in Guinea-Bissau, for their
tireless efforts in contributing to the peace and stability
of Guinea-Bissau.
My intervention will be restricted to two points:
the political situation and drug trafficking in GuineaBissau.
On the political front, my delegation wishes to
commend the Government of Guinea-Bissau for the
significant progress achieved to date. Following the
legislative elections on March 10, a new Government
has been put in place, as well as a new Prime Minister. In
this regard, we look forward to the presidential elections
set for 24 November, which are crucial in continuing
to set a trajectory of stability in Guinea-Bissau. In
particular, we must commend the notable inclusion of
women in the new Government, who now hold eight
of 16 ministerial and three of 15 Secretary of State
positions. Furthermore, we urge the parties to address
the reforms stipulated in the Conakry Agreement.
South Africa would like to commend the work done
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union, the Community of

S/PV. 8614

Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union,
the United Nations and international stakeholders and
on their steadfast commitment in breaching the political
impasse and their mediation efforts. We urge ECOWAS
to continue safeguarding this welcome progress; the
support of the international community is paramount
in this regard.
The maintenance of regional stability in GuineaBissau is a necessary condition for further unlocking
fragile regions of the area such as Mali and the other
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel and for
promoting broader peace on the African continent.
As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) continues its
drawdown process, and in the light of the impending
presidential elections, we must be prudent in our
approach to ensure that we do not leave a vacuum. It
is important that we safeguard the gains that have been
accomplished by UNIOGBIS in partnership with the
Government and regional bodies.
On the drug-trafficking challenges, South Africa
commends the work being done by the new Partnership
Coordination Forum on countering drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime, and particularly
recognizes the mammoth task that it is undertaking.
South Africa supports the Secretary-General’s call on
the international community to support and curb this
epidemic. Moreover, the regional implications of the
drug-trafficking trade route are worrisome, as they
are also utilized for arms and human trafficking. The
recent seizure of a significant consignment destined for
Mali underscores the urgency of providing support to
curtail this pandemic. Most concerning is the fact that
drug trafficking could possibly be utilized to fund and
fuel terrorist activities in an already volatile region.
Lastly, the decades of political instability have made
it difficult to implement public policy; consequently,
the level of human development remains low in GuineaBissau. Most worrisome is the negative impact on young
people in the absence of conducive socioeconomic
conditions, as mobilization for terrorist activities may
thrive as a result. It is therefore imperative for us as
the international community to redouble our efforts to
supporting continued peace in Guinea-Bissau while
also supporting the aspirations of the African Union’s
efforts to silence the guns.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China)(spoke in Chinese): China
listened attentively to the briefings by Assistant

19-2741311/19

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Secretary-General Keita and Ambassador Vieira.
China takes note of the Secretary-General’s report on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2019/664).
China has closely followed developments in the
situation in Guinea-Bissau. As stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, 2019 will be a pivotal year for the
political and social life of Guinea-Bissau. Legislative
elections were successfully held in March. In July, the
new Prime Minister took office and successfully formed
a new Government. On 24 November, Guinea-Bissau
will hold a presidential election. We hope that all parties
in Guinea-Bissau will make joint efforts to ensure that
the election is carried out smoothly and on schedule.
At the same time, the international community should
continue to provide technical, financial and logistical
support to election preparations based on the needs of
the Bissau-Guinean Government.
China appreciates the mediation efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and countries of the region to promote
the political process in Guinea-Bissau. All parties in
Guinea-Bissau should act in the long-term interests of
the country and its people, establish mutual trust through
dialogue and consultation, build consensus, resolve
differences, consolidate the positive progress achieved
in the political process, make sound preparations for
the presidential election and commit to improving
living standards and promoting stable development in
the country.
China has always supported African countries in
solving African problems in African ways, and has
supported ECOWAS and countries of the regional in
continuing to play a constructive role in promoting
stability and development in Guinea-Bissau and the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS six-point road map. We call on relevant
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and the United Nations country team, to strengthen
coordination and cooperation and provide targeted
assistance to Guinea-Bissau based on respect for its
sovereignty and will.
Development holds the key to solving all problems.
China firmly supports the people of Guinea-Bissau in
exploring a path of development suited to their national
12/19

10/09/2019

conditions and has always respected their independent
choices. Cooperation between China and GuineaBissau in the areas of agriculture, health and medical
care, in the framework of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation and the Forum for Economic and Trade
Cooperation between China and Portuguese-speaking
Countries, has made positive contributions to GuineaBissau’s efforts to achieve food self-sufficiency,
poverty alleviation and development.
China stands ready to work with international
community to continue to play a positive role in
promoting lasting stability and development in GuineaBissau and West Africa.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Keita and
Ambassador Vieira for their briefings today, which set
out a broadly optimistic assessment of Guinea-Bissau’s
political trajectory. The United Kingdom shares this
cautious optimism.
The successful conduct of legislative elections
in March and the subsequent appointment of a
Prime Minister and formation of a Government were
significant steps forward, and we commend the BissauGuinean authorities and people on this progress. The
turnout of 85 per cent in the legislative elections was an
impressive signal of the commitment to the people of
Guinea-Bissau to a democratic future for their country.
The next step in Guinea-Bissau’s political transition
is the presidential election in November. We hope to see
the country build on the positive momentum generated
by the legislative elections earlier this year. The United
Kingdom notes the challenges set out by Assistant
Secretary-General Keita today and calls on all BissauGuinean political stakeholders to put the national
interest first and play their part in delivering a free,
fair, timely, inclusive and credible election.
Like other Council members, we were encouraged
to see the enactment of the new Parity Law on the
Participation of Women in Politics and Decision-making
Spheres, requiring a minimum representation of
women in elections of 36 per cent. We urge BissauGuinean political parties to adhere to this law. A more
diverse Government will be a stronger and most stable
Government. We also commend Prime Minister Gomes
for splitting his Cabinet posts equally between men and
women, and we would be encouraged to see this law
transferred to other national institutions in GuineaBissau.
19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

We note in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/696) the commendable behaviour of the
Guinea-Bissau military in the years following the
2012 coup. Should the presidential elections take place
as scheduled in November in a free and fair manner,
and pending implementation of the priority reforms as
outlined in the Conakry Agreement and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Road
Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in GuineaBissau, the United Kingdom would be open to a review
of the sanction measures currently imposed under
resolution 2048 (2012).
The United Kingdom appreciates the supporting
role played in Guinea-Bissau by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), the Peacebuilding Commission, the
United Nations country team and other United Nations
bodies and offices, which have helped build a more
robust and inclusive political environment. We welcome
the appointment of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Sori-Coulibaly, and offer
her our full support in carrying out her mandate.
The United Kingdom also recognizes the key role
played by ECOWAS in holding political stakeholders
in Guinea-Bissau to account. We trust that ECOWAS
will remain as engaged and vigilant as GuineaBissau prepares to hold its presidential elections in
November and throughout the full implementation of
the Conakry Agreement.
We also welcome the steps taken so far by
UNIOGBIS in preparation for transition and note that
these steps are a positive reflection of the political
progress made in Guinea-Bissau. The United Kingdom
continues to believe that December 2020 is a realistic
deadline for the UNIOGBIS withdrawal from GuineaBissau. However, we will be ready to review this position
should there arise a serious threat to peace and stability.
It is our sincere hope, however, that such a threat does
not arise and that the shared sense of optimism we have
heard today continues to be well justified.
As UNIOGBIS prepares to withdraw from GuineaBissau and hands over key responsibilities to the United
Nations country team and the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), it is imperative
that political stakeholders continue to engage positively
with United Nations good offices and sustain their
commitment to the Conakry Agreement until it has
been fully implemented. In that context, we welcome

S/PV. 8614

UNOWAS efforts to increase its engagement on
Guinea-Bissau ahead of the departure of UNIOGBIS.
We hope that the political progress Guinea-Bissau
has achieved in recent years can be maintained to
carry the country out of its past and into a stronger,
more stable and more democratic future. The primary
responsibility for delivering this lies with the BissauGuinean Government. The United Kingdom, along with
the international community, will continue to monitor
the situation closely and work with the Government in
support of this objective.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission configuration,
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, for their very informative
and comprehensive briefings.
I am heartened to hear about the positive
developments in Guinea-Bissau, as reflected in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/664). Much
progress has been made on the political front in
Guinea-Bissau, including the holding of legislative
elections and the appointment of the Prime Minister.
In addition, the general security situation in GuineaBissau remains relatively stable. We hope that this
conducive environment can be maintained, particularly
ahead of the upcoming presidential elections, scheduled
to take place in two months. I would like to reiterate
three pertinent points.
First, the presidential election planned for
November this year is crucial. All Bissau-Guinean
stakeholders must contribute positively towards
enabling the completion of the electoral cycle in a
peaceful and timely manner. It is important to note,
however, that this is merely one step that should pave
the way to surmounting the task ahead. The political
will demonstrated by all parties thus far needs to be
maintained in implementing key reforms, including
revision of the Constitution, the electoral law and the
law on political parties. These are prerequisite for
Guinea-Bissau to be able to devote its attention to
ensuring long-term stability and development for the
benefit of its people.
This brings me to my second point — socioeconomic
development. As Prime Minister Aristides Gomes has
said, the Government must focus on improving the
socioeconomic situation and the implementation of the
Terra Ranka plan. As the name Terra Ranka suggests,
we hope that the strategic development plan will

19-2741313/19

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

give the entire Bissau-Guinean population a chance
to start afresh. We commend the partners that have
pledged to support the plan, and call on the international
community to continue supporting Guinea-Bissau,
not only in its economic development but also in
tackling various challenges, including the promotion
of human rights and the fight against transnational
organized crime.
Thirdly, Indonesia supports and commends the
work of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the
implementation of its mandated priorities. Having
been present in the country since 2010, the mission
has carried out important tasks, including fostering
dialogue and reconciliation, strengthening democratic
institutions and enhancing State capacity.
It is therefore necessary to ensure a seamless
transition to the United Nations country team and other
partners upon the expiry of its mandate in 2020. We
welcome the establishment of the transition task force
and reiterate the importance of national ownership in
the transition process. We also commend the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, as well as regional and subregional organizations,
such as the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, in supporting
various programmes, projects and initiatives in
Guinea-Bissau. We hope that they can continue to
play their crucial roles, particularly after the closure
of UNIOGBIS.
Lastly, we look forward to the holding of the
presidential election and the implementation of key
reforms for the long-term stability and development of
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank Ms. Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, and Ambassador Vieira
for their valuable briefings. We also thank Mr. José
Viegas Filho, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, for his efforts
during his term as Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
We also congratulate Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly on her
appointment as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Guinea-Bissau. We wish her every success
in the upcoming period, especially during the electoral
process and the drawdown of UNIOGBIS in 2020.
14/19

10/09/2019

We are two months away from the presidential
elections, due to be held in Guinea-Bissau at the end
of November. This is seen as an important stage in
achieving long-term stability in the country. We look
forward to fair, transparent and credible elections
being held within the time frame set for them.
The successful legislative elections held in March
have demonstrated that the national authorities can
conduct elections successfully, with the support of the
international community.
There are many positive aspects to be mentioned
when discussing developments in Guinea-Bissau as
compared to the previous period, which was complicated
in terms of achieving the basic requirements of the
Conakry Agreement, which to date is clearly the best
option to achieve stability. We have seen the successful
conclusion of a full presidential term for the first time
in the history of Guinea-Bissau in the past 25 years.
Moreover, we have witnessed the successful completion
of the legislative elections and the formation of a new
Government, as well as intensive efforts to overcome
the various challenges facing the country.
There are important steps for Guinea-Bissau to take
in the upcoming period, particularly ahead of the closure
of UNIOGBIS. The first such step is the presidential
elections, followed by the necessary reforms, especially
constitutional reforms. We call on the authorities in
the country to take advantage in the upcoming period
of the support provided by UNIOGBIS with a view
to ensuring the necessary reforms and building the
State’s capabilities in preparation for the drawdown of
the Office.
Despite the stable security situation, challenges
continue, especially with regard to transnational crime
and drug trafficking in the country. The whole region
suffers from those threats, which have been discussed
in the Security Council on many occasions, the most
important of which was the briefing held in December
2018, when we discussed the impact of such challenges
on security in West Africa (see S/PV.8433).
We commend the Government’s commitment
to overcoming such challenges and the support of
UNIOGBIS as well as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for their tireless efforts, which have
led to the seizure and confiscation of huge amounts of
drugs on more than one occasion.
We appreciate the pivotal role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV. 8614

in Guinea-Bissau through its ongoing support for
advancing the political process in the country and the
role of its military mission there. We fully support
its efforts and those of the African Union, the United
Nations, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2458
(2019). The entire international community must also
be committed to addressing the technical, logistical
and financial aspects and to encouraging widespread
citizen participation, including of women and young
people in particular.

In conclusion, we welcome the steps taken by
UNIOGBIS to prepare for its closure by the end of 2020.
We commend its decision to establish an integrated
task force to organize the drawdown of the Office. We
believe that the United Nations should continue to play
a role after the closure of the Office, particularly since
Guinea-Bissau currently faces a difficult economic
situation. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel must continue to provide support after
2020 in many of the areas within its mandate. Moreover,
the Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play in that regard. We welcome the projects that it is
financing, as the role of the Commission will strengthen
the efforts to maintain the current stability in the
country, especially after the closure of UNIOGBIS.

However, we must bear in mind that, while such
progress encouraging, the Government authorities
must have the strong political will to advance towards
peace, stability and socioeconomic development in
the country.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ambassador Mauro
Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
We would like to begin by highlighting the political
progress made in Guinea-Bissau, such as the holding of
legislative elections on 10 March after more than three
years of political impasse, the appointment of a Prime
Minister and the formation of a new Government.
We welcome the active participation of civil society
organizations and women in that process, which,
with the assistance of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
allowed for the development of important initiatives,
such as the Code of Conduct and Electoral Ethics.

We believe that it is essential, first, to continue
working on the constitutional reform process,
strengthening the rule of law and establishing
inclusive democratic institutions, including security
sector reform. Secondly, the ongoing threat posed by
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
in the country must be addressed, while developing
a consistent anti-corruption strategy. Thirdly, it is
necessary to implement the socioeconomic reforms
that the population so badly needs, which will allow
the country’s vast agricultural, mining and fishing
potential to be exploited.
To that end, the full involvement of the national
authorities, the strengthening of regional cooperation
and the maintenance of policy and operational
coherence among the various efforts, initiatives and
mechanisms deployed on the ground will be crucial.
That is especially important in view of the upcoming
withdrawal of UNIOGBIS, which will require a new
type of partnership with the United Nations to enable
an inclusive and successful transition process. In that
context, we would also like to highlight the projects
promoted by the Peacebuilding Fund, which play
a fundamental role in supporting the political and
institutional stabilization processes in Guinea-Bissau,
as Ambassador Vieira just outlined.

We also highlight the fact that 24 November has
been set as the date for holding the presidential elections.
We urge the Guinea-Bissau authorities to work without
delay on the organization and holding of those elections
on the basis of lessons learned and with the necessary
resources in order to promote the implementation of
the Conakry Agreement and to foster dialogue and
national reconciliation.

We emphasize the work that the United Nations
country team, together with the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic Community of West
African States, the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and the European
Union are carrying out on the ground to promote
economic growth, human development, the sustainable
management of resources and the strengthening of the
rule of law and governance.

In that context, it will be important that UNIOGBIS
continue to assist the country in organizing the elections,

To conclude, I would like to thank Mr. Viegas Filho
for the important work he carried out, as well as to wish

19-2741315/19

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly every success in her new
role as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNIOGBIS.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita and
Ambassador Mauro Vieira of Brazil for their very
comprehensive and useful briefings.
We would like to congratulate the people of
Guinea-Bissau on holding fair, credible and inclusive
elections, with a high voter turnout of almost 85 per
cent; it was very impressive. We also welcome the high
level of participation by women voters and concurrently
regret the low gender-diversity in the composition of
Parliament. We encourage continued support for the
effective participation of women in national affairs
within the framework of the women and peace and
security agenda.
At the same time, we encourage the elected
members of Parliament to be mindful of their duties
with respect to the people of Guinea-Bissau and to
surpass individual and party gains for the sake of the
collective interests and stability of their country. We
remind all stakeholders that avoiding a new impasse
over post-electoral power-sharing is a necessity to
ensure stability in the long-term perspective.
Poland urges and relies on the Guinea-Bissau
authorities to hold fair and credible presidential
elections, to be held as announced on 24 November,
with the assistance of the reactivated the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) High-level Steering Committee
on Elections. We therefore call on Bissau-Guinean
stakeholders to provide firm political direction and take
leadership in the electoral process, step up the required
technical preparations and empower the electoral
management bodies to implement appropriate solutions
for timely and credible elections.
Poland is concerned about the lack of sufficient
action to combat drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, issues that have been raised by a
number of delegations, which remain a serious threat
to national stability and security. In the same vein,
the socioeconomic situation and macroeconomic
climate, affected by the continuous political instability,
is worrisome, even with the perspective of 2019
investments. In that regard, we believe in GuineaBissau’s dedication to develop a national action plan and
strengthen the capacity of the Financial Investigation
16/19

10/09/2019

Unit, as well as legal and institutional anti-corruption
frameworks. Ensuring worthier economic performance
is necessary to combat tensions on the social front, and
it needs political stability.
Last but not least, we support the progress made
in the prosecution of gender-based violence and in
addressing intercommunal violence related to land
disputes. However, at the same time, we urge the
authorities to establish the recommended national
human rights institution, in compliance with the Paris
Principles. Human rights are crucial for sustaining
peace and ensuring long-term stability, development
and security in Guinea-Bissau.
I conclude by highlighting how important it is that
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau continue to support the country in all the
efforts I mentioned, especially in the autumn period.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
former UNIOGBIS Special Representative, Mr. José
Viegas Filho, for his dedication and hard work, as well
as to the UNIOGBIS staff, the United Nations country
team, the Economic Community of West African States,
the Group of Five international partners represented
in Guinea-Bissau and all regional and international
partners. Likewise, I would like to warmly welcome
new Special Representative Rosine Sori-Coulibaly and
express our full support for her call. We believe that
her extensive experience and wisdom will successfully
lead us towards lasting developments in the direction of
a stable and prosperous future for all Bissau-Guineans.
Ms. French (United States of America): We would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for
her briefing today, and Ambassador Vieira for all
his important work in chairing the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The United States is pleased that Guinea-Bissau’s
leadership, with the able assistance of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), was
able to agree on a timeline for elections in 2019, and
we welcome the legislative elections that took place in
March. As the focus shifts to the presidential elections
scheduled for 24 November, we must remain faithful
to the consensus agreements that helped create the
country’s hard-won, although tenuous, stability. We
look forward to free, fair and transparent elections on
24 November. We welcome the generous contributions
that ECOWAS has made in both financial support and
equipment. We encourage Guinea-Bissau’s regional
19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

neighbours and the international community to help
support the Government’s efforts to prepare for and
carry out those important elections.
Along with the Secretary-General, we remain
concerned about the continued threat that drug
trafficking and organized crime pose to Guinea-Bissau
and the broader subregion. We applaud the BissauGuinean police’s seizure and destruction of two tons
of cocaine in Guinea-Bissau in the past week, and
we welcome the creation of a dedicated unit in the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau for combating drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. We urge continued
support for strengthening the presence of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): Guinea-Bissau is a
country in transition. The two briefers presented a
mixed picture, and I would like to thank them for their
very valuable input. We see progress in some areas
on the one hand and challenges on the other hand.
That seems to be a constant pattern for countries in
transition. It is therefore important that the Security
Council closely monitor the situation in those countries,
at the same time that the United Nations as a whole
offers assistance and support.
With the Peacebuilding Commission, we have
a very strong tool to do exactly that. I would like to
commend Ambassador Mauro Vieira and the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
We have the feeling that we have not yet tapped into
the full potential of the inter-linkage between the
work of the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. Germany therefore very much supports
a regular exchange between the country configuration
Chairs and the Security Council.
With regard to the situation in Guinea-Bissau, as
other colleagues have done before me, we call upon
the Government to ensure credible, fair and free
presidential elections in November. We welcome the
efforts by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Group of Five international
partners represented in Guinea-Bissau to facilitate and
support the electoral process, as well as to mediate
between conflicting parties. We particularly commend
the inclusion of the gender perspective and support for
women’s engagement in the democratic process. In that
context, it is very important for the Government and the

S/PV. 8614

judiciary to end impunity for gender-based crimes and
human rights violations.
Transnational organized crime and drug trafficking
remain major challenges. Therefore, we express
support for the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. It is important to empower national
law enforcement authorities to effectively prosecute
organized crime.
I would like to conclude with two points.
First, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his recent report (S/2019/664). We very much look
forward to being provided with more details on the
timeline for the transition process that is mentioned
in the report. We also welcome the appointment of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau.
Secondly, as my colleague of South Africa has
mentioned, we call upon everyone to ensure that no
vacuum will follow the end of UNIOGBIS. We need
to avoid the possible destabilization of Guinea-Bissau.
The Security Council has a special responsibility for
countries in transition, in general, and for GuineaBissau in particular, in line with resolution 2458 (2019).
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou
Keita and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Mauro Vieira, for
the information they shared.
We welcome the positive dynamic of developments
in Guinea-Bissau. We are pleased to see that, early this
year, the authorities and main political forces of the
country were able to overcome their differences and
successfully hold parliamentary elections in March.
We also note the role played by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau in
preparing for the elections.
It is no secret that the post-election period, when the
new Parliament and Government were being formed,
was marked by several challenges. The portfolio
distribution process took a long time. However, we
believe that there is nothing surprising or extraordinary
about that, as it is part of the normal democratic process
we have seen in many other countries. Furthermore, all
those problems have now been resolved.

19-2741317/19

S/PV.8614

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

As has been noted today, the country is approaching
a new important milestone. Presidential elections are
scheduled to take place on 24 November. As we see it, if
the elections are successful, it could be a turning point
in the history of modern Guinea-Bissau. The country
will finally turn the page of lasting political turbulence
and create the conditions for making steady progress
towards socioeconomic development. At this pivotal
moment, we call on all public and political forces to
behave responsibly, uphold national interests and seek
to settle their disputes as soon as possible.
We are convinced that, at some stage, the issue of
lifting Guinea-Bissau sanctions should come up for
discussion in the Security Council, as they have been
obsolete for some time now. The current situation bears
no resemblance to the events of 2012. We respect the
decision of the military to stay out of politics.
We continue to believe that the issue of restructuring
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau should be addressed in as judicious a
manner as possible. We support the gradual drawdown
of its work, but not before the end of 2020, in line
with resolution 2458 (2019). By that time, the United
Nations country team will have all the tools it needs
not only to promote development in Guinea-Bissau,
but also to help the country address challenges, such
as drug trafficking, corruption and ensuring the proper
functioning of State institutions.
In conclusion, let me welcome the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Sori-Coulibaly, and assure her that
we stand ready to work constructively with the entire
United Nations team to resolve the outstanding issues
in this West African State.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to take part in today’s meeting of the
Security Council on Guinea-Bissau and to address
members on the most recent developments in my
country.
Allow me to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, and Mr. Mauro Vieira,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
18/19

10/09/2019

Peacebuilding Commission. I also welcome the recent
appointment of Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, whom we wish
every success in conducting her mission in this phase of
transition for the Office in the country.
Today’s Council meeting is being held as GuineaBissau is firmly committed to completing the electoral
cycle with the holding of presidential elections on
24 November. That election deadline will be an
opportunity for the people of Guinea-Bissau to reaffirm
the legitimacy of the institutions of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau, which was already begun with
parliamentary elections held on 10 March, in which 102
new Members of Parliament were elected.
Following the elections and under the proposal
of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cabo Verde, the majority party in the National
People’s Assembly, the President of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau reappointed Mr. Aristides Gomes as
Prime Minister on 22 June. Under the Prime Minister’s
proposal, a Government was formed on 3 July,
comprising 11 women out of a total of 31 members.
I stress the importance of the decisions taken at
the most recent summit of the Economic Community
of West African States, held in Abuja, to defuse the
continuing crisis among national political actors.
In a few days, the Government will submit its
governance instruments, including its programme and
budget, to the National Assembly for assessment and
possible approval, which will enable the Government to
implement its programme. The Government is resolutely
committed to preparing for the presidential elections to
be held on 24 November. To that end, in consultation
with other electoral institutions, it launched a voter
register correction process on 16 August. It should be
noted that this process initiated by the Government does
not enjoy the unanimous approval of political actors or
civil society, but we hope that with dialogue, the parties
concerned will agree on the process.
The current political environment is marked by
the seizure on 2 September by the Judicial Police
of Guinea-Bissau of an unprecedented quantity of
narcotics — approximately two tons of cocaine.
That fact once again illustrates the extent to which
our territory remains attractive for transnational
organized crime networks, due not only to our
19-27413

10/09/2019

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

geographical vulnerability but also to the weakness of
our institutions. It is also proof of the determination
of the Bissau-Guinean authorities to fight tirelessly
against this scourge, which has no other objective
than to undermine our integrity as a sovereign State.
This operation, known as Operation Navarra, led to
the arrest of a dozen suspects, constituting a heavy
blow to this criminal network. It would not have been
successful without the support of our various partners,
to whom I wish to pay tribute.
I would also draw the Security Council’s attention
to the need to strengthen cooperation in the fight against
drug trafficking between the Government of GuineaBissau and the United Nations Office Against Drugs
and Crime, without prejudice to the fulfilment of the

S/PV. 8614

mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau set out in resolution 2458
(2019). Among other things, that would bolster the
capacity of the national institutions involved in this
area, which, as the Council is aware, are operating in
extremely precarious conditions.
To conclude, allow me to reiterate my country’s
gratitude for the support it receives from the Security
Council as well as from regional and subregional
organizations, particularly the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
European Union.
The meeting rose at 4.50p.m.

19-2741319/19
