A/64/PV.109

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

109th plenary meeting
Friday, 30 July 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Christian
(Ghana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now turn to a note by the Secretary-General
contained in document A/64/101/Add.2, under
sub-item (a) of agenda item 112, concerning the
appointment of a member of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. Members
will recall that the General Assembly concluded
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 112 at its
75th plenary meeting, on 16 March 2010.
In order for the General Assembly to consider the
note of the Secretary-General, it will be necessary first
to reopen its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 112.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Representatives will also
recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September
2009, the General Assembly allocated this sub-item to
the Fifth Committee. In order for the Assembly to
proceed expeditiously on this sub-item, may I take it

that the Assembly agrees to consider this sub-item
directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I further take it that
the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/101/Add.2)
The Acting President: In his note, the SecretaryGeneral informs the General Assembly that he has
received notification of the resignation of Ms. Misako
Kaji of Japan from the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, effective
1 August 2010. The Assembly will therefore be
required to appoint, at its current session, a person to
fill the vacancy for the remaining period of the term of
office of Ms. Kaji, which expires on 31 December
2010.
The Secretary-General also informs the General
Assembly that the Government of Japan has nominated
Mr. Akira Sugiyama to fill the vacancy arising from the
resignation of Ms. Kaji. The note further states that the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-46837 (E)

*1046837*

A/64/PV.109

Secretariat has been informed by the Chair of the
Group of Asian States that the candidature of
Mr. Sugiyama has been endorsed by the Group.

In connection with draft resolution A/64/L.64, as
orally corrected, I give the floor to the representative
of the Secretariat.

May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to appoint Mr. Akira Sugiyama as a member
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions for a term of office beginning on
1 August 2010 and ending on 31 December 2010?

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/64/L.64, entitled “United
Nations Global Plan of Action against Trafficking in
Persons”, I wish to put on record the following
statement on financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.

It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 104 (continued)
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Draft resolution (A/64/L.64)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the special high-level
meeting on Transnational Organized Crime, under
agenda item 104, in June 2010.
I should like to consult the Assembly with a view
to proceeding immediately to consider the draft
resolution contained in document A/64/L.64. In this
connection, since the draft resolution has only been
circulated today, it would be necessary to waive the
relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure,
which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”

By paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of draft resolution
A/64/L.64, the General Assembly would decide to
formally launch the Plan of Action in a one-day highlevel meeting of the General Assembly and urge
Member States, the United Nations and other
international, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and media, to fully
and effectively implement the relevant provisions of
the Plan of Action and the activities outlined therein.
The Assembly would decide to establish, in
accordance with paragraph 38 of the annex to the draft
resolution, the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children; and request the Secretary-General to take
all necessary measures for its effective operation, and
acknowledge previous and ongoing contributions to
other funding sources that support efforts to combat
trafficking in persons. It would request the SecretaryGeneral to include a section on the implementation by
the United Nations system of the Plan of Action, within
already existing reporting obligations to the General
Assembly under the item on crime prevention and
criminal justice.

The Acting President: Before proceeding
further, I should like to inform members of the
following correction to draft resolution A/64/L.64. In
paragraph 4, the reference to “paragraph 36 of the
annex of the present resolution” should be changed to
read “paragraph 38 of the present resolution”.

The Assembly would decide to appraise in 2013
the progress achieved in the implementation of the
Plan of Action and request the Secretary-General to
take all necessary measures in that regard. It would
request the Secretary-General to present proposals to
finance the staffing and programmatic requirements of
the Secretariat necessary to strengthen the capacity of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) as described in the Plan of Action through a
reallocation of resources in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.64, as orally corrected.

By paragraphs 11, 17, 38, 46, 50, 55, 57, 58, 59
and 60 of the annex to draft resolution A/64/L.64, the

Unless I hear any objections, I shall take it that
the Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.

2

10-46837

A/64/PV.109

General Assembly would strongly urge all responsible
United Nations entities to coordinate their efforts to
fight trafficking in persons effectively and to protect
the human rights of its victims, including by means of
the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons and the Global Initiative to
Fight Human Trafficking.
It would develop or strengthen processes for the
identification of victims, such as those developed, inter
alia, by the UNODC and other organizations, including
appropriate and non-discriminatory measures that help
to identify victims of trafficking in persons among
vulnerable populations.
It would establish the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, to provide
humanitarian, legal and financial aid to victims of
trafficking in persons through established channels of
assistance, such as governmental, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, which shall
operate as a subsidiary fund of the United Nations
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, managed
by UNODC, and be administered in accordance with
the financial regulations and rules of the United
Nations and other relevant provisions, with the advice
of a board of trustees composed of five persons with
relevant experience in the field of trafficking in
persons, who shall be appointed with due regard to
equitable geographic distribution by the SecretaryGeneral in consultation with Member States and with
the Executive Director of UNODC.
It would make use of the available technical
assistance provided to strengthen the criminal justice
response to trafficking in persons, including by
UNODC; and recognize that capacity-building is a very
important component in combating trafficking in
persons, and encourage and enhance coordination and
coherence within the United Nations system.
It would intensify international, regional and
subregional cooperation to combat trafficking in
persons, as well as technical assistance for countries of
origin, destination and transit, aimed at strengthening
their ability to prevent all forms of trafficking in
persons.
It would encourage UNODC, other United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well as
international and regional organizations to continue to
assist Member States, upon request, to strengthen

10-46837

policymaking, legislative arrangements, border control
and law enforcement cooperation, public awareness
campaigns and capacity-building, and to exchange and
build upon best practices in assisting victims of
trafficking in persons.
It would further encourage United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes to continue to
improve the coherence and efficiency of technical
assistance delivery in the field of trafficking in
persons, in accordance with the recommendations of
the Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group of
Governmental Experts on Technical Assistance
established by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention.
It would urge the Secretary-General to expedite
the strengthening of the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons under the
coordination of UNODC in order to ensure overall
organization and coherence in the United Nations
system’s efforts to respond to trafficking in persons.
It would request the Secretary-General, as a
matter of priority, to strengthen the capacity of
UNODC to collect information and report biennially,
starting in 2012, on patterns and flows of trafficking in
persons at the national, regional and international
levels in a balanced, reliable and comprehensive
manner, in close cooperation and collaboration with
Member States, and share best practices and lessons
learned from various initiatives and mechanisms.
In line with paragraph 60 of the annex to the draft
resolution, it is envisaged that the activities arising
from the operative paragraphs will be implemented
effective 1 January 2012. Therefore, the adoption of
the draft resolution would not entail any additional
requirements for the programme budget for the
biennium 2010-2011.
With regard to resource requirements for the
biennium 2012-2013, it is the intention of the
Secretary-General to address the activities and tasks set
out in paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 and paragraphs 11,
17, 38, 46, 50, 55, 57, 58, 59 and 60 of the annex to
draft resolution A/64/L.64 in consultation with
programme managers to determine the necessary
programmatic changes and resource requirements
needed for their implementation. Accordingly, should
the General Assembly adopt the draft resolution,
details on the programmatic changes and resource
requirements for the biennium 2012-2013 would be

3

A/64/PV.109

provided by the Secretary-General to the Assembly at
the main part of its sixty-sixth session in the context of
the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2012-2013.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/64/L.64, entitled
“United Nations Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons”, as orally corrected.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.64, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/64/L.64, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 64/293).
The Acting President: I shall now read out a
statement on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Ali Treki,
President of the General Assembly, on the adoption of
resolution 64/293, entitled “United Nations Global
Plan of Action against Trafficking in Persons”.
“I welcome the consensus adoption of the
resolution entitled ‘United Nations Global Plan of
Action against Human Trafficking’.
“I would like to thank the co-facilitators,
His Excellency Mr. Moraes Cabral, Permanent
Representative of Portugal, and His Excellency
Mr.
Pedro
Monteiro
Lima,
Permanent
Representative of Cape Verde, for facilitating this
process. Let me also thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime for their important support.
“I congratulate all members for their efforts
and dedication on this matter, which is also a
reaffirmation of their commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights.
“Sixty years ago, the General Assembly
adopted the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It proclaims that all human beings are
born free, that no one shall be held in slavery or
servitude and that slavery and the slave trade
shall be prohibited in all their forms. Yet today
millions of people, the majority of them children
and women, are victims of a modern form of
slavery called human trafficking.
“The collective commitment to fight this
menace has led to the adoption of this Plan of
Action, which will enforce and strengthen
effective and comprehensive measures, including
cooperation at all levels, to prevent and combat

4

trafficking in persons, protect its victims and
prosecute its perpetrators.
“All nations must now work together to
implement this resolution and the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.”
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): As a co-facilitator
of this process, allow me to express my profound
gratitude to all delegations for their active
participation, in a spirit of constructiveness and
cooperation, in the consultations on the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. The Plan of
Action was a common effort in which many
delegations from different regions played a very
important role. Unfortunately, human trafficking is a
growing phenomenon. The international community as
a whole has a responsibility to work as closely and
efficiently as possible to fight this terrible scourge.
There is an international obligation to act. That is the
aim of, and reason for, the Plan of Action that we have
just adopted.
I would like to pay tribute to Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, who is sitting here next to me and whose
mandate as Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) will end in a
few days. The Plan of Action would also not have been
possible without his outstanding support and the hard
work of his office in New York. In that context, I
would like specifically to mention Ms. Simone
Monasebian and Mr. Shashi Kara for all their
unremitting work and support.
I am very grateful for Mr. Antonio Maria Costa’s
commitment to the fight against trafficking in persons
and for his vocal support of our work as facilitators.
Consequently, I regret that he has been prevented from
formally addressing the Assembly formally today for
largely artificial and procedural reasons.
Allow me also to say a word of thanks to all those
on the teams from the missions of Cape Verde and
Portugal who helped to steer our course and made
outstanding contributions to our work, often on a daily
basis and for many hours each day.
This Global Plan of Action is the result of farreaching consultations and negotiations and translates
the will of the General Assembly. The Plan of Action
promotes the universal ratification of the Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Trafficking Protocol. It also reinforces the

10-46837

A/64/PV.109

implementation of existing instruments and helps
Member States to strengthen their national and regional
commitments to prevent and combat trafficking in
persons. It calls for better coordination among
international
organizations,
States
and
other
stakeholders, as well as for raising awareness of
trafficking in persons, especially on the part of civil
society.
The structure of the Plan closely follows the
structure and main pillars of the Palermo Protocol,
specifically to prevent and combat trafficking, to
protect and assist victims and to promote cooperation
and coordination. In each section of the Plan, we have
managed to identify specific commitments to address
trafficking in persons that are consistent with
previously agreed legal instruments. I would reiterate
that the Plan does not duplicate, replace or divert
attention from existing legal instruments, and surely
does not undermine the relevance and importance of
legally binding international treaties. On the contrary, I
believe that it will reinforce such documents and
promote their universal ratification and effective
implementation. Several paragraphs in each section of
this document contain clear references to those crucial
legal instruments and to the concrete actions foreseen
by them to fight trafficking in persons.
But beyond the law enforcement perspective, the
Plan of Action also includes other dimensions that are
central to our work here in the General Assembly. In
our view, these dimensions certainly constitute an
added value to the efforts of the international
community against trafficking in persons. It introduces
a human rights perspective as well as a social
development perspective, both of which are crucial in
our efforts in the fight against trafficking.
Following that logic, the Plan of Action contains
several references to human rights instruments and
bodies and to the work of special rapporteurs, which is
highlighted throughout the text. The Plan also contains
a victim-oriented approach, because victim protection
should be another central element of our anti-trafficking
efforts at the national, regional and international levels.
In that regard, the Plan of Action has a very concrete
outcome for victims. It establishes a trust fund for
victims of trafficking in persons.
The second concrete outcome that I would
underline is the global report on trafficking patterns
and flows, best practices and lessons learned from

10-46837

regional initiatives and mechanisms that will be
produced by UNODC starting in 2012. That global
report, like the one produced in 2009 with data and
information on trafficking in persons, will certainly
help us to calibrate our action.
Another element that we especially value is the
call for better coordination of efforts and for the
mainstreaming of the issue of trafficking in persons
into policies and programmes addressing, within the
United Nations system, economic development, human
rights, the rule of law, good governance, natural
disaster issues and post-conflict reconstruction.
Last but not least, the Plan encourages and
underlines the importance of regional efforts and the
exchange of good practices. Much has been done by
numerous Member States, both nationally and in
regional frameworks. Those experiences and the
sharing of best practices will certainly be very valuable
for many other Member States.
Let me conclude by saying that being a facilitator
of this process was sometimes very difficult but also
very personally rewarding, especially when we
managed to bridge the gaps between delegations and to
create common and cross-regional ground on such an
important issue.
Mr. Lima (Cape Verde) (spoke in French): Today
is a great day for the innumerable victims of trafficking
in persons and for the United Nations. That is so thanks
to the adoption by consensus of the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which is not
only a fundamental text on the legal level that we
present to the world, but more importantly is a
reference document and a document of hope for all
victims and persons who are threatened or targeted by
the abominable practice that makes human beings a
unit of consumption and submissive spoils of war who
are at the mercy of the basest instincts and the most
heinous kind of bargaining.
With the Plan of Action, we give fresh hope to all
those throughout the world who are being hurt by a
practice that, far from disappearing from one era to
another, in times of peace or of war re-emerges as a
hydra to extend its ravages into every region of the
world, sparing no man, woman or child. When I think
of the children — and especially children —
condemned to labour that they are too weak for and
which ruins their health to slake the thirst for easy
profit for traffickers, or who are used for sexual ends

5

A/64/PV.109

by depraved persons or pedophiles — when I think of
these young victims, I am grateful that I have
contributed, as a co-facilitator, to originating this Plan
of Action, which I am sure will make its mark in the
annals of the United Nations.
But in order to do that we will need even more
commitment from all stakeholders — States,
Governments, interested organizations at all levels,
governmental and non-governmental alike, private
organizations, civil society groups and people of
goodwill throughout the world. The danger is not only
real; it is increasingly palpable everywhere. Its impact
on the lives of communities and individuals is
unquestionable, and the consequences for our societies
are incalculable.
It is estimated that 4 million women and girls are
bought and sold into forced marriages, prostitution or
slavery throughout the world, and around 1 million
children enter the sex trade every year. Some child
exploitation practices are so customary that they go
unnoticed, attracting only fleeting disapproval. That
system is perpetuated and silence is generalized, while
everyone in good faith calls for condemnation of the
most visible practices of a system in which profit,
poverty and turpitude are intertwined and the lives of
children, who die in silence from mistreatment,
constitute but a long litany of suffering.
In his courageous and revealing report of
February 2009, Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), explained that the report
“increases our partial understanding of the forces
at play in modern slave markets. Yet
internationally standardized data are still not
available, a limitation that hampers the sharing of
information between and among states, and with
the UNODC. Aggregated statistics cannot be put
together, neither at geographic nor thematic
levels.
“As a consequence, we still lack a global
understanding of the subject, and of how its
components interact to make the whole.
“We should be, but we are not, able to segment
today’s slave markets into their components
(demand, supply, trafficking, and related prices).
We must, but cannot, catalogue (for lack of data)
the different types of slavery: exploitation

6

through child-begging in Europe is different from
what goes on in a brothel, or on a street corner in
Australia. Preventive measures must also be
adapted to take into account that an Asian father
sells his under-age daughter under circumstances
different from what forces an African teenager
into a rag-tag army of killers, or what pushes an
illegal immigrant into a sweat shop in the
Americas. Measures to rescue victims and punish
criminals must vary accordingly.” (Global Report
on Trafficking in Persons, Executive Summary)
I would like to pay glowing tribute to
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for his unfailing self-sacrifice
to a cause that he has always and everywhere defended.
I also wish to express the warmest thanks of my
Government for his well-deserving, tireless and
inspired actions at the head of UNODC and for the
contributions of his office in New York, without which
it would have been difficult for us to achieve this
result. For all their efforts, I would also like to thank
Ms. Monasebian and Mr. Shashi Kara.
The work of UNODC should inspire us in the
effort to condemn trafficking and to highlight the
turpitude of civilized societies. That should be the
purpose of the Plan of Action. Contributing towards
improving understanding of this heinous form of
trafficking will make it possible for States to be more
active and effective in their efforts against traffickers
by virtue of being better informed, equipped and
determined to act to prevent trafficking, protect victims
and prosecute traffickers.
The Plan of Action should also make it possible
to expand cooperation between Member States and
regional and subregional organizations, while
increasing the efficiency of the efforts of all parties
involved. Trafficking in persons is a global
phenomenon. As such, stakeholders should devote all
the resources available in order to eradicate it.
I should also like to commend our experts’ ability
to listen and to undertake dialogue. They have done
genuinely impressive work to arrive at a consensus
text. What was unclear became acceptable to everyone.
What was rejected was ultimately taken into account.
Often, misunderstanding and mistrust were set aside so
that the goodwill of all could prevail. Understanding
prevailed in order to make resolute progress on behalf
of victims and of the future. We should now move
beyond words and transform today’s resolution and

10-46837

A/64/PV.109

Plan of Action into an assurance of survival for the
victims of trafficking, a commitment against impunity
for all traffickers and a guarantee of a normal and, if
possible, happy life for all of the children on Earth,
who are our children.
Ms. Gendi (Egypt): On behalf of Egypt, in its
capacity as Chair of the African Group, I have the
pleasure to deliver this statement on behalf of the 53
members of the Group of African States of the United
Nations following the adoption of the resolution
entitled “United Nations Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons”, contained in document
A/64/L.64, dated 29 July 2010.
The African Group takes pride today in adopting
the Global Plan of Action against Trafficking in
Persons, which the Group considers as a milestone on
the road to ending victimization, prosecuting
perpetrators, preventing and protecting all people from
falling into the sinful hands of organized crime and
compensating victims and supporting national efforts
and relevant organizations in their work to that end.
We take pride in the fact that, for the first time in
history, we have a universally approved mechanism for
coordinating all our efforts nationally, regionally and
internationally. The Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking will act not only as a coordinating
mechanism for Member States, but also as a strategic
framework for the international community to work
coherently towards preventing and fighting trafficking
in persons.
One of its main goals is to accelerate progress in
the
implementation
of
existing
international
instruments — including the most important among
them, namely, the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, which supplements the Palermo Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, which was
adopted in 2000 — as well as to fill all the gaps
existing among all instruments, plans and strategies,
whether at the national, regional or international levels,
in a unified, coherent, comprehensive and coordinated
manner that does not duplicate work but, rather,
consolidates and complements existing efforts to fight
national and international trafficking in persons.
The Global Plan of Action that we have adopted
today has been born strong. Member States have
decided to come together, with the help of international
community, to establish the new United Nations

10-46837

Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children. We hope that
it will become operational as soon as possible, for the
benefit of victims of trafficking.
The Global Plan of Action is not an exclusive
instrument of Member States and the United Nations
system. It belongs to all and should be fully and
effectively implemented by all players in the area of
trafficking in persons, even those who were not very
visible on the global scene a decade ago. International
organizations, civil society and the private sector have
a great role to play in that regard. The Global Plan of
Action can only harmonize and coordinate the roles of
all those important players. It can set out a number of
forward-looking actions that are essential to combating
human trafficking — with associated and clearly
defined targets and achievement indicators that can
allow us as Member States and the international
community to periodically review, assess and appraise
progress towards agreed policy goals and to direct
national policy towards high-impact response
measures.
The new United Nations Global Plan of Action
comprehensively takes into consideration the different
capabilities and needs of developing and developed
States, whether they are supply, transit or destination
countries. In detailing the efforts to be undertaken by
Member States, it takes into consideration the vital
importance of international cooperation, technical
assistance and capacity building. The United Nations
Global Plan of Action has also identified the role of
different players in raising awareness, gathering
information and providing proper education that will
help the general public to assist in efforts to combat
trafficking in persons at all levels.
This has been a long road filled with obstacles
and challenges, but one that has led to enormous
achievements. That was the road that African leaders
walked with determination from Sharm el-Sheikh,
where they adopted a decision, during the African
summit held in June and July 2008, to work together
towards the adoption of a United Nations Global Plan of
Action against Trafficking in Persons. A year later, also at
Sharm el-Sheikh, the leaders of the Non-Aligned
Movement also supported that effort. That road has led
to New York, where we are today witnessing a
milestone in the fight against trafficking in persons,
namely, the adoption in the General Assembly of the

7

A/64/PV.109

United Nations Global
Trafficking in Persons.

Plan

of Action

against

Finally, we owe a debt of thanks to you
personally, Mr. Vice-President, and to the President of
the Assembly and his representatives for the leadership
in making the fight against trafficking in persons one
of the presidency’s priority issues. We are also grateful
to the two facilitators of the Global Plan of Action —
Ambassador Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima, Permanent
Representative of Cape Verde, and Ambassador José
Filipe Moraes Cabral, Permanent Representative of
Portugal — and to their very active teams for the
endless hours they dedicated to making our dream
come true and to pushing us to meet our
responsibilities in finalizing the excellent document
before us.
We also owe a debt of thanks to the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretariat, particularly the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for the
amazing work they are continuously doing to assist
Member States in their fight against trafficking and for
the support to the whole process of adopting a Global
Plan of Action by consensus.
We cannot forget the visionary work of
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, head of UNODC, who will
be leaving us shortly, and his great achievements in the
fight against trafficking in persons. The African Group
also welcomes the appointment of the new head of
UNODC. We will be ready to work with him in our
common fight against organized crime, particularly
trafficking in persons.
Ms. De Geest (Belgium): Thank you, Mr. VicePresident, for giving me the floor to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU). The European Union would
like to thank the co-facilitators for presenting the text
of the Global Plan of Action. The EU acknowledges
the co-facilitators’ hard and careful work on this issue
over the past months, and is very appreciative of all
their efforts.
Human trafficking is a topic that is a major
political priority for the EU. The EU remains strongly
committed to the fight again this hideous crime, which
is an affront to human dignity and which constitutes a
gross violation of the human rights of victims,
particularly of women and children.
The EU is strongly convinced that, in this fight,
the primacy of the existing legal instruments, namely,

8

the Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime
and the protocols thereto, in particular the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, is beyond doubt, as
they form the pillars for international cooperation in
this area.
The fear of the EU during this process was that
the adoption of this non-binding document could serve
as a disincentive for Member States to ratify and
implement the existing instruments, which are legally
binding. It is clear that this Plan of Action cannot
replace the Convention and the Trafficking Protocol.
This is the standing position of the EU.
The EU therefore urges Member States that have
not yet done so to ratify or accede to those instruments
and to implement them fully and effectively.
Unfortunately, this call could not be expressed as
strongly as we had wished. The EU negotiated in good
faith, and with a constructive and principled approach,
throughout the consultation process. Today, we joined
the consensus on the Plan of Action.
However, we want to emphasize once more that
the implementation of this Plan should not lead, now or
in the future, to a parallel process that undermines the
process currently ongoing in Vienna. The EU insists
that any risk of duplicative reporting obligations or, all
the more so, of double legal standards should be very
carefully avoided. To that end, we reaffirm and fully
support the primary institutional and legal role played
by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention.
Other partners found it difficult to understand and
accommodate these fundamental concerns, which we
regret.
The EU sees the merit of the global report on
trafficking in persons, patterns and flows. At the same
time, the EU understands that resources for this report
should be found through re-allocation.
The EU considers that the human rights
dimension is crucial in the fight against trafficking.
Given its priority, the EU welcomes references in the
text to the rights of victims and victim assistance and
protection, including the provision of a wide range of
services for victims. The EU thinks that civil society
plays a crucial role in providing services to victims,
and therefore appreciates that this is recognized in the
text.

10-46837

A/64/PV.109

The EU also welcomes the support for the role
and mandates of the relevant Special Rapporteurs. The
EU also recognizes the important role and the work
done by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in the field of human trafficking.
In conclusion, the EU hopes that all Member
States will renew their efforts to prevent and combat
human trafficking and that they will tackle it forcefully
wherever it occurs.
Mr. Barton (United States of America): Our
thanks go to the Ambassadors of Cape Verde and
Portugal and to the many negotiators who were so
helpful in this process. Special thanks go to Executive
Director Costa as well for his fine work over the years.
The United States is deeply committed to
combating trafficking in persons. With the adoption of
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, in 2000, the international community defined
trafficking in persons for the first time at the
international level and agreed to prevent and combat it,
as well as to protect and assist its victims. In doing so,
it gave a new name to an old crime. Trafficking in
persons has since been used as an umbrella term for all
activities involved in obtaining or holding someone in
compelled service — whether sex trafficking,
involuntary servitude, slavery, debt bondage or forced
labour.
The United States is proud to join with the 116
countries that enacted legislation prohibiting all forms
of trafficking and is eager to work collaboratively to
address the many systemic factors — from supplychain sourcing and Government procurement to
immigration and shelter policies — that may contribute
to trafficking in persons. As we look to new ways to
engage and tackle this crime, we maintain the primacy
of the Protocol and its mandate to bring traffickers to
justice while protecting victims.
The United States maintains its position that the
focus of international anti-trafficking in persons efforts
should be on the universal ratification and
implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
supplementary Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, not on the establishment of a new mechanism
in New York. The Trafficking Protocol serves as the
cornerstone for effective action in ending human

10-46837

trafficking. Ultimately, the political will of
Governments is vitally important in the fight against
trafficking in persons.
Despite our concerns as to the necessity of the
Global Plan of Action, we have collaborated in good
faith to ensure that this document is as strong as
possible, while not creating any parallel New York
process and not overriding the Palermo treaties or the
mandate of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime in Vienna. We think that the final text of the
document reflects this for the most part.
We appreciate the efforts of the facilitators and
the main supporters of the Global Plan of Action in
addressing our concerns. With regard to paragraph 6 of
the resolution, it is the view of the United States that
this should be limited to an item on the agenda of the
General Assembly, under which Member States would
self-report on their efforts to implement the Global
Plan of Action. The United States will not object to the
current language of paragraph 6. However, we will not
support efforts in the future to turn the Global Plan of
Action, or any mechanism that may be established to
review its implementation, into a formal ongoing
mechanism in New York that will divert resources from
technical assistance and other activities related to the
Palermo Protocol.
Human trafficking is a threat to national security,
public health and democracy. Real action is needed on
the ground to combat trafficking, and it is our hope that
the resolution and the annexed Global Plan of Action
will lead to universal ratification and implementation
of the Protocol.
In view of the critical importance of ending
human trafficking, we were pleased to join consensus
on this resolution and the annexed Global Plan of
Action.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the
delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
wishes to express its gratitude to the delegations of
Portugal and Cape Verde for their tireless efforts and
the professionalism, transparency and diplomatic skill
they exhibited in their roles as facilitators throughout
the process of negotiating the Global Plan of Action
against Trafficking in Persons.

9

A/64/PV.109

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes
that trafficking in persons is a grave violation of human
rights and a transgression of human dignity. It is our
firm conviction that if we are to effectively prevent,
control and fight this terrible scourge, we must, among
other things, strengthen our States’ commitments to
broadening and improving the programmes and
initiatives which aim at fighting and reducing poverty,
inequity and social exclusion, which are the root causes
of the increased vulnerability of women, boys and
girls, in particular, who fall victim to criminal
traffickers, who often belong to organized criminal
groups operating nationally and transnationally.
My country has stressed the importance of
fighting poverty and social injustice in a variety of
international fora, and we have created the most
extensive national network of social programmes ever
seen in our history, with the aim of meeting the social
needs of all our citizens, especially the poor and most
vulnerable. In our country, we have strong and wideranging legislation and national action plans to combat
trafficking. Remaining faithful to the Bolivarian ideal,
we are working towards the realization of social
justice.
Within this conceptual framework, Venezuelan
legislation — such as the Organic Law on the Right of
Women to a Life Free from Violence — strictly
prohibits different forms of trafficking in persons.
Among the efforts of the Bolivarian Government to
strengthen the national legal framework in this area,
the Ministry of People’s Power for Interior and Justice
is currently developing a national action plan to
prevent, suppress and punish the crime of trafficking in
persons, prostitution and pornography. National and
international bodies, including UNICEF, are involved
in this effort.
Efforts to fight this scourge must be made on a
global scale. Broad-based international cooperation at
all levels is critical to effectively counteracting the
threats posed by trafficking in persons and other
modern-day forms of slavery. In this context, we
believe firmly that the struggle against this crime is a
joint responsibility that is shared by countries of origin,
transit and destination. However, we believe that the
regions representing the principle markets for
trafficked persons have the primary responsibility for
finding a solution, since there would be no supply
without demand. Furthermore, those who organize the
demand are, in general, linked through transnational

10

networks to those who organize the supply, while the
victims are usually the poor of the world, from both the
South and the North.
The role of multilateralism, and in particular the
role of the United Nations, must therefore be
strengthened in the monitoring and evaluation of
trafficking in persons, which must always be based on
the statistics and information provided by Member
States. As has already been pointed out, it is difficult to
obtain statistics in this area, given the nature of these
criminal acts. My delegation therefore takes this
opportunity to reiterate its firm rejection of the
selective, unilateral evaluations carried out by certain
countries, motivated by purely political ends.
In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela supports the adoption and implementation of
the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, which will enable us to ensure the full and
effective application of all existing legal instruments in
this area, as well as to promote coordination and
cooperation among Member States, mechanisms and
bodies established under the treaties endorsed by States
and other legal instruments established in the
framework of the United Nations system.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes the adoption by the General Assembly
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. This instrument is necessary,
especially given the increase in trafficking in persons
around the world.
We believe that strengthening international
cooperation is of vital importance to fighting this
scourge, and the Plan of Action will help towards that
end, based on full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. Cuba believes that the
consultative process has yielded a balanced Plan of
Action, which includes provisions for concrete action
and an important political call to action by the General
Assembly in the fight against trafficking in persons.
We would have preferred the Plan to include
explicit references to the need to take joint action,
without the imposition of unilateral evaluations or
requirements on States, which Cuba strongly rejects.
Nonetheless, it is clear that any unilateral, selective
and politically motivated evaluation with respect to
trafficking in persons would go entirely against the
Global Plan of Action that we have adopted today. We
therefore hope that States that continue such

10-46837

A/64/PV.109

unacceptable
immediately.

practices

will

discontinue

them

We welcome the provisions of the Plan of Action
pertaining to the drafting of balanced, reliable and
comprehensive reports on trafficking in persons at the
national, regional and international levels. Such reports
should strengthen multilateralism as the sole way of
combating all types of transnational crime.
In the case of Cuba — which is not categorized as
a country of origin, transit or destination of this
scourge — the legislation and measures that we have
adopted in this area make us one of the countries with
the most advanced norms and mechanisms to prevent
and combat trafficking in persons.
We are especially grateful to the facilitators of
this process — Ambassadors Antonio Pedro Monteiro
Lima of Cape Verde and José Filipe Moraes Cabral of
Portugal — for their efforts to strike a balance among
all the parties.
I should like to conclude by reiterating Cuba’s
unwavering commitment to continue to resolutely
combat trafficking in persons in all its aspects and to
strengthen our concrete cooperation links with the
international community and the United Nations in our
joint efforts to prevent and eradicate trafficking in
persons throughout the world.
Ms. Alkhalifa (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Bahrain welcomes the consensus
adoption of the United Nations Global Plan of Action
against Trafficking in Persons.
On behalf of my country, I am pleased to express
our sincere gratitude to the facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Cape Verde and Portugal, to whom
the President assigned the difficult task of finding
common ground among all parties concerned in
reaching consensus agreement on the Plan in spite of
all the complexities and points of view on this issue.
My delegation believes that the co-facilitators
succeeded in that very difficult undertaking, for which
we are particularly grateful. We also thank all
delegations that participated so patiently in the
negotiations in a genuine desire to agree on the
fundamental principles, which led them to accept
certain compromises.
The Kingdom of Bahrain made significant efforts
to be part of this process, in line with our country’s
political orientation and as part of a reform process that

10-46837

encompasses all areas of life, especially human rights,
labour laws and the rights of women. We have done so
based on our belief that, regardless of the form it takes,
trafficking in persons should be addressed by the entire
international community under the leadership of the
United Nations and with a common voice and purpose.
Member States now have the responsibility to
implement the Plan of Action in close cooperation in
order to achieve the desired results. The Kingdom of
Bahrain will attach the greatest priority and attention to
the Plan and make it part of our legislation.
Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): My delegation would
like to thank the two facilitators for the manner in
which they guided the negotiations that culminated in
today’s consensus adoption of the Global Plan of
Action against Trafficking in Persons.
As a member of the informal Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking, we express our
satisfaction with the entire exercise. We also wish to
thank all delegations, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and others that took an active part in
the long negotiations over the past few months. Now
that we have a Global Plan of Action, the onus is on us,
the Member States, to implement it.
As the issue of trafficking in persons is mostly
transboundary in nature, we hope that all Member
States will complement each other in carrying out the
difficult task of curbing and eradicating this trade.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Discussions on
the subject of the Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons have taken place for many
years. They could very well have gone on for many
years, but President Treki’s determination to conclude
the Plan of Action under his watch took the debate to
another level. It is for that reason that my delegation
would like to pay special tribute to him for his courage
and vision in seeing to it that the sixty-fourth session
achieved very concrete and meaningful results, such as
the Global Plan of Action.
In the same vein, my delegation highly
commends the facilitators — His Excellency Mr. José
Filipe Moraes Cabral of Portugal and His Excellency
Mr. Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima of Cape Verde — as
well as their staff, who displayed competence,
transparency, judiciousness and, may I say, extreme
patience during the consultations. Let me also thank
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa and the United Nations

11

A/64/PV.109

Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their very
important role in the formulation of the Plan.
Addressing today’s slavery is important to us all.
UNODC and the many United Nations supporting
agencies in the areas of economics, crime and human
rights with the expertise in the implementation of
existing instruments have told us that, as the
international community, we are wanting. We have
been reminded that there are many unaccounted for,
unseen and unattended victims, and that there will be
many more. We have also been told that very
prosperous and resourceful traffickers thrive due to the
gaps in the international community’s coordination.
It is for those reasons that the Global Plan of
Action against Trafficking in Persons is of the utmost
relevance and importance. We should henceforth take
every opportunity to report, assist, inform and share.
We should publicly and loudly demonstrate that, acting
as one, the international community intends to bring to
light the many faces of this hidden crime and the
victims it produces.
Let me conclude by expressing my delegation’s
great pleasure for the consensus adoption of resolution
64/293.
Mr. Torres (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to acknowledge the dedicated and
patient efforts of the Permanent Representatives of
Cape Verde and Portugal as facilitators of this process.
My country attaches special priority to crucial
national and international efforts to prevent and combat
the pernicious trafficking in persons, protect and help
its victims, and prosecute and bring to justice the
perpetrators of this crime. In that regard, Colombia has
developed a significant legal framework and
comprehensive public policies that are being
implemented in a coordinated way by various State
institutions. My country also participates in initiatives
to provide and generate ever-increasing international
cooperation to combat trafficking in persons.
Colombia would like to take this opportunity to
make some comments on the adoption of resolution
64/293 and its annex on the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
First, my delegation would like to reiterate that,
for Colombia, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,

12

Especially Women and Children, form the basic pillar
of the international community’s fight against
organized crime and the trafficking persons.
The Palermo Convention and its Protocol on
trafficking in persons establish a concrete and effective
legal framework to prevent, investigate and punish all
manifestations of organized crime, including
trafficking in persons, and to strengthen international
cooperation in that regard and provide proper
protection
for
the
victims.
The
effective
implementation of these instruments has been and
continues to be indispensable in the efficient,
consistent and coordinated fight against trafficking in
persons in the national and international contexts. Full
support and guarantees for compliance with the
mandates and work of Conference of the Parties are
also indispensable to effectively improving the ability
of States to fight transnational organized crime and to
promote and monitor the enforcement of the Palermo
Convention and its Protocols.
Secondly, my delegation wishes to stress that the
consideration of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action against Trafficking in Persons was undertaken
with the purpose, set forth in resolution 63/194, of
ensuring the full and effective implementation of the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. In this sense, the main contribution of the
Plan of Action is the renewed commitment of Member
States to promoting the universal ratification of the
Palermo Convention and its trafficking Protocol, and to
effectively
strengthening
and
applying
these
instruments, the role of which was explicitly
recognized in the resolution adopted today.
Colombia recognizes the eminently political
essence of the Plan of Action. We hope that its spirit
and aspirations will contribute to strengthening
coordination among the organs of the United Nations
system having jurisdiction in the fight against
trafficking in persons. We trust that the implementation
of the resolution will duly reflect the political will
expressed by Member States in the consultations to
ensure that the Plan of Action offers complementary
support to international efforts within the framework of
the Palermo Convention and its trafficking Protocol,
including the preservation of and due respect for the
work of and the mandate established for the
Conference of Parties.

10-46837

A/64/PV.109

Accordingly, it is essential to ensure that at no
time shall the Plan generate the creation of bodies or
review or follow-up mechanisms parallel to those that
have already been identified and defined by the
Conference of the Parties to the Palermo Convention,
of which the fifth session will take place in October.
My country recognizes that the efforts of any one
State are not enough to prevent trafficking in persons.
Action to counter and eradicate this crime calls for
firm political commitment, resolute international
political cooperation and mutual criminal justice
assistance. The protection of victims requires national
actions to be strengthened with the support of the
international community. We hope that the United
Nations, in its work against trafficking in persons, will
continue to focus its efforts and resources on
supporting Member States in the full implementation of
the Palermo Convention and the Protocol on trafficking
in persons, and to support those States that have not yet
ratified these instruments in adapting their legal
frameworks and institutional capacities to join the
Convention and the Protocol. The universalization of
these binding legal instruments as the indispensable
framework for effective international cooperation
based on trust, reciprocity and effective cooperation
should be our common goal and a priority for all.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
To conclude, allow me to acknowledge the
outstanding work of Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United National Office on
Drugs and Crime. He is here today, and I wish to thank
him on behalf of my Government for his cooperation
with and support to Colombia throughout the years in
which he has held that honourable post.
Mr. Andrade (Brazil): We welcome the adoption
by consensus of the Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons, which is a valuable contribution
to the efforts of the international community to fight
such a heinous crime. We would like to thank all
delegations involved in the discussions for their
cooperative spirit, which led to a successful outcome of
the negotiations. We would especially like to express
our gratitude for the facilitators of this process, the
Permanent Representatives of Cape Verde and
Portugal, and their staff, who very ably led us through
such a complex and delicate discussion and contributed
decisively to the successful outcome.

10-46837

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): The millions of victims of trafficking in
persons, that modern form of slavery, today have
received fresh hope to counter their suffering. The
adoption of the Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons is an historic milestone not only
for our Organization, but above all for the lives of the
human beings who have fallen prey to the greed and
avarice of those who profit from trafficking in human
beings.
The need to adopt the Global Plan of Action
against Trafficking in Persons is of long date. Under
the Nicaraguan presidency of the General Assembly at
its sixty-third session, under the leadership of Father
Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann, we began to formally
discuss the possibility of adopting such a plan of
action. At that time, the Plan seemed very controversial
and difficult to agree because many delegations did not
see the need for a global plan of action. However, a
ever-growing group of friendly countries headed by
Belarus decided to continue to draw the attention of the
international community to the urgent need for the
Plan. We thank the President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session for his support and for
returning to it with great strength.
Today, the Global Plan of Action has become a
reality thanks to the determination of Member States. I
wish to especially mention the experts who worked
extremely hard to make the Plan a reality. I also wish
to thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
and his team, especially Ms. Simone Monasebian. I
also wish to acknowledge the leadership and dedication
of the facilitators, the representatives of Cape Verde
and Portugal, Mr. Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima and
Mr. José Felipe Moraes Cabral. We thank them for
their excellent work.
The leadership and good sense of our facilitators
made the process transparent that took most of the
concerns of Member States into account. The role
played by the facilitators in this achievement
demonstrated that any issue before the United Nations
can be discussed in accordance with the principles of
equality and mutual respect between States. No matter
how large or small the countries we represent may be,
it is always possible to reach consensus based on
justice and good faith. This achievement is also a clear
demonstration that multilateralism does indeed work.

13

A/64/PV.109

Mr. Christian (Ghana), Vice-President, returned
to the Chair.
The result is a balanced document that covers all
aspects of the issue. It may not reflect our every
aspiration — in our case, for example, we should have
liked to further stress the need to eliminate demand as
a main cause of trafficking in persons for sexual
exploitation — but we are very pleased indeed because
we now have an international instrument that provides
a broad, strategic framework and will contribute to
greater coordination of the collective efforts of States
Members,
the
United
Nations
system
and
non-governmental organizations.
Far from contradicting or overlapping with
existing legal instruments, the Plan will contribute to
facilitating the implementation of international and
regional instruments and mechanisms, as well as better
cooperation and collaboration among members of the
international community that will contribute to
preventing this crime; protecting and assisting victims
of trafficking, with a focus on human rights, especially
for women and children; and to prosecuting
perpetrators.
The commitment of the delegation of Nicaragua
to the approval of the Plan is a reflection of the
commitment of our Government of National
Reconciliation and Unity to eradicating this evil
worldwide, and especially within our region of Central
America.
Mr. Troya (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Ecuador believes that the adoption of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons is valuable and timely. The
document we have adopted will give hope to many
people who have fallen victims to the detestable crime
of trafficking in persons. We are sure that the Plan of
Action does not counter or weaken such international
instruments as the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. On the contrary, it
reinforces and complements those international
instruments.
Every year, millions of people fall victim to one
of the largest illicit businesses on Earth. Human
trafficking fills the pockets of international mafias that
profit from the suffering of those who have had to
leave their countries for many reasons. My delegation

14

is aware that the problem of uncontrolled migration of
human beings cannot be resolved through protocols,
conventions or other instruments of this nature.
Uncontrolled migration can be countered only when
countries of origin offer their own citizens decent
living conditions and opportunities that make it
unnecessary to leave one’s motherland.
The road we have had to take to reach this census
has been long and difficult. Therefore, we must
recognize and applaud the valuable work of the
facilitators, the Ambassadors of Portugal and Cape
Verde, and the entire Working Group on Trafficking in
Persons, to whom we owe, to a large degree, the
success of our work.
My delegation wishes to express our deep
satisfaction with the agreement reached and reiterate
our firm commitment to working to implement the Plan
of Action.
Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus welcomes the General Assembly’s successful
consensus adoption of such a meaningful and longawaited instrument as the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. This is an
important and symbolic milestone in the development
of the international process, in which Belarus became a
participant five years ago.
The Plan of Action is a compelling manifestation
of the positive, far-reaching changes that Belarus
actively sought when it advanced in the United Nations
the idea of the need for systemic efforts to improve the
coordination and harmonization of multilateral actions
against trafficking in persons. We welcome the efforts
of the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Ali
Treki, and the facilitators of the negotiation process on
the Global Plan, the Permanent Representatives of
Portugal and Cape Verde to the United Nations,
Mr. José Filipe Moraes Cabral and Mr. Antonio Pedro
Monteiro Lima, in organizing the negotiation process
and ensuring its effectiveness.
We also welcome the efforts of the parties aimed
at achieving consensus on resolution 64/293,
introduced at today’s meeting of the General Assembly.
We express particular gratitude to Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa who, as the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, was an active
advocate of the Global Plan of Action from the outset.
He undertook tireless efforts to advance the idea of the
need for the Plan and supported the establishment of

10-46837

A/64/PV.109

the Group of Friends against human trafficking. We
thank the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
New York and Ms. Simone Monasebian personally for
their invaluable assistance to States during the
negotiation process on the Global Plan.
We have come a long way to the point we have
reached today, from the initial resolutions laying out
the possible coordinated joint actions to the frank and
wide-ranging discussions of this problem at the
thematic debates in the General Assembly, and from
the establishment of the informal Group of Friends that
came together to fight against human trafficking to the
collective drafting and consensus adoption of the
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons.
We recognize that the Plan is not a cure-all
solution to the scourge of trafficking in persons. We
understand that it is not ideal. As a compromise
document, the Plan cannot reflect the varying and
specific natures of the approaches of individual States
or groups in addressing the complex problem of
eradicating trafficking in persons, but it does reflect the
most important thing — the resolve of Member States
to see this complex matter through to the end.
We are certain that the Plan can mobilize and
harmonize the efforts of the entire international
community to prevent and suppress human trafficking
and will guide these efforts within a coordinated,
balanced and comprehensive framework. We believe
that the Global Plan will contribute to further
broadening the list of parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, and that it can help to universalize these
important legal instruments. In adopting the Global
Plan of Action today, the General Assembly has sent to
the international community a clear, strong signal that

10-46837

the United Nations has the will and ability to put an
end to the modern form of slavery that is trafficking in
persons, and to do so by acting now and together.
In Belarus, we do not believe that this is an
idealistic approach. By acting together, we can prove
that this is not the case.
Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation was
pleased to join the consensus on resolution 64/293 on
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. Above all, we would like to
express our gratitude to the facilitators of the
negotiation process, the Permanent Representatives of
Portugal and Cape Verde. We are certain that today’s
adoption was made possible by their persistence and
their creativity in seeking balanced language reflecting
the interests of all interested States.
Furthermore, we welcome the constructive and
responsible approach of all parties to the negotiating
process. Clearly, without the political will to seek
compromise, the drafting of the Global Plan of Action
would hardly have been made possible. It is heartening
that, despite the sometimes differing understandings
and assessments of the problem, we were still able to
pool our efforts against the threat of trafficking in
persons. We believe that only a comprehensive and
holistic approach will allow us to achieve tangible
results against this scourge.
In conclusion, we express the hope that the
Global Plan adopted today will become an effective
road map for the entire international community to
counter trafficking in persons.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
104.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

15
