United Nations

S/PV.6533

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6533rd meeting
Thursday, 12 May 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Identical letters dated 18 February 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security
Council (S/2011/85)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-33213 (E)

*1133213*

S/PV.6533

affected by conflict and actors from conflict zones, and
their points of view inform this report.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Identical letters dated 18 February 2011 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council (S/2011/85)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Chair of the Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities; Ms. Susana Malcorra, UnderSecretary-General for Field Support; and Mr. EugèneRichard Gasana, Permanent Representative of Rwanda,
in his capacity as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/85, which contains the text of a
letter dated 18 February 2011 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council transmitting the report of the independent
review on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno.
Mr. Guéhenno (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Sir, for having invited me to
this meeting to present to the Council the report of the
Senior Advisory Group on civilian capacity
(S/2011/85). I should also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Malcorra and the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Gasana, for
being here today.
The report before the Council is truly the product
of a collaborative effort. I note the presence here today
of Ambassador Mitra Vasisht, a member of the
Advisory Group. I believe without the diversity of
points of view expressed in the Group, we would not
be where we are today. This report is a result of a
collective effort also in terms of the diversity and
variety of the consultations we were able to hold in the
preparatory phase. We met with Member States,
regional organizations, civil society, individuals

2

Let me first make a few remarks on the origins of
this report. As Council members know, it arose from
growing concerns among the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, on how to
provide, in a timely manner, people with the needed
qualities in difficult situations, and how to deploy them
rapidly in conflict-affected areas. This difficulty, which
is common to all major multisectoral missions, affects
the ability of United Nations missions — missions
authorized by the Council — to fulfil their mandates
and thus to build lasting peace. This is the overarching
problem that our report aims to address.
Of course, it is not a new problem. Members will
recall that during a debate in the General Assembly last
June marking the tenth anniversary of the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809), Lakhdar Brahimi noted that there
is no substitute for getting the right people into the
right jobs at the right time, and only for the time that is
necessary. He went on to say that many peacekeeping
veterans had told the panel he chaired in 2000 that the
civilian personnel system was failing peacekeeping
missions and that if there was only one problem to fix
as a priority, it should be this. Ten years later,
regrettably, he expressed his fear that many of the
problems identified in 2000 had not yet been resolved.
In the past ten years, the operating environment
of missions has become considerably more
complicated, and the expectations of the international
community have also significantly changed. The scope
of the missions mandated by the Council has continued
to expand, with missions playing ever more diverse
and varied roles covering a very wide range of
activities relating to the re-establishment of peace and
security. This requires much greater agility at
Headquarters and on the ground and a much broader
range of skills and expertise, including specialized
skills that are often hard to find.
(spoke in English)
As the Secretary-General said during the
Council’s debate on post-conflict peacebuilding and
institution building in January (S/PV.6472), “More
nimble and agile systems are also required, including
stronger partnerships that can provide the most
appropriate civilian capacity”, particularly from the
Global South and among women.

11-33213

S/PV.6533

I would like to say a few words on the key
features of the report. Council members are already
familiar with its four main areas: national ownership,
global partnership, expertise and nimbleness. I would
like to explain why it was these four key issues that we
chose to concentrate on.
First, national ownership. As the Peacebuilding
Commission has emphasized, unless conflict-affected
countries develop their own capacities to cope with
crisis and change, international assistance will not
succeed. Yet we heard repeatedly from conflictaffected countries that we do not sufficiently respect
national ownership or develop national capacities. In
Liberia, for example, where the last peace agreement
was concluded in 2003, despite the international
community’s efforts since then, the lack of specialized
capacity in many areas remains a major challenge. For
the Liberian National Police alone, civilian expertise is
needed in the areas of administration, communications,
criminal investigation, institutional capacity-building
and logistics. We need more than just the uniformed
personnel, who of course play a critical role; there is a
whole supporting civilian environment that needs to be
developed in parallel.
Our report is therefore founded on the principle
that international assistance has to identify, protect and
nurture latent national capabilities — in short, that it
must build on what is already there, not start from a
blank slate. That means stronger support to core State
capacities, such as aid coordination, policy and public
financial management, maximizing the economic
impact of our interventions through local procurement,
and using local capacities as much as possible,
including in professional positions in United Nations
missions. This support has to start early. In Southern
Sudan, for example, I hope that the United Nations will
aim to build up the capacities of the Southern Sudanese
to articulate their priorities so that it will be the
Southern Sudanese themselves, who will truly shape
the future of their country, with the United Nations
planning process then aligning with those nationally
defined priorities.
The second area of focus is partnerships.
Conflict-affected
countries
have
increasingly
specialized needs in a variety of fields, from natural
resource management, as we have seen in Liberia, to
land management in Darfur, harbour management in
Timor-Leste — the scope is unlimited. The United
Nations obviously cannot hope to meet all of these

11-33213

needs from its own ranks. Instead, it needs to establish
and operate effective partnerships with outside
providers, as many agencies, funds and programmes
already do. We therefore recommend establishing a
civilian partnership cell to link field needs to the
capacities of Member State and non-governmental
organization and to enable faster, more effective
deployment of Member State capacities.
We emphasize, too, the need for greater SouthSouth cooperation and triangular cooperation. The sort
of expertise needed in conflict-affected countries can
often be found in countries with a recent experience of
transition or institutional transformation. South Africa,
for example, has provided electoral and mediation
expertise in Burundi. The capacity development needs
of the Liberian National Police are being supported by
neighbours in the subregion. Triangular cooperation is
helping restore and strengthen core State functions in
South Sudan, where 200 advisors from the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and 150
United Nations Volunteers, supported by the United
Nations Development Programme, will be outposted to
work at the local level with Government counterparts
and provided with technical and advisory support.
The next issue of focus is expertise. The
Secretary-General’s report on peacebuilding in 2009
(S/2009/304) stressed the need for predictable delivery
of assistance in the core areas of peacebuilding. Yet
efforts are still hampered by the lack of quickly
deployable expert capacity, including in such missioncritical areas as the rule of law. Part of the problem is a
lack of clarity about roles and responsibilities, with
gaps in some areas and overlap in others where
multiple actors do the same tasks under competing
mandates. This is why the report recommends
establishing a clear model defining who does what,
with clearly designated leads for all areas. The aims
here are to strengthen responsibility and accountability,
and to fill obvious capacity gaps.
The last is of focus is nimbleness. The SecretaryGeneral’s representatives in the field are entrusted by
the Security Council with great political and diplomatic
responsibility to carry out the Council’s mandates. But
when it comes to management, they actually often have
very little flexibility and need the authority to adapt
their implementation plans to react to the unforeseen
and to seize opportunities. The implementation of their
mandates could sometimes be well served by missions
being enabled to undertake certain programmatic

3

S/PV.6533

activities, at least before United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes have got their programmes
under way. Examples such as the community violence
reduction programme carried out by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, and a road-building
scheme managed by the United Nations Mission in
Liberia that employed 75,000 Liberians, a third of
them ex-combatants, are illustrations of the enormous
potential value of using mission funds for carefully
targeted programmes within the mandate.
The report also makes one cross-cutting
recommendation for more seamless arrangements
within the United Nations to enable rapid response and
interoperability across the system. This points, I must
say, to a deeper problem — a single human resources
system that tries to cater both to the recruitment of
Headquarters staff and to the management of field
missions. These are two vastly different tasks, perhaps
impossible to do within one single set of rules without
at least some adaptations.
In conclusion, let me stress that the international
community has too often missed the window of
opportunity that the immediate post-conflict period
offers to provide basic security, deliver peace
dividends, build confidence in political processes and
strengthen core national capacities to lead
peacebuilding efforts.
The stakes are very high. As the recently
published World Development Report underlines,
“insecurity … has become the primary development
challenge of our time. One-and-a-half billion people
live in areas affected by fragility, conflict, or largescale, organized criminal violence, and no lowincome fragile or conflict-affected country has
yet to achieve a single United Nations
Millennium Development Goal”.
To meet the needs of post-conflict countries, the
United Nations currently tries to recruit a vast array of
specialized personnel instead of building partnerships
that will provide access to the necessary capacities as
and when they are needed. Inevitably, then, its
response to conflict is determined by the supply of its
own human resources, and not by demand. Improving
the way we deliver civilian capacity requires a shift
from this supply-driven to a demand-driven approach
that respects and understands the needs of conflictaffected countries and adapts itself to fill them, rather
than simply providing the capacities it happens to have.

4

It requires going outside the boxes that we have built to
describe our activities in post-conflict peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. These have
sometimes proved to be an obstacle rather than a help
because the reality is that the effort to rebuild a country
that has suffered conflict is really a continuum. Too
often, because of those boxes, our interventions are
like a cliff, with at one stage a massive engagement
and then suddenly very little. We do not know how to
turn that cliff into a more gentle slope, which is really
what is needed.
Our recommendations are intended to equip the
international community to better respond to these
demands. To that end, we envision a core of United
Nations staff working in close partnership with host
communities and civilians from Member States,
regional organizations and other partners, accessing
temporary capacities in response to need.
A meeting organized by the United Nations and
the African Union in Addis Ababa in December 2010
was quite clear on this point. The concluding statement
of that meeting said, in part:
“The spirit of partnership must drive the next
generation of engagement with conflict-affected
States. The United Nations must be open and
respectful. It must engage host communities,
Member States which have appropriate capacities,
regional and subregional organizations, civil society
and the private sector, with a willingness to learn
from them and adapt.”
This message goes to the very heart of the report.
Our ideas and proposals are now for Member
States and the Secretary-General to weigh and
consider. I hope that some of them will prove of some
value. I thank the members of the Council for their
interest, and look forward to hearing their views on our
report and its relevance to their work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Guéhenno for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Malcorra.
Ms. Malcorra: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me
to this meeting and giving me the opportunity to hear
members’ views and discuss the follow-up of the report
of the Senior Advisory Group on civilian capacity (see
S/2001/85). I am happy to see Jean-Marie Guéhenno

11-33213

S/PV.6533

and
Ambassador
Gasana,
representing
Peacebuilding Commission today.

the

Civilian capacity is a vital component of almost
all the missions that the Council authorizes. From
large, multidimensional peacekeeping operations to
smaller, more specialized political missions, all need
extensive civilian expertise to fulfil their mandates.
When the Secretary-General produced his first report
on peacebuilding (S/2009/304) in the immediate
aftermath of conflict in 2009, the Council stressed the
importance of rapidly deployable civilian expertise to
help develop national capacities as early as possible. It
was in that regard that the Council welcomed the
Secretary-General’s proposal for a review to analyse
how to broaden and deepen the pool of civilian
experts — a review that has now produced the report
we have before us today.
The Secretary-General has welcomed the
direction
articulated
by
the
report.
The
recommendations are congruent with his broader
efforts to create a more open and responsive United
Nations working in close partnership with Member
States. The Secretary-General has stressed that the
report’s emphasis on the need to do more within
existing resources and to make better use of the
systems already in place is also in line with his
continuing drive to build a more accountable, efficient
and effective United Nations. I see a great deal of
congruence between the report’s recommendations and
the priorities the Council has long identified for
improving our collective performance in supporting
conflict-affected countries.
First, with respect to national ownership, the
entire report is based on the premise that unless
national Governments, peoples and institutions truly
own their peacebuilding processes, peace will not last.
Identifying and developing latent national capacity is
always difficult, but it has to be built into our
objectives and our work plans from the very start.
The Council has emphasized the need for early
and predictable support in priority areas of
peacebuilding, including security sector reform and the
rule of law, respect for human rights and refugee
return, core Government functions and economic
revitalization. The report recognizes those that
currently lack the capacity to respond to demand. But
there is also the question of the national capacity to
manage and direct such assistance. The Council has

11-33213

rightly stressed the vital role of the United Nations in
supporting national authorities to develop an early
strategy to address their peacebuilding priorities. The
report, too, says that we must do better at supporting
Governments in building the core structures needed for
policy management and prioritization, aid coordination
and public financial management. This is congruent
with key findings and messages in the newly released
World Development Report.
With regard to partnerships, delivering more
effective civilian capacity needs to be a collective
effort. It is neither practicable nor wise for the United
Nations to try to recruit as staff members individuals
with all the myriad skills and experience that are
necessary to meet post-conflict needs, either now or in
an unknown future. What the report recommends,
instead, is for the United Nations to supplement its
core staff by investing in long-term partnerships with
external providers who can furnish the necessary niche
capacity on a more flexible, on-demand basis. Building
such partnerships will be of mutual benefit. Not only
will the United Nations gain access to new sources of
capacity that are currently underused, but Member
States and other partners will have increased
opportunities for deploying their civilian capacities in
partnership with the United Nations. This is the point
of the report’s recommendations for greater SouthSouth cooperation and triangular partnerships, and for
associated modalities like experts on mission or
civilian support packages, to enable them to work
smoothly.
Lastly, with regard to the importance of
translating
proposed
changes
into
improved
effectiveness of operations on the ground, many of the
recommendations in the report concern United Nations
rules or management practices at Headquarters. But
there is little point in changes at Headquarters if they
do not ultimately improve our performance in the field,
that is, the value of our assistance to conflict-affected
countries. As we move ahead and consider which of the
report’s ideas we can usefully apply, and how, I am
determined that we should maintain a clear focus on
the field and on how our work is going to make an
impact there. I therefore intend to involve
representatives from the field in meetings of our
Steering Committee whenever possible.
Next, let me turn to the way ahead. As Chair of
the Steering Committee appointed by the SecretaryGeneral to take the report forward, we are working on

5

S/PV.6533

the basis of certain key principles. First, we shall be
open and consultative. The entire United Nations
system, Member States and other external partners all
need to be involved if we are to crystallize a set of
actionable recommendations from the report.
Consultations will also help us understand what
capacities are available beyond the United Nations but
not being fully used. The debate that took place in the
General Assembly yesterday has already given us
indications that will inform the process moving
forward.
We have to align our work with other initiatives
and reforms across the United Nations system that fit
with what we are trying to do. Some of the report’s
human resources recommendations, for example, may
be more productively pursued within other work
streams. By putting these things under a civilian
capacity chapeau, we may be able to lend them a
sharper focus, sense of urgency and added value.
We are adopting a holistic, system-wide
approach. The Steering Committee established by the
Secretary-General includes our development and
humanitarian colleagues. The World Bank has shown
interest in joining, and we are working on a way to
make that happen. Our meetings so far have shown that
there is much constructive interest across the system in
how the report can be acted upon, even though there
may be differences of opinion about exactly how to do
it. There is, moreover, broad agreement on the key
goals, namely, to better enable national capacity
development, to develop mechanisms for effective
partnerships with external capacities and to design
more seamless arrangements within the United Nations
to enable a rapid response to crises. That is an
encouraging basis on which to move ahead.
Lastly, we need to be selective. The report
contains more than 70 recommendations. Some
changes that appear simple may in practice be difficult.
Others, though, can be done within the SecretaryGeneral’s or his executive heads’ own purview. We
need to identify those that offer the greatest return on
investment and prioritize them. We also need to test
some of these ideas, especially in the field. South
Sudan, for example, should the Security Council
authorize a United Nations mission there, may present
opportunities. But we must also be realistic. Some
recommendations need systemic change, and they will
take some time.

6

Where do we go from here? I look forward to
hearing Council members’ views on the report and
what they consider to be opportunities for early action.
The Secretary-General will wish to reflect on these as
he considers how to take the report forward. He will
then indicate which recommendations he intends to
implement, and how — probably in the form of a
report to the membership after the summer. This will
be a long journey, and we are just beginning here.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Malcorra for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Eugène-Richard
Gasana.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank the Security Council for its evergrowing interest in the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) by inviting us from time to time to contribute to
the Council’s lofty undertaking, as enormous and
invaluable as it is for human kind as a whole. Allow
me also to formally reiterate my congratulations, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month.
(spoke in English)
The Peacebuilding Commission has prioritized
national ownership as a central principle in ensuring
sustainable peace and preventing a relapse into
conflict. To that end, beyond rhetoric and slogans, the
Commission believes that ownership is best understood
and meaningful in the context of three primary areas,
namely, first, a national vision for, and leadership of,
the political and peacebuilding processes; secondly,
adequate human and institutional capacities in critical
areas of security, governance and economic generation;
and, thirdly, the inclusiveness of all segments of the
society.
The Commission considers the review of civilian
capacity as a window of opportunity for the
international community to address the second area,
namely, the adequate development of human and
institutional capacities, and to recognize the urgency
with which we need to improve our collective response
to that challenging task. In the context of taking
forward the relevant recommendations from the 2010
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, the Commission has prioritized national
capacity development for the countries on its agenda as
a key area requiring immediate attention this year.

11-33213

S/PV.6533

In that connection, the Commission was
periodically engaged throughout the consultative
process which produced the ambitious report
(S/2011/85) that is before us today. The members of the
Commission have also been closely involved through
the informal consultative group chaired by Canada, a
member of the Commission and the Chair of its Sierra
Leone configuration. Recently, following the release of
the report, the Commission had informal interactions
with our outstanding and efficient Under-SecretaryGeneral, Susana Malcorra, Chair of the Steering
Group, who shared with us her thinking on the next
steps to be taken.
There is a need to operationalize actions across
the four areas covered by the report: ownership,
partnership, expertise and nimbleness. We appreciate
the fact that in order to operationalize the outcome of
the review, we must prioritize those actions that could
deliver the most immediate and tangible improvements
in the field. However, we recognize also that high
expectations have already been generated by the
process. We hope that we can, to the extent possible,
match practicality with expectations, and realism with
the urgency of introducing changes. I am not
suggesting that this will be a simple task for the
Secretary-General, as it will necessarily feed into the
broader efforts of United Nations reform.
On substance, I would like to touch on the
following elements, which the Commission deems of
particular significance in going forward.
First, capacity needs in the countries concerned
must be viewed within the framework of the most
pressing peacebuilding needs and priorities, which are
country-specific and time-bound. Therefore, the
priority-setting exercise must be owned nationally, and
our response must be demand-driven.
Secondly, we need to improve the way in which
we identify and classify existing national and local
capacities. Practical mechanisms that could enable,
train and deploy such capacities, including among the
diaspora, must be put in place. Our focus must be on
enabling, not substituting for, local capacities.
Thirdly, leveraging capacities and expertise in the
neighbouring regions, the global South and among
women and civil society actors is a key feature of the
review. We recognize, however, that translating that
objective into practical reality will be particularly
challenging, not least on the funding front. Enabling a

11-33213

more
peacebuilding-oriented
focus
and
the
interoperability of existing South-South cooperation
and capacity-building mechanisms with United Nations
system-wide mechanisms deserves our immediate
attention.
Fourthly, women’s empowerment must remain a
high-priority area in the context of this exercise. We
need to approach this area in conjunction with ongoing
efforts to strengthen women’s participation in
peacebuilding processes, as indicated in the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/466) and his
seven-point action plan.
Member States have expressed their wish to
remain closely engaged in and consulted throughout
the process leading to the Secretary-General’s
submission of his report on operationalizing the
review. As a forum that works across organizational
boundaries and addresses the entire continuum of
peacebuilding
activities,
the
Peacebuilding
Commission stands ready to offer a space for such
consultations, bringing together a broad range of
stakeholders. That might help to facilitate coherence
and complementarity with ongoing efforts and
initiatives, such as the operationalizing of the World
Development Report 2011. In that connection, we also
look forward to performing our function as an advisory
body to the Security Council and the General Assembly
as the two organs take forward their respective
legislative mandates.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana for his statement. The
Council believes that the work being carried out by the
Peacebuilding Commission is of the greatest
importance, and I wish to thank all three speakers for
the contributions they made.
I now give the floor to members of the Council
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I, too, wish
to thank former Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno
and Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for their
statements and the Senior Advisory Group that
Mr. Guéhenno chaired for their excellent efforts. I am
grateful also to Ambassador Gasana for his statement
and for his very able leadership of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The United States welcomes this important and
timely report (S/2011/85) on civilian capacity in the

7

S/PV.6533

aftermath of conflict. We appreciate its level of
ambition, and we look forward to studying its
recommendations and working with colleagues on
ways to take the agenda forward together.
When new Governments emerge from the ashes
of devastating conflict, they face countless challenges.
These range from establishing critical State functions
and services to shepherding political transition and
building confidence among former adversaries to
laying the groundwork for economic recovery and
longer-term development.
Peace is always too long in coming after bloody
conflict, but even when we see it coming, we are often
not well prepared to offer the most timely and relevant
support. Countries seeking to rebuild cannot afford the
average six months or more it can take to identify and
deploy the expertise they need. When there is a
requirement for specialized capabilities, whether
judges or police trainers, legal and constitutional
experts, public administrators or economic advisers,
our instruments are often not well tailored to deliver.
As much as post-conflict countries may need
support from external partners, we are also very much
mindful of the reviews urging us not to overlook
capacity that may already be in place, even in the most
damaged areas. We need to ensure that international
efforts enhance capacities that already exist rather than
displace or replace them.
We appreciate the main themes of the review: the
call for much greater seriousness about national
ownership, the openness to wider and more diverse
partnerships, the importance of expertise relevant to
specific contexts and the need for management
practices that are responsive to fluid post-conflict
environments. We welcome the practical, concrete
recommendations. We see this exercise as an important
opportunity to draw together and to enhance some of
our existing efforts to strengthen peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and internal support to peace processes.
We fully support the review’s emphasis on gender and
its ideas for recruiting and retaining more women
across the United Nations and the wider international
system.
At this stage we would
consideration of several issues.

welcome

further

First, as has been mentioned, we will soon be
formulating a mandate for a new mission in South

8

Sudan, and we see this as an opportunity, as has been
suggested, to advance some of the review’s important
ideas in this context. We would welcome an
opportunity — as a Council and interactively with our
colleagues from the Secretariat — to explore how best
to do this.
Secondly, we need to ask ourselves what the
Secretariat can already do, now, to improve its ability
to identify and deploy relevant civilian expertise, and
how Member States can best support these efforts.
Thirdly, the review underscores the need for
closer cooperation between international financial
institutions and the political and security presences, as
we have just discussed — a point that was also
underscored by the 2011 World Development Report on
conflict-affected and fragile States. What can we do
now to forge more productive partnerships with the
international financial institutions and donor entities?
In this Chamber we know all too well that it is
not enough for soldiers to keep the peace unless
parallel efforts are made to address the underlying
drivers of conflict and to build the foundation for a
lasting peace that will enable troops to return home.
This civilian capacity review report makes an
important contribution to helping us get this right.
There is much here to digest, assess and debate.
We
appreciate
Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra’s appeal to prioritize, and we welcome her
leadership. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
ongoing commitment to this issue, and now our
work — that of the membership — begins. We have an
important new opportunity to make progress in our
collective efforts to support countries recovering from
war. Let us work together to seize it.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I have listened
with much interest to what the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission has had to say, as well as to
the briefings by the Chair of the Senior Advisory
Group and by Under-Secretary-General Malcorra.
Peacekeeping operations mandated by this
Council have been the main instrument for United
Nations action on the ground for conflict resolution.
They have stood the test of time and will remain the
critical pillar of United Nations activities for years to
come. They have also provided the umbrella for
peacebuilding activities. However, over the years, we
in this Council have invariably added to the mandates

11-33213

S/PV.6533

of peacekeeping missions. The critical imperative is
therefore for placing adequate resources at their
disposal.
As many of the situations where United Nations
peacekeeping missions are operating are those of
prolonged conflict or are post conflict, it is essential
that the United Nations missions involve themselves in
building local capacities for the provision of basic
administration and essential services. Civilian
capacities are critical in this endeavour, and their
presence in a significantly enhanced manner in United
Nations peacekeeping missions has to engage us here
in the United Nations as Member States.
We are very appreciative of the work done by
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno and the Senior Advisory
Group in examining the issue in detail and making
recommendations on how enhanced civilian capacity
could be incorporated in the work of the United
Nations in post-conflict situations. We have also noted
that the Secretary-General has set up a steering group
to facilitate follow-up of the report of the independent
review on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict
(see S/2011/85) and that Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra will be leading that effort.
This is a detailed report, and the issues of
enhanced civilian capacities require that we engage
ourselves as Member States. At the United Nations we
have a number of institutions in which we will have to
do this, including the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.
Significantly enhancing civilian capacities will have a
major impact on the staffing, resourcing and impact of
peacekeeping missions, but these must neither dilute
nor detract from the requirements of peacekeeping.
The open framework and the cluster approach to
identifying tasks and responsibilities in the aftermath
of conflict could help in better defining peacebuilding
priorities and tasks. The concept of a lead agency has
to be reconciled with the requirement of unity of
command, so essential in peacekeeping, and to ensure
that peacebuilding does not fall victim to turf battles.
There will also be demands for creating entities in New
York to administer these advanced civilian capacities.
We need to avoid setting up large and top-heavy
bureaucratic structures. Our focus must remain on the
field and delivery there.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) has been acting on the provision of police

11-33213

capacities for many years, and I am happy that India
has been able to contribute both formed police units —
including the first female formed police unit — and
senior police personnel to serve in management and
command positions.
The report has identified several critical areas for
providing core government functions where civilian
capacities are best suited. India has been included as
one of the countries whose capacity in several of these
areas has been noticed for possible tapping by the
United Nations. In the past, when called upon to
provide civilian capacities for United Nations missions,
India has responded promptly. I recall the secondment
of several of our civilian officials to United Nations
missions in the former Yugoslavia and even right now
in Afghanistan.
The report has underscored recognition of
national ownership and the importance of support to
core government functions to ensure success in
preventing relapse into conflict. It is critical that
national ownership is accepted in its real sense, and not
only by way of lip service while actually pushing for
the solutions favoured by the donors. It is also critical
that civilian capacity deployments are demand-driven.
My delegation believes that the recruitment
model should give primacy to a partnership with
Governments of Member States and involve the
secondment of Government officials. It is also
important to ensure gender balance. This has a number
of advantages. It gives the United Nations rapid access
to the required capacities, allowing rapid scaling up
and scaling down of capacities. Above all it provides
capacities that are trained to work in and establish
government structures, and it would mesh well with the
peacekeeping personnel on the ground. The DPKO has
a fourth-generation model. Perhaps that too could be
used to generate civilian capacities from Governments
of Member States.
My delegation also believes that the capacities
that are being sourced must be relevant to the
conditions in post-conflict situations. The expertise
that is most relevant and actually tried on the ground is
in developing countries that have undertaken
successful efforts in recent times in building
government structures and arranging for better delivery
of basic services. There is an international shift in
many fields towards sourcing capabilities from the
global South, driven by sound economic and functional

9

S/PV.6533

considerations. United Nations efforts to source
civilian capacities from developing nations would be in
consonance with these broad prints.
The United Nations remains, in the eyes of the
affected,
the
most
credible
and
legitimate
representative of the international community. Its
peacekeeping activities have provided the bedrock of
this trust. It is imperative that civilian capacities add to
this credibility.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank Jean-Marie
Guéhenno and Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra for their comprehensive briefings. I would
like to commend Mr. Guéhenno and the Senior Advisor
Group for their excellent review of civilian capacity in
the aftermath of conflict (see S/2011/85). I am also
happy to see Ambassador Gasana, the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission, here among us, and I
thank him for his contribution.
This is a welcome opportunity to start a collective
effort. The key challenge, particularly in the period
immediately following a ceasefire or a peace
agreement, is this: how to secure the best civilian
capacities needed to build sustainable peace. This
includes the re-establishment of institutions of
government, rule of law, respect for human rights and
economic revitalization.
The response of the international community and
the United Nations in this field is still too fragmented
and often too late. We need to do better to enable
national ownership, to work in partnership and to
improve the effectiveness, appropriateness and
timeliness of United Nations support to conflictaffected countries.
We therefore welcome the findings of the
independent report, including the recognition of the
critical role of women in peacebuilding. We also
welcome and support the leadership of UnderSecretary-General Malcorra to take forward the
implementation process with the Steering Group.
When considering the next steps in the follow-up
to the report, I would like to highlight three priorities.
First, all efforts should aim at the leanest system
that works and is needs-based, flexible and resultsoriented. This also includes working towards leaner
and more flexible missions in terms of civilian staff
wherever possible. Duplication within the United
Nations system and gaps need to be identified and

10

addressed. Recruitment procedures for civilian experts
need to be streamlined and simplified. As the report
points out, the United Nations can implement many of
the recommendations without legislative changes. I
would like to encourage the Secretary-General to take
all the necessary steps to that end, and to welcome the
intention to develop a prioritized road map on the way
ahead, which should also indicate where action by
Member States is required.
Secondly, instead of setting up new and costly
structures, focus needs to be on making better use of
existing resources and systems already in place.
Partnerships are an essential element in this context,
including South-South cooperation. The European
Union has a broad set of instruments and expertise
through its Common Security and Defence Policy and
its civilian crisis management missions. We encourage
the Secretariat to pool the efforts to deliver and train
resources, as proposed by the European Union in
yesterday’s debate in the General Assembly.
Building on partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
will also be vital, as is making use of the tools and
instruments provided by the international financial
institutions, notably the World Bank, and engaging the
private sector.
Germany stands ready to provide expertise
through our Center for International Peace Operations,
to assist the compact support team to be established by
Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra. The
Center
maintains a national stand-by roster of trained experts
who are ready to be deployed in peace operations of
the United Nations, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The Center also offers to provide in-mission training,
and we look forward to discussing this in detail with
the compact support team.
Thirdly, it is important to draw on lessons
learned, best practices and evaluation results. The
cluster approach of the humanitarian system was
recently evaluated in 2010, and the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee is currently working on
implementing the recommendations. Existing reform
processes, such as the implementation of the global
field support strategy, need to be taken into account.
We should start to take concrete steps without
delay. South Sudan could be, as was pointed out, the
first test case and starting point. Critical needs, notably

11-33213

S/PV.6533

the establishment of Government institutions and
justice, will have to be addressed swiftly. Attention
should therefore be paid to identifying and supporting
effectively national capacities, including the capacities
of the diasporas. Furthermore, the Security Council
will have to consider the initiation of peacebuilding in
mandates and, from the outset of a mandate, how best
to integrate the building of partnerships.
It is not for the Security Council alone to follow
up on the process. Joint action is required by the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat and United Nations
bodies, including the Peacebuilding Commission and
the General Assembly. Creating effective ways to make
civilian capacity available to support peacebuilding in
conflict-affected countries is the best way to secure
national ownership and make peace and reconstruction
sustainable. My country is willing to work with the
United Nations and all partners to that end.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the report by the Senior Advisory Group (see
S/2011/85) on the review of international civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict. We welcome the
briefings by Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Chair of the Senior
Advisory Group for the review of international civilian
capacity, and by Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support Susana Malcorra. I also thank Ambassador
Gasana, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
his statement.
As communities emerge from conflict, they often
face a critical shortage of capacities needed to secure
sustainable socio-economic development, lasting peace
and security and much-needed stability. More often
than not, we have seen that countries emerging from
conflict lack the very basic capacities to run a
Government. They experience setbacks in their
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
processes and are confronted with distressed
economies. This state of affairs increases the likelihood
of relapse into conflict.
International civilian capacities will require
strengthening in providing support in the following
areas: political processes; the re-establishment of
national institutions; the reform of judicial systems; the
promotion of respect for human rights; transitional
justice mechanisms, including truth and reconciliation
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes; the integration of armed forces; and, more
important, economic recovery.

11-33213

Today’s debate gives us an opportunity to explore
how the United Nations and international players,
including the donor community, could better utilize
existing international civilian capacities and resources
to complement existing local and national capacities in
countries emerging from conflict.
It the light of this, my delegation welcomes the
recommendations made in the report of the Senior
Advisory Group. These recommendations are
important, as they are aimed at strengthening national
ownership, broadening and deepening the pool of
international civilian capacities and improving the
appropriateness, timeliness and effectiveness of United
Nations support.
The United Nations has traditionally focused on
humanitarian and peacekeeping operations, and there
has been little success in supporting and enabling the
national capacities that are essential for enduring
peace.
My delegation would like to focus on only two of
the main recommendations in the report, namely,
national ownership and building partnerships.
Given the effects of conflict, local capacities may
be weakened, thus making them unavailable or scarce.
In other situations, although ravaged by conflict, there
will still be more national capacity than is at first
apparent. Such latent capacities must be protected and
nurtured. My delegation would like to emphasize the
salience of ensuring that national capacities are central,
and not just an appendage in post-conflict
reconstruction. The failure to tap into capacities that
are already in place, or to nurture and strengthen such
capacities where they are lacking, will create a
dangerous dependency syndrome, which will continue
to stretch the meagre resources of the international
community.
By developing international civilian capacities,
we will be encouraging sustainable development as the
key to ensuring that countries do not relapse into
conflict. We need to acknowledge that we have not
sufficiently tapped into existing international
capacities, in particular from the global South and the
North. As we seek to broaden and deepen the pool of
civilian capacities and experts, we also need to utilize
the comparative advantage of regional and subregional
organizations and leverage the crucial but often
neglected capacity of women.

11

S/PV.6533

South Africa recognizes the importance of both
national ownership and building partnerships. In order
to develop local capacities, my Government has begun
capacity-building programmes for countries emerging
from conflict. For example, in addition to our recent
humble contribution in Burundi in the area of election
management, as recognized by Mr. Guéhenno today,
we have, over the years, contributed to the training of
over 1,500 officials of the Government of South Sudan
in cross-cutting fields including diplomacy, public
service and public finance and management. We have
also entered into a triangular partnership with
Germany, to provide training in South Sudan on
correctional, judicial and legal services.
As is always the case, the development of
national and international civilian capacities in the
aftermath of conflict will not succeed without the
provision of predictable, flexible and sustainable
sources of funding. My delegation looks forward to
further interactions on the report on civilian capacities
as Under-Secretary-General Malcorra takes forward the
report’s recommendations.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Many thanks to
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also
express my thanks for the briefings that we have heard.
Given the mounting demands on the United Nations to
support countries emerging from conflict, such as the
Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire, this debate provides a timely
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to improve the
effectiveness of the United Nations in peacebuilding.
I would like to thank Mr. Guéhenno, the Senior
Advisory Group and the team based in the
Peacebuilding Support Office for their efforts in
generating the report before us (see S/2011/85). I am
also delighted that Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra has been appointed to lead its
implementation. We fully support the overarching
approach of the report.
The international community, including the
United Nations, needs to be much more effective in
helping build national capacities in post-conflict
countries. The focus needs initially to be on building
institutions that can generate the critical survival
functions of the State: security, the rule of law and the
economy. Without progress on security, justice and
jobs, people will have little confidence in a nascent
peace process or the State authorities. However, that
will need to expand rapidly into other expected State

12

functions, such as basic services, infrastructure and
economic management.
Getting the right civilian expertise deployed
promptly to help a country deliver those core functions
is therefore critical, but, as the report emphasizes, local
capacity should have primacy. International capacity
should only be used as a last resort. It is therefore
important that international support be based on a
thorough assessment of existing local capacity.
To help where international deployments are
needed, we support the proposal of establishing a
civilian partnerships cell so that the United Nations can
better tap into the expertise of Member States, regional
organizations and other partners. Such a cell will help
to widen the network of expertise and thus improve the
ability to select people with intimate knowledge of a
region or post-conflict needs. A network of centres of
excellence will help to improve the quality and
availability of experts and the supply to the United
Nations and others. We need to see the benefits of such
recommendations working quickly on the ground.
The report also rightly highlights the need for
effective leadership. Successful United Nations
missions depend on strong leadership. We must select
the best candidates based on competence alone. We
support the need for better training of leaders so that
they can manage the post-conflict response more
effectively.
We also agree with the need for greater unity of
effort so that we have a clear sense within the United
Nations of who is doing what. That will be supported
by having a clearer delineation of roles and
responsibilities for the core peacebuilding sectors.
Without that, we will not get the right investment to
ensure a predictable and professional response. That is
ever more important in an environment where
resources are constrained.
However, we feel that some of the report’s
recommendations need further clarity and consultation,
particularly those concerning the flexibility of mission
resources. We welcome Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra’s plans to consult closely with Member States
as that and other recommendations are taken up. Where
recommendations are taken forward, that must happen
within existing resource allocations.

11-33213

S/PV.6533

Finally, we welcome the plan for the SecretaryGeneral to prepare a response to this initial report in
the autumn.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): The
mobilization and the deployment of civilian expertise
in post-conflict situations is one of the priorities of
United Nations peacebuilding activity. In May 2008,
under the United Kingdom presidency, the Council
addressed this issue for the first time (see S/PV.5895).
The Council emphasized the need to swiftly deploy
civilian expertise in the two years following the end of
a conflict.
Allow me, too, to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno and Under-Secretary-General Ms. Susana
Malcorra for their presentation of the report of the
Senior Advisory Group tasked with considering this
issue (see S/2011/85). I would also like to thank
Ambassador Gasana for his intervention, providing the
point of view of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
which we give our full support.
On the one hand, the report enables us to
highlight the shortfalls in the transition between
peacekeeping activities and the restoration of peace. It
also enables us to assess peacebuilding experiences in
recent years in Afghanistan, Somalia, Burundi, GuineaBissau and the Central African Republic in order to
draw relevant lessons. Countries emerging from
conflict often lack the means needed to establish
lasting peace, in particular in areas such as the
restoration of a judicial system and administration,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform and the re-establishment of
economic activity and social services, such as
education, health care and so on.
My delegation supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General seeking to establish a reliable
and credible partnership between countries in crisis and
the international community that takes account of the
country’s potential, the aspirations and real needs of its
people and the leadership of local authorities in order
to better direct the aid and the many kinds of support
of the international community.
It is vital that such a partnership is ultimately
based on strong national ownership, in particular in the
areas of justice, basic services and the critical functions
of the Administration. By receiving international
assistance, the State emerging from conflict must
regain the exercise of its sovereign prerogatives in

11-33213

those areas. The partnership between the State
receiving assistance and the international community
should be carried out under the leadership and
governance of the relevant State, even in the absence of
national human resources.
We welcome what the United Nations has already
undertaken in recent years with training programmes
for the civilian and military personnel of States in
transition, or already in a post-conflict situation, so that
such personnel can take on the tasks transferred to
them and replace the external staff deployed in the
context of such missions. The situations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Timor-Leste and
Afghanistan are instructive in that regard. Such
capacity-building is crucial to better consolidate the
gains of peace and post-conflict stabilization.
For its part, the Council has a central role to play
given that the mandates of peacekeeping operations
increasingly entail consolidation and reconstruction
tasks. It is therefore our duty to focus on the structure
and new mandates of operations, to ensure that the
resources allocated are sufficient for the assigned tasks
and to have a bearing on effective implementation in
order to fully realize the potential for consolidation and
reconstruction in countries emerging from conflict.
My delegation would like to underscore the view
of the Advisory Group that assistance to a country in
the post-conflict period must respect the country’s
priorities and real needs. That is the basis of ownership
and the guarantee of better results on the ground.
In conclusion, we welcome the establishment of
the team that Ms. Malcorra will lead to examine the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Group. We are convinced that their
conclusions will make it possible to increase the
effectiveness of missions on the ground and the
possibilities for lasting stability of countries emerging
from conflict.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Guéhenno and
Ms. Malcorra for their briefings on the report of the
Senior Advisory Group (see S/2011/85) and to
Mr. Gasana, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his comments.
We believe that the report reflects the main
problems in peacebuilding. Indeed, it provides
excellent food for thought and could serve as a

13

S/PV.6533

platform for cooperation among Member States in
determining the optimal means of assisting countries
overcoming the consequences of conflict. We will
carefully study the report, and we are ready for an
exchange of views with the various partners.
We support the two main thrusts of the report.
The first is that civilian specialists must be deployed
rapidly, and second is that deployment must be focused
on maximizing the use of and strengthening national
institutions and national capacities. Like our
colleagues, we are ready to discuss the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on the subject.
In general and in principle, we would like to note
that any form of assistance from the international
community must be provided with the consent of
national Governments, while respecting national
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Assistance should
be tailored to each country. It is important to
understand that one of the main elements of postconflict peacebuilding is the strengthening of national
institutional capacity. We are pleased that this principle
is reflected very clearly in the report.
This universal organization, the United Nations,
should play the coordinating role in international
peacebuilding efforts, owing to its unique experience
and legitimacy. The United Nations should coordinate
all efforts by countries to implement the decisions
taken. In practical terms, with respect to the concrete
proposals in the report, we would like to make several
comments.
First, we have questions about the use of reserves
in the area of civilian components in United Nations
field missions deployed under Security Council
mandates. How balanced would that be in terms of
geographical representation? How much would it
reflect the actual capacity of Member States?
Secondly, in our view, it is important to avoid
contradictions between efforts to build capacity in the
post-conflict period and the deployment of specialists
from international structures outside the United
Nations for post-conflict development.
Thirdly, in terms of resources, the report requires
further
details,
given
that
some
of
the
recommendations will, in our opinion, have serious
implications, not only for the current rules, but also for
the core principles governing the financing of United
Nations field operations. Here I refer in particular to

14

the degree of control by Member States over the
implementation of their decisions and to the use of the
Organization’s resources that are made available under
mandates.
With respect to the recommendations on staff
policies, we also believe that there is a need to more
closely analyse the reforms recently completed in those
areas.
Financing and logistics policies need to be more
flexible in terms of how resources are allocated for
field mission budgets. Interaction among the various
agencies of the United Nations should be enhanced.
Also worth mentioning are the components for
deploying the global field support strategy, which is
being discussed in the General Assembly. We think
those ideas should be discussed in detail in the
Assembly’s Fifth Committee before pursuing their
implementation.
We have noted that the report contains several
recommendations for creating specialized structures in
the Secretariat, such as a Civilian Partnerships Cell,
and for studying such partnerships and their creation
on the ground. That idea should be studied in advance
and its potential functions described in greater detail.
On the whole, however, we would prefer to retain the
mechanisms already in place.
Reserves could require considerable expense, and
there might not be enough specialists. We are ready to
continue working with the representatives of the
Secretariat in studying the details of the specialist
rosters and other mechanisms described in the report.
The review of the recommendations in the report
and of the Secretary-General could indeed help the
various organs form more effective operational and
economical approaches for the deployment of civilian
personnel in post-conflict situations.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank the Secretary-General and the Senior
Advisory Group for their efforts in preparing the report
before the Council today (see S/2011/85). It contains
many important ideas. We would also like to thank
Mr. Guéhenno, Ms. Malcorra and Ambassador Gasana
for their detailed briefings.
If strengthening civilian capacity does not lead to
the establishment of peace, then civilian capacity will
not have a direct impact on many vital sectors in terms
of peacebuilding, for instance in stabilizing the

11-33213

S/PV.6533

security situation, strengthening State institutions and
ensuring development. The Security Council has noted
the close correlation between strengthening State
institutions and social development, on the one hand,
and achieving lasting peace, on the other. It did so
during the two debates organized this year under the
presidencies of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Brazil,
respectively (6472nd and 6479th meetings).
In terms of future actions, we welcome the
formation of a steering group, to be led by UnderSecretary-General Malcorra, to ensure follow-up of the
implementation of the report and its recommendations.
We encourage her to ensure that the follow-up process
is based on close consultations with Member States and
the parties concerned, and that it leads to concrete
recommendations on the best way of translating the
initiatives described in the report into reality.
In that regard, we would like to highlight three
aspects of the report, which in our view should be
given close attention as part of efforts to create a road
map for the implementation of the report’s
recommendations.
First is national ownership. Like other speakers,
we wish to emphasize the importance of guaranteeing
national ownership in societies emerging from conflict.
National actors are indeed the primary stakeholders in
peacebuilding efforts. They are in the best position to
understand the needs of their society and to optimally
respond to them.
While the report has devoted considerable
attention to the best way of guaranteeing national
ownership, it is still true that experience has shown
that implementing such initiatives is an extremely
complex undertaking. In the future, we hope to see
practical proposals for the best way in which to
guarantee national ownership, which could be achieved
through the activities of civilian experts on the ground,
and on how those experts can help to enhance national
capacities.
Second is the issue of women’s empowerment.
Women are essential partners in peacebuilding. We
note, however, that this important category is often
excluded, in spite of the fact that women account for
half of the population of societies emerging from
conflict. In this respect, we hope that concrete
proposals will be made concerning women’s
empowerment and involvement that guarantee their
economic autonomy and access to basic services, such

11-33213

as health services and education, in societies emerging
from conflict.
Third is the issue of partnerships. Partnerships are
a fundamental pillar of the United Nations ability to
deploy civilian capacity in a flexible, effective and
timely manner. In this respect, we believe that we
should first consider the expertise available in the
country concerned, and then in the region, and then
among countries of the South, and then at the
international level. We should clarify the best way for
the activities of a civilian partnership cell to contribute
to mobilizing the expertise of countries of the South.
Finally, we hope that the United Nations will
streamline its consideration of civilian capacity and the
challenges ahead, particularly since such consideration
is taking place in the broader framework of the efforts
of the Secretary-General and Member States to ensure
that our Organization can best respond to the needs of
societies for peace and development.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno and Ambassador
Eugène-Richard
Gasana
for
their
valuable
presentations. We appreciate the comprehensive review
undertaken by the Senior Advisory Group on postconflict civilian capacities, and we wish Ms. Malcorra
success in her endeavours as the leader of the Steering
Group established by the Secretary-General.
Brazil welcomes this exchange of views on the
recommendations presented by the Senior Advisory
Group. Given the importance of this issue and its
system-wide reach, we would encourage further
consultations in a broader setting that can incorporate
the views and inputs of the wider membership.
The review is an opportunity to translate into
practice the idea that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
are parts of an integrated and non-sequential process.
Those dimensions are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. We cannot lose sight of the main objective
of the review, which is to better address the needs of
countries emerging from conflicts. In this regard, we
appreciate the priority given by the report (see
S/2011/85) to the use of national capacities and their
development. When international experts are deployed,
they must be able to train local personnel and foment
their use by the local Government. Just as important,
those sent to the field are expected to deal with and

15

S/PV.6533

understand the local reality with due regard for the
priorities established by national stakeholders.
The sustainability of the gains in security and
stability achieved with the help of peacekeeping
missions greatly depends upon the capacity of the local
Government to resume its core functions. Any
successful exit strategy must therefore be accompanied
by the development of national capacities and the
strengthening of local institutions and political
processes. It is thus very important that peacekeeping
mandates be supplemented as soon as possible by
peacebuilding activities that can help to strengthen
national institutions and to develop local expertise. An
effective deployment of civilian capacities can give
United Nations peacekeeping missions a lighter
footprint, as envisioned in the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809).
The deployment of military and police forces is
one of the distinctive characteristics of peacekeeping.
However, the role of the civilian component should not
be underestimated. We strongly believe that the
deployment of civilian experts to support economic
and social policies in the early stages of recovery can
create the conditions for a long-lasting peace. We agree
that partnerships are an important tool for expanding
capacities in post-conflict countries. Cooperation
among countries facing similar difficulties is of
particular relevance, which makes it preferable to seek
international capacities in the same region or to
stimulate South-South cooperation, as already
underscored by previous speakers.
The use of experts within the modality of experts
on mission and the establishment of civilian support
packages in close coordination with Member States are
interesting options that could enable developing
countries to offer more civilian expertise, including in
aforementioned areas such as finance management,
public administration, health and education. In the
context of United Nations peacekeeping, these
proposals could contribute to more effective mandate
implementation.
Brazil stands ready to contribute to the
implementation of the recommendations presented by
the Senior Advisory Group with a view to enhancing
our collective capacity to help post-conflict countries
reach sustainable peace.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Susana Malcorra

16

and the Chair of the Senior Advisory Group, Mr. JeanMarie Guéhenno, for their briefings on the findings in
the report of the independent review on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict (S/2011/85) and
for their views on the way ahead for the
implementation of the suggested recommendations. I
also thank Ambassador Gasana for his useful
contribution to this debate.
Portugal is very supportive of the approach and
of the major findings of the report of the Senior
Advisory Group. The report should, in our view,
become a reference document for the planning and
management of peacebuilding activities, not just by the
United Nations, but also by other multilateral and
bilateral actors. Allow me to underline some elements
related not only to the report but also to the wider topic
of civilian capabilities that, in our view, deserve
particular attention.
First, I would like to underline the importance of
fostering national ownership in initiatives aimed at
State-building backed by the international community.
There is certainly a long way to go to increase levels of
ownership, but the report is very clear in identifying, as
the first priority of post-conflict assistance, the
strengthening of national capacities for fulfilling core
functions of the State. Choices always have to be
made. Thus, international efforts should be directed to
ensure that decisions on policy objectives and priorities
are taken by national actors and that international
efforts are there mainly to assist, and not to replace,
those of State authorities.
Secondly, we should view civilian assistance
tasks as requiring attention from the early stages of
post-conflict reconstruction. Mandates should be clear
in identifying the role and functions of peacekeepers as
early peacebuilders in such areas as the
multidimensional tasks of rule of law and security
sector reform. The United Nations must ensure a
comprehensive and integrated approach to its presence
in a given country, and work on concrete measures to
improve the linkage between civilian and political
tasks and those tasks traditionally performed by
peacekeepers. In many situations, this articulation is
crucial to preventing a relapse into conflict.
Thirdly, we are very encouraged by the
recommendations regarding the capacity of the United
Nations to provide the kind of civilian expertise that is
needed in a particular post-conflict situation. Our

11-33213

S/PV.6533

understanding is that the United Nations must show
greater flexibility and adaptability to changing
situations. If certain tasks are no longer necessary,
resources allocated to those tasks should be transferred
to others requiring more attention. The reallocation of
resources should be conducted in close consultation
with national authorities, identifying and filling
existing capacity gaps.
Finally, and in connection with the previous
point, I would underline the need for coordination with
international actors, which in the report is presented as
the establishment of partnerships for ensuring that
technical expertise is readily available when needed.
Articulation is therefore a central concern in the other
stages of post-conflict assistance because it would be
much more difficult to adapt and to accommodate
different actors at a later stage. However, we should
ensure that there is clarity as to who is leading each
particular international assistance process in order to
avoid duplication of efforts.
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Chair of the Senior
Advisory Group, and Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra for their briefings, as well as Ambassador
Gasana for his comments.
Post-conflict peacebuilding is an important part
of the United Nations work that is of great significance
not only for realizing sustained peace and development
in the countries concerned, but also for strengthening
the existing collective security system and promoting
the common development of humankind. Professional
and efficient civilian capacity represents an important
foundation and prerequisite for the smooth conduct of
the work of the United Nations.
The Senior Advisory Group led by Mr. Guéhenno
has submitted its report (see S/2011/85), which
contains concrete proposals highlighting ownership,
partnership, expertise and nimbleness. China welcomes
this. We hope that the Steering Group to be led by
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra will seriously study
and follow up on the plans so as to formulate workable
recommendations for the United Nations.
I wish to elaborate on a number of points. First,
full use should be made of the resources of host
countries, which would promote ownership by host
countries of peacebuilding processes. Given their more
in-depth knowledge of their own societies,
professionals from host countries can play a unique

11-33213

role in United Nations peacebuilding activities. More
important, after the withdrawal of peacebuilders, a
group of professionals will be left behind in host
countries, thus reinforcing national capacities and
sustaining peace and development.
Secondly, the targeted selection of personnel
should be strengthened. Security sector reform, the rule
of law, human rights and economic and social
development are the priorities for peacebuilding. The
United Nations and the international community
should, in line with the conditions and needs of the
host country, focus on recruiting, selecting and training
professionals in these areas, thus contributing to the
capacity-building of the host countries.
Thirdly, personnel management should be
strengthened. We must focus on taking advantage of
the expertise to be found in developing countries and
regional organizations, and step up efforts to recruit
civilian experts from developing countries. Members
of the United Nations should be encouraged to actively
train and recommend talent to the United Nations, and
to work with the United Nations in building and
replenishing talent pools. In recruiting civilian experts,
the Secretariat should continue to implement the
principles of openness, equity and transparency,
improve its vetting procedures, and seek in advance
opinions of Member States relating to mechanisms,
criteria and guiding principles.
Fourthly, reliable financial resources and security
must be provided. We hope that countries in a position
to do so will continue to provide practical support and
that the United Nations will further optimize its
management mechanisms and make rational use of
existing resources so as to achieve the maximum
possible benefits.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
would like to thank Mr. Guéhenno for his concise
briefing and his able stewardship of the Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities. We are also grateful to Ms. Malcorra
for sharing the invaluable perspective of the
Department of Field Support on this issue. We also
recognize the presence of Ambassador Gasana, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and appreciate his
contribution to this debate.
The civilian capacity review is an ambition yet
necessary advancement in the effort to make our
service delivery more responsive to the needs of

17

S/PV.6533

Member States in the twenty-first century. As threats to
peace and stability increasingly arise from health and
environmental hazards, as well as from armed conflict,
our response mechanisms must be recalibrated and
optimized. The framework so well delineated in the
report before us (see S/2011/85) provides a solid
foundation for this project. Nigeria accordingly
supports the vision of the review.
The four key pillars which frame the
recommendations are very well defined. They aim to
strengthen national ownership, broaden and deepen the
pool of international civilian capacity and improve the
appropriateness, timeliness and effectiveness of United
Nations support. There are several peacekeeping and
peacebuilding programmes that would benefit from a
better harnessing of the capacities of all actors. Indeed,
transition situations, such as in South Sudan, that we
have identified this morning present opportunities to
identify best practices in applying civilian capabilities
in consonance with nationally determined priorities.
The need to assess local needs and existing local
capacities, including the capacity to absorb assistance,
before we even set about deploying international
capacities has often been central to our discussion,
especially in the Council. This is mostly true of
countries emerging from conflict, which face critical
shortages of the capacities and institutions to sustain
peace. The United Nations system has an obligation to
support the development of home-grown capacities
while temporarily filling the gaps to re-establish the
rule of law and restore basic services.
With this review, we now have a policy proposal
that will determine how these strategies are
implemented in the field. As the report seeks to enlist
all the key actors in this endeavour, we are encouraged
by the initial steps taken by the United Nations
Development Programme and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to review their
needs and capacity assessment methodologies to better
attune their work in the field. We sincerely hope that
the DPKO and the Council can together find ways to
reflect certain elements of the review when renewing
peacekeeping mandates.
I must say that we are encouraged that the review
addressed even the most sensitive areas of analysis,
including training for better leaders among a civilian
core and creating a culture of accountability. The
recommendations in this regard acknowledge that, as a

18

facilitator and partner for peace, the United Nations
must be guided in its every action by the needs and
priorities of the communities that we serve.
Nigeria would very much like to see this review
as a catalyst for change. It is with satisfaction,
therefore, that we welcome the Secretary-General’s
decision to establish a Steering Group empowered to
facilitate decision-making and pursue coordinated
action. We have no doubt that Ms. Malcorra is up to the
task of leading the Steering Group. We look forward to
receiving the formal views of the Secretary-General
and his proposals on concrete reform measures and
resource allocation.
The civilian capacity review enjoins all of us to
utilize available resources more effectively and more
efficiently, to seek out and deploy our brightest and
best, and to draw on the full range of global and
national capacities. In that way, we can increase the
ability of the United Nations to keep pace with
changing circumstances in the field.
In concluding, I must state that Nigeria has
invaluable experience in building international civilian
capacities. The Nigerian Technical Aid Corps Scheme,
since its inception 17 years ago, has deployed over
2,000 volunteers to complement national efforts to fill
capacity gaps in more than 27 African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries, in the true spirit of South-South
cooperation. Indeed, we have shared technical knowhow and expertise with recipient countries based on
assessed and perceived needs. In supporting the review,
we are willing to offer lessons learned and to work
closely with the United Nations.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Bosnia
and Herzegovina highly appreciates this debate on
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict. We thank
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his briefing. We
commend the Senior Advisory Group under his
leadership, which provided the Secretary-General with
important advice on how to better develop, recruit and
rapidly deploy civilian expertise, in close cooperation
with national authorities, in order to meet the urgent
needs of post-conflict countries. We welcome setting
up the Steering Group and the appointment of
Ms. Susana Malcorra to provide strategic oversight,
views and advice on follow-up and implementation of
the review. Of course, we thank Ms. Malcorra and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Gasana, for their remarks today.

11-33213

S/PV.6533

The debate on institution-building during the
Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency in January (see
S/PV.6472) emphasized the critical role of national
ownership in peacebuilding and of drawing on existing
national expertise to support the development of
national capacity. We are convinced that enhancing the
capacity of national institutions should be seen as a
core issue of peacebuilding and that this process is
among the most relevant steps towards improving the
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
performance.
We emphasize that building accountable,
legitimate and resilient institutions should be a
strategic objective from the early stages of a
peacebuilding process. Priority has to be given to the
development of those institutions that will prevent
relapse into conflict, progressively reduce dependence
on the international community’s capacities, and
promote self-reliance by creating stable, viable and
responsive domestic institutions.
In the past, we have seen how the international
community has, in particular cases, faced challenges
and difficulties in promoting the national capacities
necessary for an enduring peace in a post-conflict
environment. The civilian aspects of post-conflict
peacebuilding often lag behind police and military
efforts in given settings.
We support recommendations on prioritizing
national capacities and providing expertise tailored and
adapted to the specific needs of a post-conflict country.
Strengthening national ownership of peace processes
by supporting core Government functions, such as aid
coordination and policy management, is essential.
Nurturing national capacities can contribute to
improving the economic impact of various
international interventions and achieving sustainable
peace. The co-location of international experts is
desirable when needed and where appropriate.
The issue of civilian capacity is of a cross-cutting
nature. We are of the view that it provides an
opportunity for improving cooperation with Member
States in this area. Creating an effective mechanism for
cooperation will enable peacekeeping operations or
political missions to draw upon the civilian capacities
of Member States or regional organizations while the
United Nations acts as a platform for qualified
expertise. It should contribute to better matching needs
with capacities. Nevertheless, the United Nations needs

11-33213

to work more on better coordinating its activities with
Member States in order to make more efficient use of
existing capacity. Improving guidance on enabling
capacity-building and improving training resources is
especially important. Planning processes need to
include host Government views, expertise and
priorities from the outset.
It is necessary to clarify roles and responsibilities
with regard to the lead responsibility for the
development and deployment of civilian expertise in
core peacebuilding sectors. We believe it crucial to
harmonize overlapping mandates and various policy
perspectives with a view to providing agile and more
relevant United Nations support.
Responding to changing circumstances requires
greater flexibility in everyday operations in the field.
To that end, getting the right people to the right places
at the right time is an imperative and requires the
system to define areas of responsibility and
accountability. The United Nations must ensure that
planning processes have sufficient capacities to
adequately address gender issues. The participation of
women and their inclusion in all processes is of the
utmost importance.
Although some recommendations from this
review can be easily and quickly implemented, we are
fully aware that a number of them will require more
detailed elaboration and certain organizational reform.
We support the application of recommendations related
to national ownership, capacity-building and lessons
learned in order to achieve a practical difference on the
ground.
Work in conflict-affected areas entails the
transformation of United Nations structures, using
lessons learned, drawing on the expertise of Member
States and other bodies, and innovative methods of
work for mandate delivery and operational success.
Greater flexibility and better responsiveness to
nationally identified priorities are indispensable. While
the United Nations is the most legitimate agent of the
international
community, civilian capacity is
undoubtedly an integral part therefore.
The United Nations, Member States, international
organizations and donors must do more in order to
increase flexibility, efficiency and the impact of our
common efforts in post-conflict settings. Designing
adequate responses, choosing the right mix of
instruments at the right time, allocating resources

19

S/PV.6533

based on comparative advantage and the search for
optimal solutions never end. Finally, responsive
civilian capacity is a shared responsibility in
supporting and building durable peace.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his
statement and, through him, all the members of the
Senior Advisory Group who contributed to the report
on the civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (see
S/2011/85). We also thank Ms. Susanna Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Field
Support,
Ambassador Gasana, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their comprehensive statements.
In recent months, the Security Council has held a
series of debates in which a clear need has been
recognized to analyse and develop strategies to allow
us better to respond to the major challenges facing our
Organization, to effectively and efficiently address the
needs of post-conflict societies, and to prevent the
resurgence of conflict. The establishment and
improvement of civilian capacities are crucial to the
support that the international community must provide
to countries emerging from conflict so as to ensure
that, in the medium and long terms, the State and
society in question are able independently to deliver
the services and public assets that make it possible not
only to stabilize and build peace, but also to strengthen
processes towards national unity and the well-being
and development of their people.
It is well known that there is no one-size-fits-all
solution and that strategies to respond to the challenges
of a post-conflict situation must be based on a very
specific analysis of conditions in the field. The Senior
Advisory Group’s approach is therefore of particular
relevance, given that the four core principles on which
its report focuses reflect the general framework within
which the United Nations can take nimble, timely and
coordinated action with respect to civilian capacitybuilding, in full compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
National ownership is undoubtedly a guiding
principle in enhancing civilian capacity-building in all
its aspects. In that respect, ongoing cooperation and
consultations with States emerging from conflict are
sine qua non to identifying key Government functions
to be prioritized as the need to resort to international
capacity in essential areas is assessed. It is also of the
greatest importance to give pride of place to national

20

markets for the provision of goods and services as a
way of stimulating local economies and identifying
local needs. Partnership with other interested parties is
another factor that must be the focus of special
attention.
While nimble and flexible instruments are needed
to provide specialized capacities that the Organization
is not always in a position to furnish, the quality and
legal framework of its performance and the
accountability of its partners must meet the standards
required by the United Nations. There is also a need for
the Organization to provide clear leadership in the
execution of the tasks included in mandates.
In addressing the issue of technical competencies,
the report once again shows the need to ensure that the
entire United Nations system works in a coordinated
and coherent manner, with a view to avoiding
duplication and ensuring efficient use of available
resources. In that context, human resource management
must address the need to quickly and efficiently deploy
specialized personnel in large-scale field operations,
without creating unnecessary disparities and while
preserving geographical diversity and promoting merit.
There is a clear need to establish more flexible,
timely and cost-efficient systems, providing flexibility
with regard to the responses required by the changing
environment on the ground. In that regard, it is
essential to give the necessary consideration to
budgetary implications and contributions from States,
as well as the need to fulfil the mandates established by
the competent bodies of the Organization.
Conflict-affected
countries
need
effective
national political processes, strong institutions and
economic development to build lasting peace.
Supporting those processes with civilian capacities that
respond to local needs and priorities while also
building national capacities to that end is a shared
responsibility of affected societies and the international
community. We encourage the Steering Group to
continue the process of broad consultations already
begun, paying the necessary attention to the views of
all States.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I would like to thank Mr. Guéhenno, Ms. Malcorra
and Ambassador Gasana for their briefings.

11-33213

S/PV.6533

It is logical for the General Assembly to have
yesterday considered the report on civilian capacity in
the aftermath of conflict (see S/2011/85), which the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission introduced
during today’s debate, just as it is that the Secretariat
has already begun to follow-up the proposals of the
Senior Advisory Group led by Jean-Marie Guéhenno.
The implementation of the report requires a joint effort
by the entire United Nations, including the
commitment of the Secretariat and the support of
Member States, as was the case with the Brahimi report
on peacekeeping operations and military capacities
(S/2000/809).
The report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of
conflict is part of our efforts to improve the
performance of the United Nations on the ground. We
have a collective interest in ensuring that its goals are
achieved. Moreover, we should avoid ideological
debates and focus on the essential, namely, how to get
the most benefit from the report that has been
presented to us and how to help the Secretariat to
implement it in the best way possible.
I should like to focus on three issues that are at
the heart of the reflection carried out by the experts
that are of direct concern to the Security Council.
First of all, the priority is national ownership. As
we have said frequently in Security Council debates,
there can be no lasting reconstruction without national
ownership. In that regard, as rightly pointed out in the
report, local human resources within civilian capacity
support structures in post-conflict countries is of
crucial importance.
Secondly, partnerships must be expanded. The
Senior Advisory Group has suggested establishing a
civilian partnerships cell to facilitate matching needs
with the capacities of different countries. That is
exactly what France proposed in the context of the
Group of Eight working group on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, which we currently chair. In that regard,
countries of the South can provide more civilian
capacity. That does not mean that the countries of the
North can forego their responsibility in the areas of
peacekeeping and development. It is not a matter of
transferring the burden, but rather of taking advantage
of more effective expertise by virtue of being closer to
reality on the ground. The goal should be to strengthen
the trilateral cooperation between donors, those that

provide personnel and the host country. This is a
concern for everyone.
Lastly, we should encourage initiative on the
ground. We therefore support the idea proposed by the
Senior Advisory Group to provide a broader margin for
decision-making to Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in the internal management of
civilian resources. This is a productive proposal that
could improve coordination with the funds,
programmes and agencies in the use of their resources,
thereby contributing to instilling a culture based on
results in the management of resources.
As we see routinely in our debates in the Council,
the needs with regard to civilian capacity are
numerous, varied and tend to increase with the
complexity of the situations in which United Nations
intervention is required. The United Nations must
therefore be able to adapt, often in a short span of time.
Effectiveness requires a certain level of flexibility in
the use of civilian capacity. It also requires rigorous
and responsible management of financial and human
resources.
Following up on these recommendations cannot
be done without the participation of all Member States
and on the basis of consensus. The recommendations to
be made by the Secretary-General should be considered
by the entire membership, in particular at the Fifth
Committee. We cannot properly carry out these
important reforms without moving ahead gradually and
in unison.
I once again thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno for
the excellent work done by the Senior Advisory Group
on civilian capacity. I also thank the Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission for his interest in the
report. Lastly, I think that I can say on behalf of the
entire Council that we have every confidence in
Ms. Susana Malcorra in connection with the follow-up
she has initiated on the experts’ proposals. We shall
closely consider the next report on the SecretaryGeneral on this subject.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

11-33213

21
