A /71/PV.62

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

62nd plenary meeting

Tuesday, 13 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Sixth Committee on agenda
items 74 to 86, 108, 121, 135 and 165 to 174. I request
the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Isaías
Arturo Medina Mejías of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, to introduce the reports of the Committee
in one intervention.
Mr. Medina Mejías (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela), Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee:
I have the honour to present the reports of the Sixth
Committee on its work during the seventy-first session
of the General Assembly. The Assembly allocated to
the Committee 25 substantive and three procedural
agenda items. Except for the item relating to the
election of officers, all those agenda items fall under
three of the headings corresponding to the priorities of
the Organization, namely, “Promotion of justice and
international law”, “Drug control, crime prevention and
combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations” and “Organizational, administrative
and other matters”. I will introduce the reports of the
Sixth Committee on the various items in the order in
which they fall under those three headings.
I shall begin with the first heading, “Promotion of
justice and international law”, under which the Sixth
Committee considered 13 agenda items and adopted
18 draft resolutions recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption. I first invite the Assembly
to consider agenda item 74, “Responsibility of States

for internationally wrongful acts”. The report on this
agenda item is contained in document A/71/505, and the
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 9 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would, inter alia, request the SecretaryGeneral to prepare a technical report listing in a
tabular format the references to the articles contained
in the compilation of decisions of international courts,
tribunals and other bodies prepared by the SecretaryGeneral, as well as in submissions presented by Member
States since 2001, and to submit such material during
its seventy-first session.
The Assembly would also request the SecretaryGeneral to update once again the compilation of
decisions of international courts, tribunals and other
bodies referring to the articles, invite Governments to
submit information on their practice in that regard and
submit such material well in advance of its seventyfourth session. The General Assembly would further
encourage all Member States to continue the substantive
dialogue on an informal basis during the period prior to
its seventy-fourth session.
Finally, the Assembly would decide to include the
item in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fourth
session and further examine, with a view to taking a
decision, within the framework of a Working Group
of the Sixth Committee, the question of a convention
on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful
acts or other appropriate action on the basis of the
articles.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-43375 (E)

*1643375*

A/71/PV.62

The report on agenda item 75, “Criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission”, is contained in document A/71/506, and the
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
The draft resolution affirms and further elaborates on
the various measures adopted in previous resolutions
aimed at ensuring the criminal accountability of United
Nations officials and experts on mission and sets out
a variety of mechanisms intended to increase and
enhance the information enabling Member States to
address the topic.
The report on agenda item 76, “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its forty-ninth session”, is
contained in document A/71/507. The Sixth Committee
recommended four draft resolutions for adoption by the
General Assembly, which are reproduced in paragraph
14 of the report. Under the terms of draft resolution I,
the General Assembly would, inter alia, take note with
interest of the decisions taken by the Commission with
regard to its future work and the progress made by the
Commission in its work in several areas.
Draft resolutions II, III and IV pertain to texts that
were finalized and adopted by the Commission during
its forty-ninth session. Draft resolution II relates to the
model law on secure transactions and recommends,
inter alia, that all States give favourable consideration
to the model law when revising or adopting legislation
relevant to secure transactions. Draft resolution
III concerns the 2016 note on organizing arbitral
proceedings and recommends, inter alia, the use of
the 2016 note, including by parties to arbitration,
arbitral tribunals and arbitral institutions, as well as
for academic and training purposes with respect to
international commercial dispute settlement. Finally,
draft resolution IV pertains to the technical note
on online dispute resolution and recommends, inter
alia, that all States and other stakeholders use the
technical note in designing and implementing online
dispute-resolution systems for cross-border commercial
transactions.
The report on agenda item 77, “United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law”, is to be found in document A/71/508. The draft
resolution is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof. Under
the terms of the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would, inter alia, note with satisfaction that resources
2/17

13/12/2016

have been provided under the programme budget for the
organization of regional courses in international law on
an annual basis and for the further development of the
audiovisual library of international law. The Assembly
would also authorize the Secretary-General to carry out
the activities specified in his report on this item.
The report on agenda item 78, “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its sixtyeighth session”, is contained in document A/71/509.
The two draft resolutions recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption are reproduced in paragraph 11
of the report.
Under draft resolution I, the General Assembly
would, inter alia, express its appreciation to the
Commission for the work accomplished at its sixtyeighth session and recommend that it continue its work
on the topics in its current programme. Furthermore, the
General Assembly would decide that the next session
of the Commission shall be held at the United Nations
Office at Geneva from 1 May to 2 June and from 3 July
to 4 August 2017. To commemorate the International
Law Commission’s seventieth anniversary, part of the
session in 2018 will be held in New York at United
Nations Headquarters.
Under draft resolution II, the General Assembly
would, inter alia, take note of the draft articles on
protection of persons in the event of disasters, invite
Governments to submit comments concerning the
recommendations by the Commission to elaborate a
convention on the basis of those articles and decide to
include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third
session an item entitled “Protection of persons in the
event of disasters”.
The report on agenda item 79, “Diplomatic
protection”, is contained in document A/71/510. The
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 9 of the report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly
would commend once again the articles on diplomatic
protection to the attention of Governments and request
a report from the Secretary-General on comments from
Governments. In addition, the Assembly would decide
to include in the provisional agenda of its seventyfourth session an item entitled “Diplomatic protection”
and, within the framework of a working group of the
Sixth Committee, continue to examine the question
of a convention on diplomatic protection or any other
appropriate action on the basis of the aforementioned
16-43375

13/12/2016

articles and to also identify any difference of opinion
on the articles.
The report on agenda item 80, “Consideration of
prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous
activities and allocation of loss in the case of such
harm”, is contained in document A/71/511. Paragraph 7
of the report contains the draft resolution recommended
for adoption by the General Assembly. By its terms,
the Assembly would once again commend the work
of the International Law Commission with regard to
the various outcomes in relation to the item, request
reports from the Secretary-General on comments from
Governments and on relevant case law, and include the
item in the provisional agenda of the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly.
The report on agenda item 81, “Status of the
Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts”, is contained in document A/71/512. The
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 of the report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly
would, inter alia, reaffirm the necessity of making
the implementation of international humanitarian law
more effective and support its further strengthening
and development. In addition, the Assembly would
note with appreciation the 10 resolutions adopted at
the thirty-second international Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent, which took place in 2015.
The report on agenda item 82, “Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives”, is contained in document A/71/513.
The draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 of
the report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, strongly condemn acts
of violence against diplomatic and consular missions
and representatives as well as against missions and
representatives to international, intergovernmental
organizations and officials of such organizations and
urge States to strictly observe, implement and enforce,
including during a period of armed conflict, all the
applicable principles and rules of international law.
The report on agenda item 83, “Report of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and

A/71/PV.62

on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”,
is contained in document A/71/514. The two draft
resolutions recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption are reproduced in paragraph 11 thereof.
Under the terms of draft resolution I, the
Assembly would, inter alia, endorse the decisions and
recommendations adopted by the Special Committee at
its 2016 session, as annexed to the draft resolution, and
call upon the Special Committee to consider them in
an appropriate, substantive manner and framework. It
would also welcome the establishment of a new website
for the repertoire of practice of the United Nations
organs.
Under the terms of draft resolution II, the Assembly
would, inter alia, solemnly commend the International
Court of Justice for the important role it has played as
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations over
the past 70 years in adjudicating disputes among States
and recognize the value of its work.
The report on agenda item 84, “The rule of law
at the national and international levels”, is contained
in document A/71/515. Under the terms of the draft
resolution reproduced in paragraph 7 of the report,
the Assembly would, inter alia, invite Member States
to focus their comments in the upcoming Sixth
Committee debates during its seventy-second session
on the subtopic “Ways and means to further disseminate
international law to strengthen the rule of law”.
The report on agenda item 85, “The scope and
application of the principle of universal jurisdiction”,
is contained in document A/71/516. Under the draft
resolution, which is reproduced in paragraph 9 of
the report, the Assembly would decide that the Sixth
Committee shall continue its consideration of the matter
next year, including the context of a working group
of the Committee that would undertake a thorough
discussion of the item.
The report on agenda item 86, “The law of
transboundary aquifers”, is contained in document
A/71/517, and the draft resolution is reproduced in its
paragraph 7. Under the terms of the draft resolution,
the Assembly would, inter alia, once again commend
the draft articles annexed to its resolution 68/118 to the
attention of Governments as guidance for bilateral or
regional agreements and arrangements for the proper
management of transboundary aquifers.

16-433753/17

A/71/PV.62

I shall now turn to the second heading, “Drug
control, crime prevention and combating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”, under
which the Sixth Committee considered agenda item
108, “Measures to eliminate international terrorism”.
The relevant report is contained in document A/71/518,
and the draft resolution is reproduced in paragraph 9
thereof. By its terms, the Assembly would, inter alia,
decide to recommend that the Sixth Committee, at
the seventy-second session, establish a working group
with a view to finalizing the process on the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism as
well as discussions on the item included in its agenda by
Assembly resolution 54/110, concerning the question of
convening a high-level conference under the auspices of
the United Nations, while also encouraging all Member
States to redouble their efforts during the intersessional
period towards resolving any outstanding issues.
Under the third and final heading, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”, the Sixth Committee
considered 11 substantive and two procedural items.
Agenda item 145, “Administration of justice at the
United Nations”, was allocated to the Fifth and Sixth
Committees. The views of the Sixth Committee on that
item were transmitted to the Fifth Committee through a
letter from the President of the General Assembly dated
26 October 2016, in the annex to document A/C.5/71/10.
The report on agenda item 165, “Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country”, is
contained in document A/71/522. Under the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption, which is reproduced in paragraph 8 of the
report, the Assembly would, inter alia, request the
Committee to continue its work in conformity with
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI).
Furthermore, the Sixth Committee considered nine
requests for observer status in the General Assembly.
It recommended that the Assembly grant observer
status in the General Assembly to the Conference of
Ministers of Justice of the Ibero-American Countries,
agenda item 170; the International Youth Organization
for Ibero-America, agenda item 171; the Pacific Islands
Development Forum, agenda item 172; the International
Chamber of Commerce, agenda item 173; and the Central
American Bank for Economic Integration, agenda item
174. The reports concerning those requests are found in
documents A/71/527, A/71/528, A/71/529, A/71/530 and
A/71/521, respectively. The relevant draft resolutions
and draft decisions are reproduced in paragraph 7 of
4/17

13/12/2016

documents A/71/527, A/71/528, A/71/529 and A/71/521
and in paragraph 9 of document A/71/530.
The Sixth Committee also recommended that the
Assembly defer to the seventy-second session a decision
on the requests for observer status in the General
Assembly for the Cooperation Council of Turkicspeaking States in the General Assembly, agenda item
166; the Eurasian Economic Union, agenda item 167; and
the Community of Democracies, agenda item 168. The
reports on those requests are reproduced in documents
A/71/523, A/71/524 and A/71/525, respectively. The
relevant draft decisions are reproduced in paragraph 8
of those reports.
The sponsors of draft resolution A/C.6/71/L.4 on
agenda item 169, “Observer status for the International
Conference on Asian Political Parties in the General
Assembly”, decided not to pursue the request for
observer status in the General Assembly for the
International Conference on Asian Political Parties at
the current session, while reserving the right to present
it at a future session. The Sixth Committee concluded
its consideration of that item without taking action. The
report on that agenda item is contained in document
A/71/526.
Concerning the two procedural items, namely,
agenda item 121, “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly”, and agenda item 135, “Programme
planning”, the report under agenda item 121, containing
the provisional programme of work of the Sixth
Committee at the seventy-second session, is to be
found in document A/71/519. The draft decision by
which the Assembly would take note of the provisional
programme of work is reproduced in paragraph 6 of
the report. The report on agenda item 135 is contained
in document A/71/520, and no further action by the
Assembly is recommended.
The draft resolutions and draft decisions relating to
the agenda items under all three headings were adopted
by the Sixth Committee without a vote, and it is my
hope that the General Assembly will be in a position to
do the same.
Finally, I wish to inform the Assembly that there is
no report in respect to agenda item 5, entitled “Election
of the officers of the Main Committees”. Consistent
with previous practice, the election of the officers of
the Sixth Committee for the seventy-second session
will be taken up at a later stage in the course of the
current session.
16-43375

13/12/2016

That concludes my introduction of the reports
of the Sixth Committee. I would like to take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to the Chair of
the Sixth Committee, Ambassador Danny Danon of
Israel, for his dedicated work and for the commendable
leadership that he provided to the Committee, as well
as to the other members of the Bureau — Mr. Bilal
Ahmad of Pakistan, Mr. Kaswamu Katota of Zambia
and Mr. Zoltán Turbék of Hungary — for their valuable
cooperation. I also wish to thank all representatives and
colleagues, particularly coordinators and facilitators
of the draft resolutions and working groups, for their
valuable contributions to the success of this session.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude and
appreciation to the secretariat of the Sixth Committee
and the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, for their efficient and
valuable support, and, especially Mr. Huw Llewellyn,
Mr. Arnold Pronto and their team at the Codification
Division of the Office of Legal Affairs for their
dedicated work devoted to the Sixth Committee and
professional advice provided throughout the session.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Sixth
Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote or position. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Sixth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth

A/71/PV.62

Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.
Members are reminded that additional sponsors
are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and
decisions have been adopted by the Committee. Any
clarification about sponsorship should be addressed to
the Secretary of the Committee.
Agenda item 74
Responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/505)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/133).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 74?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 75
Criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/506)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/134).

16-433755/17

A/71/PV.62

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 75?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 76
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its fortyninth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/507)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now take a decision
on draft resolutions I to IV.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the
work of its forty-ninth session”. The Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/135).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Model Law on Secured Transactions of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law”. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/136).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“2016 Notes on Organizing Arbitral Proceedings of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law”. The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
71/137).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Technical Notes on Online Dispute Resolution on the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law”. The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 71/138).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 76?
6/17

13/12/2016

It was so decided.
Agenda item 77
United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/508)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/139).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 77?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 78
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its sixty-eighth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/509)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now take a decision
on draft resolutions I and II.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its sixtyeighth session”. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/140).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Protection of persons in the event of disasters”. The
Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/141).
16-43375

13/12/2016

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 78?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 79
Diplomatic protection
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/510)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/142).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 79?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 80
Consideration of prevention of transboundary
harm from hazardous activities and allocation of
loss in the case of such harm
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/511)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/143).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 80?
It was so decided.

A/71/PV.62

Agenda item 81
Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection
of victims of armed conflicts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/512)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/144).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 82
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/513)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/145).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 82?
It was so decided.

16-433757/17

A/71/PV.62

Agenda item 83
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/514)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now take a decision
on draft resolutions I and II.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 71/146).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Commemoration of the seventieth anniversary of the
International Court of Justice”. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 71/147).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 84
The rule of law at the national and international
levels
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/515)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/148).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 84?
8/17

13/12/2016

It was so decided.
Agenda item 85
The scope and application of the principle of
universal jurisdiction
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/516)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/149).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 85?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 86
The law of transboundary aquifers
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/517)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/150).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Rolón Candia (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of the Republic of Paraguay has
followed very closely the negotiations on resolution
71/150, entitled “The law of transboundary aquifers”,
submitted by the delegation of Japan under agenda
item 86 of the current session. Paraguay holds 5 per
cent of the Guarani Aquifer, one of the world’s largest
freshwater reserves. We accord great importance to the
consideration of this agenda item by the Organization
and believe that the draft article submitted by the
16-43375

13/12/2016

International Law Commission represents progress in
that regard. As such, in 2010, we signed an agreement
with the other countries on whose territory the Guarani
Aquifer is located. Nevertheless, the delegation of
Paraguay wishes to state that while we joined the
consensus on the adoption of the resolution, we note
that the legislative branch of our country did not
approve the 2010 agreement. It did not enter into force,
therefore, since our State did not ratify it.
Mrs. Özkan (Turkey): Turkey believes that the
work on transboundary aquifers should focus on
general principles, respecting the sovereign rights of
each State to promote the sustainable utilization of
water resources of an aquifer in its territory and not
causing any significant harm to other riparian States.
The provisions of the draft articles should have been
elaborated in such a way that the multiplicity of interests
of the riparian countries could be taken into account in
a balanced and objective manner. Each transboundary
aquifer system has its own specific characteristics and
peculiarities and reflects its own regional, economic,
social, cultural and historic aspects. Therefore,
one-size-fits-all approaches for transboundary aquifers
are not appropriate. In that regard, the draft articles
might serve only as voluntary guidance for the practice
of States and should remain a non-binding document.
As to the reference to the model provisions on
transboundary ground waters, Turkey would like
to dissociate itself from it, as it makes reference to
an instrument to which Turkey is not party — the
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes. That reference
should therefore not be interpreted as a change in
Turkey’s legal position with regard to that instrument.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 86?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 108
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/518)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted

A/71/PV.62

the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/151).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 108?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 165
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/522)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/152).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 165?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 166
Observer status for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/523)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
decision recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted the
draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/524).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 166?
It was so decided.

16-433759/17

A/71/PV.62

Agenda item 167
Observer status for the Eurasian Economic Union
in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/524)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
decision recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted the
draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/525).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 167?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 168
Observer status for the Community of Democracies
in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/525)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
decision recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted the
draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

13/12/2016

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 169?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 170
Observer status for the Conference of Ministers
of Justice of the Ibero-American Countries in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/527)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/153).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 170?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 171
Observer status for the International Youth
Organization for Ibero-America in the General
Assembly

The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/526).

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/528)

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 168?

The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 169
Observer status for the International Conference of
Asian Political Parties in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/526)
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to take note of the report of the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.
10/17

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/154).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 171?
It was so decided.
16-43375

13/12/2016

Agenda item 172
Observer status for the Pacific Island Development
Forum in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/529)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/155).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 172?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 173
Observer status for the International Chamber of
Commerce in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/530)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/156).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Fernandez Valoni (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Argentina wishes to point
out that, while we joined the consensus on resolution
71/156, on the granting of observer status for the
International Chamber of Commerce in the General
Assembly, in view of the special role the Chamber plays
as well as its historical specificities, Argentina would
reiterate its support for the criteria set forth in General
Assembly decision 49/426. Pursuant to those criteria,
the granting of observer status to the International
Chamber of Commerce would therefore be done on an
exceptional basis and should not be seen as a precedent

A/71/PV.62

for the future in the context of granting such status to
an organization that is not intergovernmental in nature.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 173?
It was so decided.
Mr. Rahming (Bahamas), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Agenda item 174
Observer status for the Central American Bank for
Economic Integration in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/521)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/157).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 174?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/519)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take action
on the draft decision entitled “Provisional programme
of work of the Sixth Committee for the seventy-second
session”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 71/528).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 121?
It was so decided.

16-4337511/17

A/71/PV.62

Agenda item 135 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/520)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
135.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to thank Mr. Danny Danon of Israel, Chair of the
Sixth Committee, the members of the Bureau and
representatives for a job well done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Sixth Committee
before it for this meeting.
Agenda item 88 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/71/322)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.35)
Mr. Fadhil (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation welcomes all efforts made in preparation
of the annual report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) (see A/71/322), which includes a
review of the Agency’s activities and achievements in
the three key areas: nuclear technology, nuclear safety
and security, and verification.
Iraq is well aware that nuclear security is first and
foremost a national responsibility to be borne by States
through their national institutions and legislation.
Accordingly, my Government has adopted several
positive measures in this regard. In fact, in November
2016, our Parliament enacted a new law on the atomic
energy authority, which will enter into force once our
President signs it and it is published in the Official
Gazette of Iraq. National institutions in Iraq are
currently working on drafting new instructions for the
Oversight Department, which regulates all nuclear- and
radioactive-related issues, together with the IAEA. The
relevant authorities have also analysed the situation in
areas recovered by the Iraqi security forces to make
sure that there are no risks, particularly radioactive
12/17

13/12/2016

risks, in zones that were previously controlled by
terrorist organizations. Iraq continues to be in dire
need of international aid to revitalize those areas.
As for the implementation of international
conventions, Iraq ratified the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism. We have taken the necessary
steps to implement both conventions through the
establishment of special committees created for that
purpose. In order to support our integrated nuclear
security plan, we have worked to include all activities
that would improve the capacity of Iraqi institutions to
safeguard nuclear materials and facilities, information
security and nuclear criminal investigations.
In the same vein, my Government has adopted
fundamental principles for a national policy on
radioactive-waste management, establishing a national
committee in order to draft the necessary policy for
adopting a strategy for the management and disposal of
radioactive materials. We hope we can implement such
a strategy in the first semester of 2017, after it has been
reviewed by the IAEA.
The technical cooperation programme for the
promotion and transfer of nuclear technology to
ensure sustainable socioeconomic progress remains a
key task for the Agency. This programme is the joint
responsibility of the IAEA and its member States. Our
collective efforts will have a decisive impact on the
programme’s success and will be based on the needs
of member States. Materials will be needed to ensure
that the cooperation-fund resources are predictable and
sufficient to cover the expenses for the Agency’s other
activities included in its rules of procedure.
The progress made in mitigating the risk of
nuclear weapons and promoting the effectiveness
of the safeguards regime will remain insufficient
unless we make tangible progress, whether in nuclear
disarmament, through the implementation of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
or in urging States to adhere to the Treaty and achieve
its noble objectives. In this regard, the Middle East
remains a challenge. International and regional efforts
have been unable to establish a nuclear-weapon-free
zone because Israel continues to reject all attempts
to do so, despite the fact that, since 1974, the General
Assembly has adopted many resolutions that call for
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone and
16-43375

13/12/2016

despite the decisions of NPT review conferences to
that effect. We also believe that establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone is one of the best ways of achieving
the most noble goal — nuclear security.
As we consider our region, the Middle East, and
the challenges it has been currently facing, it is clear
that reaching an agreement for the establishment of
a zone free of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destruction is one of the most important steps for
achieving nuclear security and ensuring the stability
and security of the region in general. The most crucial
step continues to be subjecting Israeli nuclear facilities
to the Agency’s comprehensive safeguards regime.
We stress that nuclear disarmament and the legal
commitments undertaken to this end, when they are
in line with international commitments on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation, can serve only
to promote the effectiveness of other nuclear-safety
measures. The failure of the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in reaching consensus on an outcome
document is a setback in international efforts to rid the
region of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction. My Government therefore stresses the
relevance of the decision of the 1995 NPT Review and
Extension Conference, on the basis of which the Treaty
was indefinitely extended and will remain in force until
it is fully implemented.
We reaffirm our deep belief in the need to fully
implement and comply with all international instruments
on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, as well
as all relevant Security Council resolutions — the latest
of which, resolution 2321 (2016), condemns North
Korea for conducting nuclear tests and continuously
disregarding relevant international resolutions. North
Korea’s conduct only thwarts efforts to maintain
international and regional peace and security. Once
again, we stress that developing peaceful programmes
is an unalienable right for all countries. It is part of
their right to development, especially for developing
countries, without any impediment or monopoly by any
group of States and without imposing any mandatory
conditions that undermine the interests of those
countries.
Ms. Kharashun (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus believes that the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) continues to adequately
carry out its important role in guaranteeing the

A/71/PV.62

non-proliferation regime and assisting Member States
in the implementation of their integral right to develop
peaceful nuclear energy. We note the importance of
further improving the IAEA safeguards regime to
increase effectiveness, but also of ensuring Member
States’ confidence in the objectivity of the current
system.
This year’s IAEA report (see A/71/322) reflects the
fact that in 2015 Belarus continued the construction of
both nuclear power units of its first nuclear power plant.
Over the course of a year, Agency experts conducted
several missions to prepare recommendations for a
regulatory framework. We underscore our unstinting
commitment to the international rules and standards
concerning nuclear energyand the prime importance
of ensuring nuclear security and transparency in the
implementation of this project which is crucial for our
country. Belarus intends to actively draw upon the tools
that the Agency provides to countries that, for the first
time, begin to implement nuclear-energy programmes.
That includes relevant consultations with the Agency
and the use of Agency assessment missions.
We stress the critical importance of the technical
cooperation mechanisms with the Agency, as well
as the need to continue and broaden relevant IAEA
programmes here. The participation of the Agency and
other international organizations in multilateral efforts
to reclaim and sustainably develop territory impacted
by the Chernobyl disaster continues to be relevant.
Last week, resolution 71/125, entitled “Persistent
legacy of the Chernobyl disaster” — initiated and
drafted by Belarus — was adopted by consensus in
the General Assembly. The resolution calls for the
continued attention of the international community to
the issues following Chernobyl and for the coordination
of international efforts to address the long-term
consequences of the Chernobyl disaster. We would like
to see the IAEA participate actively in joint efforts
to attain the Sustainable Development Goals in the
territory affected by the Chernobyl disaster.
Belarus has co-sponsored and supports draft
resolution A/71/L.35, which endorses the report of the
IAEA.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Director General Yukiya Amano for his
comprehensive report on the Agency’s activities (see
A/71/322). We warmly welcome the adoption of the

16-4337513/17

A/71/PV.62

Agency’s report and commend the outstanding work of
the IAEA in supporting the needs of Member States
by expanding its work from nuclear verification and
the safety and security of nuclear materials to focusing
on nuclear applications and technical cooperation for a
better and safer world.
As a member of the Agency, we are proud to work
closely with the IAEA to strengthen our own policies
in the fields of nuclear energy, non-proliferation, safety
and security in our country, the region and globally.
Kazakhstan has had strong technical cooperation
with the IAEA in the areas of nuclear education,
medicine and agriculture; research reactor safety; and
radioisotope and radiation applications for collective
global human security.
As one of the world’s largest producers and suppliers
of uranium, Kazakhstan has vastly expanded its fuel
fabrication capability for peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, within the framework of IAEA safeguards.
My country is also working on the Kurchatov nuclear
technologies park, under IAEA surveillance. In August
2015, Kazakhstan and the Agency signed an agreement
on the establishment of the IAEA Low Enriched
Uranium (LEU) Bank. After the commissioning of a
new facility for the LEU Bank, which is expected to
be ready in the second half of 2017, the Bank will be
launched. The establishment of the LEU Bank will be
an important step towards the safe and peaceful use of
the atom and the strengthening of the non-proliferation
regime. Kazakhstan’s contribution to the IAEA Nuclear
Security Fund and the Peaceful Uses Initiative have
exceeded €1 million.
My country’s extensive nuclear-disarmament
division
supports
its
nuclear
security
and
non-proliferation policies on many different fronts. This
year, we are celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Semipalatinsk nuclear-test site closure and, on
29 August, we held an international conference in
Astana on building a nuclear-weapon-free world. Last
year, during the seventieth session of the General
Assembly and at the subsequent Nuclear Security
Summit in Washington, D.C., in March, President
Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan made a momentous proposal
to get rid of nuclear weapons by 2045 — the centenary
of the United Nations.
My country has always supported the process
of international negotiations on the Iranian nuclear
programme and made a practical contribution to
14/17

13/12/2016

it. In 2013, Kazakhstan hosted two rounds of talks
between the P5+1 group and Iran in Almaty concerning
Iran’s nuclear programme, which contributed to
the negotiations between P5+1 and Iran. Last year,
the European Union, acting as coordinator of the
Joint Commission of the P5+1 and Iran, appealed to
Kazakhstan to assist in the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). In coordination
with P5+1, Iran, the IAEA and the relevant structures
of the Security Council, Kazakhstan supplied Iran with
natural uranium on commercial terms as compensation
for the removal of low-enriched uranium from that
country, as specified in the JCPOA.
Kazakhstan
strongly
believes
that
strict
implementation of the agreements achieved between
the P5+1 and Iran will further strengthen the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and ensure the implementation
of the legal and absolute rights of every State party to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) to develop peaceful nuclear activities, provided
they fully observe the provisions of the Treaty, the
safeguards agreement with the IAEA and its additional
protocol.
We call on all the parties involved to adhere to
their commitments and to the plan. We are concerned
about the escalation of the nuclear military programme
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and call
on it to fulfil its obligations, in full accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, and to return
to the negotiation process to resolve the situation
through the Six-Party Talks. The strengthening of the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and nuclear security
will be among the main thrusts of Kazakhstan’s work
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
for the 2017-2018 period. Kazakhstan will always be
fully committed to supporting the IAEA in all of its
initiatives as an unfailing and longstanding partner.
Mrs. Martinic (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, let me thank Director General Yukiya
Amano for his comprehensive presentation of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 2015
report (see A/71/322). The Argentine Republic has been
committed to the work of the IAEA since its inception
and, in that spirit, we have co-sponsored draft resolution
A/71/L.35, on the report.
The Argentine nuclear sector already has more than
66 years of experience, as well as robust development
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, backed by solid
16-43375

13/12/2016

and consistent State policies that give vital importance
to the implementation of the international safeguards
system.
The effectiveness of the IAEA nuclear activity
verification system is crucial to preventing nuclear
proliferation. However, such verification measures
must not affect the inalienable right of States to develop
nuclear technology for exclusively peaceful ends, as set
forth in article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). My country has consistently
reaffirmed, at the IAEA and other relevant forums, the
importance of not limiting or reinterpreting that right.
The Republic of Argentina also stresses that
the safeguards regime and its guarantees must be
developed in an environment of cooperation and
dialogue. In that sense, we would like to highlight
the four-party agreement that Argentina has with its
sister country — the Federative Republic of Brazil,
the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and
Control of Nuclear Materials and the IAEA, which
has defined and regulated cooperation activities for
the application of nuclear safeguards since 1991.
Regarding the Agency, we are pleased to announce
that on 18 July, along with Brazil, we celebrated its
twenty-fifth anniversary. The creation of the Agency
has been a milestone not only in our relationship with
Brazil, accompanied by the credible assurance of the
exclusively peaceful uses of nuclear development in
both countries, but also for the region, as it helped
consolidate the idea of a Latin America free of nuclear
weapons.
Argentina wishes to express its appreciation
and support for the work carried out by the IAEA
in the field of nuclear security. In that regard, our
country has repeatedly affirmed the central role of
the Agency in coordinating and strengthening the
architecture of nuclear security, and urges it to play a
more active role in that area. We echo the sentiment
of our Foreign Minister at the Vienna conference on
nuclear security last week, when she stated that the
expansion of international efforts in the field of nuclear
security is equally essential. We would therefore like to
emphasize the importance of supporting the work of the
IAEA — not only politically but also financially — as
nuclear safety is a clear case where countries must back
their words with actions. The IAEA’s role in nuclear
security must be strengthened and reach the maturity
and development that it has already demonstrated in
nuclear safety, another of its fundamental pillars.

A/71/PV.62

Argentina actively participates in that arena and
aims to become a focal point for conducting training
activities in the region. In that regard, our country has
offered to host several of the training, education and
human resource skill development activities sponsored
by the IAEA in the field of exclusively peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. We will continue to work with the
Agency’s technical cooperation programme, to which
we offer our experience and training and capacitybuilding facilities, which have already benefited
engineers and professionals from our region and other
parts of the world.
Mrs. Sánchez Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Cuba would like to thank the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Mr. Yukiya Amano, for his presentation of the Agency’s
2015 report (see A/71/322). We support the important
work of the IAEA for global peace and development,
and we welcome the Agency’s sixtieth anniversary. We
appreciate that the Agency has been able to strike the
right balance in its work on the key pillars, focusing
on nuclear energy and its applications — nuclear
safety and security, nuclear verification and technical
cooperation.
Since the presentation of the previous report
(see A/70/219), we have witnessed two major global
agreements: the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. The IAEA and its technical cooperation
programme has an important role in achieving the goals
of both. The IAEA’s technical cooperation programme
must be a priority, as it is one of the Agency’s main
pillars and the main instrument to promote the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.
Cuba attaches great importance to technical
cooperation with the IAEA and recognizes that
the application of nuclear technologies contributes
significantly to key areas for the economy and society,
such as human health, particularly the cancer-control
programme; food security; and agriculture and the
protection of the environment, especially water-resource
management. The IAEA Director General’s November
visit to Cuba was made in the context of celebrating the
sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations agency that
is the global centre of cooperation in the area of the
application of nuclear energy, science and technology,
and it also reflected the excellent relations between the
IAEA and Cuba.

16-4337515/17

A/71/PV.62

The effective management of nuclear security
precludes exclusion and selectivity. The international
standards on nuclear security must be adopted at the
level of the IAEA, following transparent and inclusive
multilateral negotiations, with the participation of all
States. The IAEA’s leading role in seeking consensual
approaches, in that regard, must not be minimized or
ignored. Cuba welcomes the successful international
conference on nuclear security that took place just a
few days ago.
We also stress each State’s responsibility to ensure
nuclear security and to create national measures to
strengthen it. We welcome the recent entry into force
of the amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, which will better
protect nuclear facilities and materials, thus enabling
cooperation among States party to the Convention in
their efforts to prevent and combat crimes regarding
radioactive and nuclear materials in a reaffirmation of
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In that context, we reiterate our rejection of
measures aimed at prohibiting or limiting the legitimate
right of States to develop and use nuclear energy,
technology and related knowledge for peaceful uses.
We denounce and call for the immediate lifting of all
limitations and restrictions regarding the exportation of
materials, equipment and technology related to nuclear
activities for peaceful ends to developing nations.
We welcome the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action in the Islamic Republic
of Iran. That is a clear example that dialogue and
negotiations are the appropriate means for resolving
differences and reaching agreements that satisfy
all parties involved. We reaffirm our support for the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East. In that regard, we deeply regret that the
conference that was planned for that purpose has yet to
take place.
The possibility of a terrorist attack using nuclear
materials cannot be eliminated through a selective
approach limited to horizontal proliferation and
ignoring vertical proliferation and disarmament. The
only way to avoid the use or the threat of the use nuclear
weapons is to prohibit and completely eliminate them.
We believe that it is an important step to convene an
international conference in 2017 so as to negotiate an
instrument prohibiting nuclear weapons and aimed at
their complete elimination.
16/17

13/12/2016

Finally, let me conclude by congratulating the
body on its 70 years of work and extremely important
contribution to such important issues as climate change,
combating desertification and drought, ensuring food
security and treating diseases. We are convinced that
this time of celebration will strengthen commitments
and contribute to implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.35, entitled
“Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed on the draft
document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/70/L.35: Angola, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, Chile, Costa Rica, France, Georgia,
Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Sweden and Switzerland.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.35?
Draft resolution A/71/L.35 was adopted (resolution
71/158).
The Acting President: The representative of
Lithuania has asked to speak in explanation of vote
on the resolution just adopted. I remind her that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Šorytė (Lithuania): I wish to make an
explanation of vote on behalf of my country with regard
to resolution 71/158.
Lithuania co-sponsored the resolution, which
reaffirms the indispensable role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) with regard to
non-proliferation and the use of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes, as well as nuclear verification safety
and security.
My country aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union yesterday (see A/71/
PV.61).
16-43375

13/12/2016

Nuclear energy is a viable solution, given the
challenges facing the international community that
arise from climate change and the need to ensure energy
security. Yet nuclear energy has a future only if it is
developed in the most responsible way and in conformity
with the spirit and letter of the international safety
standards and requirements. Lithuania appreciates the
role of the IAEA in setting high nuclear-safety standards
through the constant improvement of regulations,
assistance in implementation and efforts to foster the
concept of a safety culture. The implementation of stress
tests and the IAEA’s safety standards, the adherence to
the Nuclear Safety Convention and cooperation with
specialized IAEA missions, including review missions
of the Centre for Environment and Development for the
whole nuclear cycle, should be integral parts of each
and every nuclear-power programme.
Bearing in mind the broader context of
transboundary implications and in reaction to the
statement delivered by the representative of Belarus,
we are concerned about the fact that nuclear-energy
sites are being built on my country’s borders without
the proper implementation of international conventions,
nuclear-safety standards and genuine dialogue with
neighbours. The lack of transparency and essential
information, especially with regard to site selection,
seismic evaluation and emergency preparedness plans,
is deeply alarming.
Confidence-building and ensuring maximum
safety are crucial for nuclear-energy development.
The implementation of the IAEA safety standards,
adherence to the Nuclear Safety Convention and
cooperation with specialized IAEA missions for
the whole nuclear fuel cycle, including site safety,
should become inseparable from any nuclear-power
programme. In acknowledgement of that desired
outcome, therefore, and in the interest of ensuring
the maximum safety level in nuclear power plants,
we call on all countries implementing nuclear-energy
projects to use the instruments provided by the IAEA
and international conventions dating from the very
beginning of the project in full compliance with the
rules and requirements of the IAEA, the Convention on
Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary
Context and other international and regional bodies in
order to ensure a safe environment and the safe use of
nuclear energy.

A/71/PV.62

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
Several delegations have asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Yesterday in his statement (see A/71/PV.61),
my colleague the representative of the Republic of Korea
made unprecedented allegations about my country that
we have not read in any report and that have not appeared
in any document. We ask our colleague to provide us
with further information concerning those allegations
and to indicate if they have been corroborated through
bilateral channels. We would have preferred it if, rather
than accusing us, our colleague from South Korea had
dispelled and disavowed information referring to the
existence of nuclear weapons in my country, which
would constitute a flagrant violation of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Ms. Kharashun (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
I would just like to underscore in my statement the
untiring commitment of Belarus to the international
norms and standards concerning nuclear energy, as
well as the priority nature for us of ensuring nuclear
safety and security and transparency in carrying out
the construction of our first nuclear power plant. We
stand ready for dialogue with all international partners,
including our neighbours. For my country, which
suffered the greatest impact of the Chernobyl, nuclear
security is of primary importance.
As I noted earlier in my statement, Belarus uses
the tools provided by the International Atomic Energy
Agency to countries that are embarking on nuclear
programmes for the first time. We have hosted the
assessment missions of the Agency on numerous
occasions.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 88?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

16-4337517/17
