United Nations

A/RES/59/191

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 105 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/503/Add.2)]

59/191. Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the fundamental importance, including in response to
terrorism and the fear of terrorism, of respecting all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law,
Recalling that States are under the obligation to protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all persons, and deploring violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of the fight against terrorism,
Recognizing that the respect for human rights, the respect for democracy and
the respect for the rule of law are interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
Noting the declarations, statements and recommendations of a number of
human rights treaty monitoring bodies and special procedures on the question of the
compatibility of counter-terrorism measures with human rights obligations,
Recalling its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002 and 58/187 of
22 December 2003 as well as Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2003/68 of
25 April 2003 1 and 2004/87 of 21 April 2004 2 and other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993 and, inter alia, the
responsibility of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
promote and protect the effective enjoyment of all human rights,
Reaffirming that acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental
freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and the security of
States and destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and that the

_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.

04-48772

A/RES/59/191

international community should take the necessary steps to enhance cooperation to
prevent and combat terrorism,
Noting the declaration on the issue of combating terrorism contained in the
annex to Security Council resolution 1456 (2003) of 20 January 2003, in particular
the statement that States must ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with all their obligations under international law and should adopt such
measures in accordance with international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Reaffirming its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal and unjustifiable, and
renewing its commitment to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism,
Deploring the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims and their families,
and expressing its profound solidarity with them,
Stressing that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms recognized in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 3 without distinction of any kind,
including on the grounds of race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status,
Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
1.
terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
Also reaffirms the obligation of States, in accordance with article 4 of the
2.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 4 to respect certain rights as
non-derogable in any circumstances, recalls, in regard to all other Covenant rights,
that any measures derogating from the provisions of the Covenant must be in
accordance with that article in all cases, and underlines the exceptional and
temporary nature of any such derogations; 5
3.
Calls upon States to raise awareness about the importance of these
obligations among national authorities involved in combating terrorism;
4.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
resolution 58/187, 6 in which it is stated that it is imperative that all States work to
uphold and protect the dignity of individuals and their fundamental freedoms, as
well as democratic practices and the rule of law, while countering terrorism;
Takes note with appreciation of the study of the United Nations High
5.
Commissioner for Human Rights submitted pursuant to resolution 58/187; 7
6.
Encourages States to make available to relevant national authorities the
“Digest of Jurisprudence of the United Nations and Regional Organizations on the
Protection of Human Rights while Countering Terrorism” and to take into account

_______________
3

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 (XXI), annex.
5
See, for example, General Comment No. 29 on states of emergency adopted by the Human Rights
Committee on 24 July 2001.
6
A/59/404.
7
A/59/428.
4

2

A/RES/59/191

its content, and requests the High Commissioner to update and publish it
periodically;
7.
Welcomes the ongoing dialogue established in the context of the fight
against terrorism between the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the relevant bodies for the promotion and protection of human
rights, and encourages the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to
strengthen the links and to continue to develop cooperation with relevant human
rights bodies, in particular with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, giving due regard to the promotion and protection
of human rights in the ongoing work pursuant to relevant Security Council
resolutions relating to terrorism;
Requests all relevant special procedures and mechanisms of the
8.
Commission on Human Rights, as well as the United Nations human rights treaty
bodies, to consider, within their mandates, the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of measures to combat terrorism, and
encourages them to coordinate their efforts where appropriate, in order to promote a
consistent approach on this subject;
Encourages States, while countering terrorism, to take into account
9.
relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions on human rights, and encourages
them to consider the recommendations of the special procedures and mechanisms of
the Commission on Human Rights and the relevant comments and views of United
Nations human rights treaty bodies;
10. Notes with appreciation the appointment of an independent expert on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 2004/87,2 and encourages
States to cooperate fully with him;
11. Requests the High Commissioner, making use of existing mechanisms, to
continue:
(a) To examine the question of the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, taking into account reliable
information from all sources;
(b) To make general recommendations concerning the obligation of States to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms while taking actions to
counter terrorism;
(c) To provide assistance and advice to States, upon their request, on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, as
well as to relevant United Nations bodies;
12. Requests the independent expert to take into account the debate held
during the fifty-ninth regular session of the General Assembly in finalizing the
report mandated by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2004/87, to
be presented through the High Commissioner to the Commission on Human Rights
at its sixty-first session;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the Commission on Human Rights at its sixty-first
session and to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004
3
