THZRTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING:

N.EW

23 MARCH

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1990)

Adoption

of the agenda

. . ,. . . , . . .. , , . , , . .. . , .. . .. . . ..

. , . . . . . . . . . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent RepreseIltative of Nigeria to the
United Natiom addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12295) .

1

S/PV. 1990
-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The. resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1990TH
HeId in New York

MEETING

on Wednesday,

President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG (United States of America).
Present; The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 990)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations ad.
dressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12295)
The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12295)
I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 1988th and 1989th meetings, I invite the
representatives of Bahrain, Egypt, Indonesia, Liberia, Madagascar, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the usual understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they wish to address the
Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. 3. M. Al Saffar
(Bahrain), Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid (!?gypt), Mr. A. Marpaling (Indonesia}, Mrs. A. Brooks-Randolph
(Liberia),
Mr, B. Rabetafika [Madagascar), Mr. L. 0. Harriman (Nigeria), Mrs. 5’. Y. Gbujama (Sierra Leone), ,Mr. I. B. Fonseka
(Sri Lanka), Mr. M. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. .I.
Petrid (Yugoslavia) and Mr. D. C1! Kamana (Zambia) took
the places reserved jbr them at the side of the Couricil
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I should like to inform
members of the Council that letters have been received

23 March 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Guinea and
Senegal in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the question on the agenda. Accordingly, I
propose, in accordance with the usual practice and with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
under the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table whenever they wish to address
the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A, Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. T, Tlou (Botswarza), Mr. M. S. Camara (Guinea) arld
Mr. M. Fall (Senegal) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Sierra Leone, whom I now invite to take a place at
the Council table and to make her statement.
5. Mrs. GBUJAMA (Sierra Leone): Mr, President, on
behalf of the Sierra Leone delegation, it gives me great
pleasure to welcome you to this august body. It is a happy
coincidence that you should be guiding the deliberations of
the Security Council on the question of South Africa, not
only within one month of your accreditation here, but
within just a few weeks of your return from southern
Africa where you no doubt had the unique privilege of a
personal insight into the current situation down there.
6. Your recent visit to Africa, characterized by discussions
with the Presidents of front-line States and freedom
fighters, as well as with officials of the apartheid regime in
South Aftica, takes on added importance when it is viewed
in relation to your presidency of the Council at this time.
Your experience, your academic background, your dynamism, your forthrightness, your personal dedication and that
of your Government to human rights and black majority
rule in southern Africa, when taken in conjunction with the
importance which you attach to your present assignment,
make us confident that you will guide the Council to a
conclusion that will be fraught with meaning for the black
man in South Africa.
7. In one of the statements made during the general
debate at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of a Western country said:

I.

10. During his recent most gracious visit to the United
Nations, President Carter endorsed this united position
when he indicated that anything lessthan majority rule in
southern Africa was likely “to lead to a protracted racial
war with devastating consequences
for all”. Thus we are
united, but yet divided. The division on the South Africa
issuehasresulted from the fact that someWestern Powers
have chosen unabashedlyto preservetheir short-run economic, scientific and strategic interests in complete ap?
thetic disregardof the sufferingmillions.

“To find what unites us and overcome what divides us,
harness our mutual determination to build and repress the
instinct that urges us to destroy, work together for the
liberty, happiness ‘and dignity of mankind-that,
to my
mind, is a programme that is just as relevant and
imperative in 1976 as it was in 1945.“’
8. It is perhaps easier to talk of what divides us on the
question of South Africa than of what unites us, considering the many abstentions, negative votes and even triple
vetoes that have been cast in connexion with resolutions
against the apartheid rigime. We all agree, however, that the
problem of South Africa is a racial one based on the
pigmentation of the skin. And it is also a fact that for
decades many statements have been made and many
resolutions adopted in condemnation of the base system of
apartheid. The world body has been united in identifying
the problem of South
Africa as one based on the false
premise of the supremacy and superiority of the white man
in South Africa. The incidents at Soweto and other
townships have reminded us that the Sharpeville sacrifice of
human lives was not in vain, and we are also united in the
knowledge that the situation in South Africa remains
explosive and can never be peaceful and calm until white
minority power gives way to majority rule.

11, After the Sharpeville massacrein 1960, the South
African Government embarked on a rapid buildup of its
military forces. In 1960-1961 estimated expenditure on
defence was 44 million rand; by 1975-1976, during the
Soweto incidents, that figure had increased 21 timesto
nearly 1 billion rand. In 1975, Defence Minister Botha
disclosedthat South Africa was capableof manufacturing
nuclear bombs and would soonbe able to turn out heavy
weaponsand ultra-modern aircraft. Why doesthe apartheid
rCgimeof South Africa need suchastronomicalincreases
in
military buildup except for the purposeof carrying out its
determination to maintain the statusqzm by force of arms‘?
The incidents which occurred at Soweto and other townshipsin June last year and for many months after areby
now well known to the Council as having started when
children born in the wake of the Sharpeville massacre
rebelled againstthe imposition of the white tribal language
of Afrikaans as a medium of instruction in the secondary
schoolsthroughout the nation, with the suppressionof the
tribal languagesof the blacks and in preference to the
Englishlanguagethat is commonto both black and white.
Peaceful demonstratorswere gunned down by the same
police of the apartheid r@irne which gunned down their
parents at Sharpeville. Shortly after, a senior police officer
said to the press: “We fire into them. It is no good firing
over their heads.”

9. Even the Western Powers accept this fact, if the
following quotations are anything,to go by. Speakingabout
distressingsituations in the world which, in his words,
“actually jeopardize peace”, Mr. de Guiringaud of France
said:
“I am thinking most particularly of southern Africa,
where tension a,nd confrontation are becoming more
acute . . . It is all too evident that racial discrimination is
the underlying causeof the crisis.“*
Referring to the‘ Soweto incidents, he said:

12. On 15 July, the South African r&ime put into force
the indefinite detention provisionsof the Internal Security
Act and detained leadersof the South African Students’
Organization and the Black People’sConvention, giving
warningsto opponents of a,vartheidnot to get involved in
the situation. Even those studentswho have now fled to
neighbouring countries are being pursued by the South
African police. A strike by black workers at Soweto wasa
welcomeopportunity to shedyet more African blood. The
police fired at the demonstratorsand not less than 30
personswere killed in cold blood, Almost 50 per cent of
the total African work force in the Johannesburgmetropolitan areahad taken part in that demonstration.

“The recent tragic incidents should have made South
Africa’s leaders realize at long last that such persistent
contempt for the digni-ty of the human person in itself
constitutes a sourceof perpetual conflict amongmen, and
this could lock their country in a deadly cycle of unrest
and repression.“2
Also at the thirty-first sessionof the General Assembly,
Mr. Genscherof the Federal Republic of Germany said:
“A second source of danger for international relations
has developed in southern Africa. It is impossible to
imagine the consequenceswhich a racial war embracing
the whole region would have.“3

13. Two different groupsof white and Coloured demonstrators in support of black protestsagainstapartheid laws
also met with brutal attacks in which hundreds were
seriously injured. The official figuresreleasedafter one of
those incidents-no doubt only a fraction of the real
total-were 176 personskilled and 1,139 wounded, many
of them schoolchildren. What further manifestationsof
brutality are needed to render the apartlzeid rCgimean
aggressoragainstthe black majority?

Further, he added:
“Everyone must realize, also in southern Africa, that
racism and colonialism no longer have a place in this
world. The sandshave run out.“4
1 Official
Records
of the General
Plerwry Meetings,
9th meeting, para.
2 Ibid., pora. 110.
3 Ibid., 7th meeting,
pnra.95.
4 Ibid., pm. 97.

Assembly,
149.

Thirty-first

Session,

14. Despitethose naked actsof exploitation and violation
of human rights in South Africa, the WesternPowershave
2

been reluctant to adopt measures in support of military or
economic sanctions which would compel the racist regime
to review its inhuman policies. The result of that reluctance
is that South Africa is providing economic and military
assistance to Rhodesia to create a buffer zone against
African nationalism. That is why economic sanctions
against Rhodesia can never be effective. African States have
never failed to draw the attention of the international
community to the explosive situation in southern Africa.
But the whites in southern Africa and their Western allies
have refused to treat the matter with the seriousness it
deserves.

Agreement in 1971 when the United Kingdom was obliged
to sell seven helicopters to South Africa. The argument was
that, as the United Kingdom bad already supplied South
Africa with anti-submarine frigates, it must supply the
helicopters which were considered an integra1 part of the
anti-submarine system. The Simonstown Agreement was
terminated on 16 June 1975.
19. All those armaments wodcl appear to serve three main
purposes: they would promote internal security, which is
another name for the suppression of blacks and the curbing
of the activities and movements of guerritias along the
coast; their sophistication and modernity would facilitate
South Africa’s inclusion in some alliances, which would
imply a general acceptance of apartIzeid by its new alljes;
they would also be used to assist Ian Smith in Rhodesia to
fight the blacks and to maintain a buffer zone between
South Africa and the north.

15. A repeated call by the world body for a mandatory
arms embargo against South AfYica under Chapter VII of
the Charter has failed to gain acceptance from the Western
Powers in the Security Council on the grounds that the
situation in South Africa does not constitute aggression or a
threat to peace and security in the area. But the Council is
well aware of South Africa’s aggression against Zambia and
Botswana, both of which have brought their cases to this
very Council. South Africa’s involvement in Angola after its
accession to independence, which was denied by the
apartheid r6gime, is now in the open, and its present
manoeuvres against the Government of Angola led by
President Agostinho Neto and the MPLA /Mouimer?to
Pop&w de Liberta@o de Angola] is also now no secret.
Finally, it cannot be denied that South Africa holds the key
to the independence of Namibia and the end of minority
rule in Zimbabwe and that the racist regime has extended
its apartheid policy across its own borders into those two
States. Therefore, the excuse that Snuth Africa is not an
aggressor and a threat to peace and bdcurity cannot now be
seriously maintained, nor could it be accepted were it to be
advanced. The South African Government has regularly
ignored the decisions and resolutions of the Council
condemning the policies of apartheid as a grave threat to
international peace and security.

20. The Western Powers have also been reluctant to accept
economic sanctions against South Africa, with the explanation that withdrawing investments at this point would have
devastating consequences for some economies. It has
already been pointed out that if those investments had been
withdrawn
in 1960 the results would have been minimal
compared with now when they have more than tripled. But
worse still, if they are not withdrawn now, present and
future investments are all likely to be lost in the holocaust
of an imminent racial war. As for the argufilyrlt of
investmtnts enhancing the economic position of the %!rtb
Africai worker in relation to his other African colleague:,, I
can only ask: what good is the rich slave’s money if III:
cannot use it to live where he wishes in his own country?
Which reminds me of a Norwegian proverb, similar to one
in my own language, which says that it is better to be a free
man in a small house than a slave in a big enc. The South
African Government believes that those economic ties
constitute the most effective way of preventing black
Governments from taking any positive action against the
system,

16. South Africa of course revels in something which has
constituted a constant fear for my delegation: the fact that
the Western Powers cannot turn their backs on it. South
Africa is strategically important to the West because of the
Cape route and South Africa’s mineral resources, trade,
investment and tourism. Thus some Western Powers have
decided to risk their reputations as Governments of the
people and violate the arms embargo against South Africa.

21. The move by South Africa to set up a Cabinet Council
for Coloureds and Asians, to hold talks with black township
middle-of-the-roaders,
to adopt a new policy on lifetime
home ownership for Africans in towns, while still retaining
land as totally owned by the white Government, ;md in
response to business pressures for more concessions to
Africans cannot alter the fundamental system of economic
exploitation in South Africa or the precarious political and
economic
situation that exists.

17. France has agreed to sell South Africa two Corvette
escorts in violation of the IJnited Nations arms embargo.
France’s defence is that the escorts will be used to defend
South Africa’s territorial waters and will have nothing to do
with the perpetuation of apartheid and frontier wars.

22. Hence those States which have collaborated with the
Pretoria regime by allowing their nationals to continue to
invest in South Africa, with the explanation that no
Government can legislate effectively against such activities,
share equally the responsibility for the persistent defiance
and arrogance of the South African Government, because
we all lcnow only too well’ of instances where those same
individuals or companies would not dare challenge or
violate restrictions imposed by their Governments against
other States.

18. After the June 1964 Security Council meeting OII an
arms embargo against South Africa, the British Labour
Government announced that it would honour the embargo
against South Africa on the understanding that current
South African orders would be filled. Kho was in a position
to know what the existing contracks were, except the
United Kingdom and South Africa? What was the duration
of those contracts? In 1970, the British Conservative
Government announced that it would sell arms to South
Africa for external defence. Then came the Simonstown

23. The South African Minister of Information,
Muldcr, has spoken of ties, other than militarv
3

Connie
or eco-

detained because of their opposition to apartheid. We ask
the South African rCgime to cease forthwith its indiscriminate violence against peaceful demonstrators, its murder of
those in detention and its torture of poiitical prisoners. The
South African racist r6gime must abolish the “bantu
education system” and all measures of apartheid and racial
discrimination in the field of education.

nomic, between South Africa and the West, which may
have contributed in no small measure to past vetoes in the
Security Council of sanctions against South Africa. He said:
CL.*. that diplomatic contacts between South Africa and
the IJnited States were increasing since the sea route
around the Cape coulcJ be endangered and fall into the
hands of the communists . . . That cannot be afforded by
the United States or any of the Western Powers. We will
be acceptable to the United States irrespective of the fact
that we will carry on with the fundamental issues of our
own policy.”

29. Finally, my delegation calls for measures that would
lead eventually to a mandatory arms embargo under
Chapter VII of the Charter, as we did when my Minister for
Foreign Affairs, the Honorable Francis Minah /195&h
meetingj, participated in the last Security Council debate
on the question of Namibia. We believe that thii; measure is
the least among various measures that should by Laken in an
effort to put an end to the outrageous situaiirjil in South
Africa. The alternative, as has already been stated by nearly
all the speakers in this debate, will be a holocaust of racial
war in which the investmints of Western Powers will not
escape ruin and destruction. It is therefore in the interests of
the Western Powers to look beyond the present economic
gains and prepare for long-term friendship as well as
economic co-operation with a majority government in South
Africa in this worId of interdependence.

24. Having drawn attention to that: I must say in passing
that my delegation is encouraged for the future by the
recent step taken by the new United States Administration
to repeal the Byrd amendment, altll .mgh sceptics have
argued that the repeal was rendered e;lsy by the fact that
there could be a large stockpile of Rhodesia chrome in the
United States which may minirnize the effect of what my
delegation sees as a positive move towards enhancing
majorrty rule in southern Africa.
25. Time has run out for the inhuman system of apart&icl
in South
Africa. There is always a breaking point in the
peq.petration of despicable acts such as suppression, repression and exploitation.
That breaking point has finally
arrived in South Africa. The aim now is to proceed
undaunted towards self-determination,
regardless of the
price. The Soweto incident of June 1976 is an example of
the desperation of which I speak. Many of those young
people who have crossed the borders of South Africa into
the free world are not even keen to finish their studies;
rather, they are anxious to receive military training which
will render them fit to take part in the war of liberation
that has already begun.

30. I should like now, Mr. President, to express through
you my appreciation to the Council for the opportunity
given to my delegation to participate in this debate.
31. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
32. Mr. PETRI6: (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to extend to you warm greetings in your
capacity as President of the Security Council for the month
of March. 1 avail myself of this opportunity to wish you
much success, especially in the efforts which the Council
and the United Nations are exerting in order to find the
right and rapid way for the effective liquidation of
apartheid and colonialism in southern Africa.

26. The Council must discharge its responsibilities in
southern Africa by taking appropriate measures to tackle
the central issue in that region, namely, South Africa. A
black intellectual in his thirties is reported to have said that
the Soweto demonstrators do not want any concessions or
reforms. They do not want to modify the system: they
want to do away with it. Demonstrations
against the
apartheid rCgime have taken place not only in obscure black
townsllips in the Johannesburg area but also in areas with
large white populations such as Cape Town. This should be
of gr.eat significance to the Council. It is the hope of my
delegation that the members of the Council will overcome
that which divides us and harness a common determination
to work together for the liberty, happiness dnd dignity of
the black man in South Africa, for he represents miliions of
human beings with flesh, blood and a soul like any others
anywhere on this earth.

33. I should like to express to the representative of
friendly Romania our deep feelings of heartfelt sympathy in
connexion with the catastrophic earthquake which struck
his country causing vast devastation and the loss of many
lives. At the same time, I wish to convey our sincere
condolences to the Government and people of Iran with
regard to the victims of the recent earthquake in their
country.
34. The debate on the question of South Africa was
opened [1988th meeting] by the comprehensive and
elaborate statements of the representatives of the Organi.
zation of African Unity, the Special Committee against
Apartheid, the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania and the
Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-aligned Countries. Their
presentation of the problem of apurtheid deserves our full
support and appreciation and constitutes, in our mind, a
basis for the decisions to be taken by the Security Council
on the subject.

27. My delegation strongly condemns all acts of violence
and suppression against the black people of South Africa
and expresses its solidarity with all those struggling for the
elimination of apartheid and racial discrimination.
28. To conclude, my delegation calls for an end to
violence and repression against the black people and all
other opponents of apartheid. We call for the release of all
persons imprisoned under arbitrary laws and those who are

35. The fifth Summit Conference of non-aligned countries, held at Colombo, devoted considarable attention to
4

this question. The Conference adopted a number of
important resolutions on the situation in South Africa,
Namibia and Zimbabwe which were fully reflected in the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session. The non-aligned countries have effectively
established the Support and Solidarity Fund for Southern
Africa.

crisis from being transformed into a war of wider proportions. If such a war were to break out, it would amount to a
course of action imposed on the people of South Africa and
a failure of the United Nations and particularly of the
Security Council, wh:ch has primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and within
this context for the elimination of the causes of threats to
peace. In this specific case, colonialism and racism in South
Africa are such a cause. Vorster’s rggime has with arrogance
ignored the numerous United Nations and Security Council
resolutions on apurtkeid, Namibia and Zimbabwe. It is
applying ever more brutal and ruthless measures against the
African majority. All that that rigime is doing is liable to
lead to a widespread race war in South Africa. Given the
present circumstances, such a war would be bound to
assume the proportions of a wider conflict threatening
Africa and the world at large.

36. The racist Government of South Africa has imposed
upon the people of that country a system of slavery which
thrives on the massive denial and violation of all the
fundamental human rights of the African people of South
Africa. In its endeavour to preserve that system, the racist
South African rCgime holds the international Territory of
Namibia under its illegal occupation, waging a war in that
Territory for the extermination of the liberation movement
of the South West Africa People’s Organization and for the
complete enslavement of the Namibians. The South African
racist rCgime is helping the illegal minority rCgime of Ian
Smith in Zimbabwe to maintain itself in power. In the
recent past, it has committed acts of aggression against the
young Republic of Angola and the Republic of Zambia, for
which it was condemned by the Security Council. It
supported the marauding attacks of Ian Smith’s mercenaries
against Mozambique and Botswana. Vorster’s rkgime has
openly arrogated to itself the right to engage in hot pursuit
of liberation movements in all African countries south of
the equator. The South African r6gime is engaged in a
massive effort to modernize its armaments, including the
strengthening of its nuclear capabilities.

41. The system of apartkeid, which is inhuman and
contrary to generally accepted moral norms, in fact
constitutes the most brutal form of racial discrimination. it
is a system of absolute negation of all the fundamental
human rights, freedoms and principles enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in the Charter of
the United Nations and in the Covenants dn human rights,
Actually, it is a system which legalizes the enslavement and
exploitation of peoples and human beings on the basis of
racial discrimination. Apartheid is founded on racist ideology and its objective is to perpetuate the exploitation of
human potential and natural resources for the benefit of
the racist white minority.

37. What does all this mean’? It proves, first of all, that
the conclusions of the thirty-first session of the General
Assembly to the effect that the system of apartkeid poses a
threat to peace and security in Africa and more widely are
correct and that consequently the Security Council should
take the necessary measures for the elimination of that
threat, that is, for the eradication of apartheid and
colonialism from southern Africa.

42. The racist rCgime in South Africa has, in recent years,
intensified its policy of terror, mass murder, imprisonment
and the detention of innocent people, thus defying the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole. In spite of the intensified terror, the struggle of the
people of South Africa has assumed the character of a
nationwide struggle. Sharpeville and Soweto will go down
in the history of South Africa as examples of the
determination of the oppressed people to fight for their
freedom, independence and self-determination.

38. I shall now deal briefly with the individual aspects of
this question.
39. The General Assembly has called upon the Security
Council to take firm measures against the racist regime in
South Africa, including the application of the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter. The General Assembly has also
recognized the right of the people of South Africa to
self-determination and their right to fight apartheid with all
the means at their disposal. The resolutions of the General
Assembly have laid stress on the particular responsibility of
the United Nations and the international community with
regard to the enslaved people of So~~tll Africa who are
deprived of their elementary rights and on the duty of the
world Organization to lend support and assistance to their
liberation struggle.

43. The time for general condemnations and indignation
at apartheid has passed. What we need at present are deeds.
They can be achieved through common action by all the
Member States of the United Nations and particularly the
permanent members of the Security Council. The first and
essential condition for such action is that those Western
countries which maintain various forms of relations with
tile system of apartheid should bring their policies into
harmony with the Charter and the relevant resolutions of
the Organization. In conformity with their public condemnations of apartkeicl and their declarations in favour of the
peaceful solution of the crisis in southern Africa, they
should definitively and unconditionally put an end to all
military co-operation with the racist rbgime. They should
refrain from any further investment of capital and withdraw capital already invested. They should put an end to all
trade with the racist regime. If they fail to implement any
of the measures demanded by the United Nations and
Africa, they will assume full responsibility for further
developments.

40. All this shows that the implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations and the application of
sanctions, on both the bilateral and the broader international plane, have become the immediate task and
obligation of all the Member States with their aim the rapid
eradication of apartheid and racial ‘discrimination in southern Africa as the only means likely to prevent the current
5

44. The policy of the bantustanization of the whole of
southern Africa, including the international Territory of
Namibia, in spite of the strong condemnation of that policy
by the United Nations, is being continued with a view to
perpetuating apartheid within new frameworks. In October
1976 [resolution .?I/: Al, the General Assembly unanimously conclemncd t:le proclamation of the so-called
independence of the btintustan Transkei as a manoeuvre of
the South African racis.s. Not a single State has recognizcd
the bantustan of the ‘Transkei. The international community and the LJnitc I Nations should oppose all the
attempts of the racist 15gime aimed at creating dissension
among the people by mcnns of the so-called homelands.
45. The strengthening of the military power of the racist
r&ime in South Africa is causing serious concern in Africa
and throughout the world. Providing the apartheid rBgime
with nuclear weapons or enabling it to manufacture them in
itself constitutes a grave threat to mankind and is fraught
with unpredictable consequences. My delegation feels the
time has come for the Security Council to adopt a
resolution imposing a mandatory embargo on the export of
weapons to South Africa,,provide for sanctions for the
violation of the embargo and, if necessary, apply other
measures under the Charter,

46. In his messages addressed to the Special Committee
against Apartheid on the occasion of the International Day
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, President
J&p
Broz Tito gave firm Support
to the liberation struggle
of the peoples of southern Africa and to the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, calling for their urgent
implementation.
47.’ Finally, the elimination of apartheid and racial discriminalion is a priority and urgent task for the United
Nations and the international community. The basic prin.
ciple underlying the implementation of that task is the right
of peoples to self-determination and freedom. Racism,
apartheid and oppression in southern Africa represent a
massive violation of fundamental human rights and principles of justice, freedom and humanity and constitute a
threat to peace and international security.
48. We hope, Mr. President, that on this occasion and
under your guidance the Secui-ity Council will adopt
resolute and effective measures.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
5 See A/AC.1 I SlL.462.

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $US.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-700014anuary

1978-2,200
