General Assembly -

42

980 (X). Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses
for the financial year 1956
The General, Assembly
Resolves that, for the financial year 1956:
1. The Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questio~s and s~bject_ to the 1'.inancial Re~lations of the Umted Nations, 1s authorized to enter mto
commitments to meet unforeseen and extraordinary expenses, provided that the concurrence of the Advisory
Committee shall not be necessary for:
(a) Such commitments, not exceeding a . total of
$US2 million, if the Secretary-General certifies that
they relate to the maintenance of peace and security or
to urgent economic rehabilitation ;
( b) Such commitments, duly certified by the President of the International Court of Justice, relating to
expenses occasioned by:
( i) The designation of ad hoe judges ( Statute, Article 31), not exceeding a total of $24,000;
(ii) The appointment of assessors ( Statute, Article
30), or the calling of witnesses and the appointment of
experts (Statute, Article SO), not exceeding a total of
$25,000;
(iii) The holding of sessions of the Court away from
The Hague ( Statute, Article 22), not exceeding a total
of $75,000;
( c) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$12,000, as may be required in the event of the coming
into force during 1956 of the Protocol32 for Limiting
and Regulating the Cultivation of the Poppy Plant, the
Production of, International and Wholesale Trade in,
and Use of Opium;
( d) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$90,000, as may be required in connexion with the travel
of representatives to the General Assembly in the event
of the admission of new Members;
2. The Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
and to the General Assembly, at its eleventh session, all
commitments made under the provisions of the present
resolution, together with the circumstances relating
thereto, and shall submit supplementary estimates to the
General Assembly in respect of such commitments.
559th plenary meeting_,
16 December 1955.
981 (X). Working Capital Fund for the
financial year 1956
The General, Assembly
Resolves:
1. That the Working Capital Fund shall be established for the ;,:rear ended 31 December 1956 at an amount
of $US 20 million to be derived from cash advances by
Members in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the present resolution;
2. That Members shall make cash advances to the
Working Capital Fund as required under paragraph 1
above in accordance with the scale adopted11 by the
General Assembly for contributions of Members to the
eleventh annual budget;
as United Nations publication, Sales No.: 1953.XI.6.

Tenth Se1111ion

3. That there shall be set off against this new allocation of advances the amounts paid by Members to the
Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1955, under
General Assembly resolution 892 (IX) of 17 December
1954, provided that, should such advance paid by any
Member to the Working Capital Fund for the financial
year 1955 exceed the amount of that Member's advance
under the provision of paragraph 2 above, the excess
shall be set off against the amount of the contributions
payable by that Member in respect of the eleventh annual
budget, or any previous budget ;
4. That the Secretary-General is authorized to advance from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions;
sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts
from contributions are available for the purpose ;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the provisions of General Assembly resolution 980 ( X) relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; the
Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget
estimates for reimbursing the Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding
for the same purposes, do not exceed $125,000, to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous selfliquidating purchase£ and activities. Advances in excess
of the total of $12~,000 may be made with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall
submit, with the annual accounts, an explanation of the
outstanding balance of the revolving fund at the end
of each year;

( d) Loans to specialized agencies .and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by inter-governmental agreement under the auspices of the United
Nations to finance their work, pending receipt by the
agencies concerned of sufficient contributions under their
own budgets. In making such loans, which shall normally
be repayable within two years, the Secretary-General
shall have regard to the proposed financial resources
of the agency concerned, and shall obtain the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions for any cash issues which
would increase the a~gregate balance outstanding (including amounts preVtously advanced and outstanding)
at any one time to an amount in excess of $1,500,000
and for any issue which would increase the balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and
outstanding) in respect of any one agency to an amount
in excess of $500,000;

(e) Such sums not exceeding $35,000 as may be required to finance payments of. advance insurance premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond
the end of the financial year in which payment is made.
This amount may be increased with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Bud~etary Questions. The Secretary-General shall make
proVtsion in the budget estimates of each. year, during
the life of the related policies, to cover the charges applicable to each such year;
(/) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending accumulation of credits. Such advances shall
aa See resolution 970 (X).
