A/61/PV.90

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

90

th plenary meeting
Monday, 26 March 2007, 12.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Chidyausiku
(Zimbabwe), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/61/709/Add.3)
The Acting President: Before turning to the item
on our agenda, I would like to invite the attention of
the General Assembly to document A/61/709/Add.3, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communications contained in documents A/61/709 and
Add.1 and 2, Palau has made the necessary payment to
reduce its arrears below the amount specified in Article
19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in this
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/592/Add.3)
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the

report of the Fifth Committee that is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee”.
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to ten minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-28243 (E)

*0728243*

A/61/PV.90

The draft resolution is entitled “Estimates in
respect of special political missions, good offices and
other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/258).

2

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 117.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
inform Members that the General Assembly will hold a
plenary meeting to consider the reports of the Sixth
Committee on Wednesday, 28 March 2007, at 10 a.m.
in Conference Room 4.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

07-28243
