A/RES/77/163

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 December 2022

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 18 (b)
Sustainable development: follow-up to and implementation of
the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 14 December 2022
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/77/443/Add.2, para. 14)]

77/163.

Towards the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles and commitments enshrined in the Rio Declaration
on Environment and Development, 1 the principles embodied in the Declaration of
Barbados, 2 the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States, 3 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development, 4 the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(Johannesburg Plan of Implementation), 5 the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, 6 the outcome document of the United Nations

__________________

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
3
Ibid., annex II.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius,
10−14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
1

22-28780 (E)

281222

*2228780*

Towards the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations

A/RES/77/163

Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, 7 the outcome
document of the third International Conference on Small Island Deve loping States,
the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, 8 the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development 9
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 10 as well as other relevant
declarations and international instruments,
Recalling the Paris Agreement, 11 and encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change 12 that have not yet done so to deposit their instruments of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Recalling also the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030, 13
Recalling further the Declaration and review document adopted by the General
Assembly at its twenty-second special session, 14
Recognizing the efforts of Caribbean States to develop and implement strategies
for the conservation and sustainable use of the ocean and its resources, in this regard
reiterating the calls made in the declarations entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for
action” 15 and “Our ocean, our future, our responsibility”, 16 calling for further
enhanced actions to support the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14,
with a particular focus on targets 14.2, 14.4, 14.5 and 14.6 that matured in 2020, and
renewing the commitment to take urgent action and to cooperating at the global,
regional and subregional levels to achieve all the targets as soon as possible, without
delay,
Taking into account all its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 54/225 of
22 December 1999, 55/203 of 20 December 2000, 57/261 of 20 December 2002,
59/230 of 22 December 2004, 61/197 of 20 December 2006, 63/214 of 19 December
2008, 65/155 of 20 December 2010, 67/205 of 21 December 2012, 69/216 of
19 December 2014, 71/224 of 21 December 2016, 73/229 of 20 December 2018 and
75/214 of 21 December 2020,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 17
Recalling also the Convention for the Protection and Development of the
Marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean Region, signed at Cartagena de Indias,
Colombia, on 24 March 1983, 18 and the protocols thereto, which contain the definition
of the wider Caribbean region of which the Caribbean Sea is part,
Reaffirming the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 19 which
provides the legal framework for ocean activities, and emphasizing its fundamental
character, conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelate d and need
__________________

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Resolution 69/15, annex.
9
Resolution 69/313, annex.
10
Resolution 70/1.
11
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
12
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
13
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
14
Resolution S-22/2, annex.
15
Resolution 71/312, annex.
16
Resolution 76/296, annex.
17
Resolution 60/1.
18
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1506, No. 25974.
19
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.
7
8

2/8

22-28780

Towards the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations

A/RES/77/163

to be considered as a whole through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral
approach,
Recalling the Convention on Biological Diversity 20 and other biodiversityrelated conventions, including the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 21 and the Convention on Wetlands of International
Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat, 22
Emphasizing the importance of national, regional and global action and
cooperation in the marine sector as recognized by the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in chapter 17 of Agenda 21, 23
Recalling the relevant work done by the International Maritim e Organization,
Considering that the Caribbean Sea area includes a large number of States,
countries and territories, most of which are developing countries and small island
developing States that are ecologically fragile and socially and economically
vulnerable and are also affected, inter alia, by their limited capacity, narrow resource
base, need for financial resources, high levels of poverty and the resulting social
problems, and the challenges and opportunities of globalization and trade liberalizat ion,
Recognizing that the Caribbean Sea has unique biodiversity and highly fragile
ecosystems,
Recognizing also that the Caribbean Sea is a critical asset, which inter alia
provides a range of ecosystem services and socioeconomic benefits in the form of
food security and nutrition, employment, foreign exchange, culture and recreation,
Recognizing further that the Caribbean has been shown to be the most tourism dependent region in the world relative to its size,
Deeply concerned that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its
severe global economic disruptions are having a devastating impact on the sustainable
development and humanitarian needs of Caribbean countries that are dependent on
tourism, commodities, stable global supply chains and remittances, making the
prospect of achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development more difficult,
Noting that the Caribbean Sea, when compared with all other large marine
ecosystems, is surrounded by the largest number of countries in the world,
Emphasizing that the Caribbean countries have a high degree of vulnerability
occasioned by climate change, climate variability and associated phenomena, such as
the rising sea level, oceanic oscillation phenomena, such as the El Niño phenomenon,
and the potential increase in the frequency and intensity of natural disasters caused
by hurricanes, floods and droughts, and that they are also subject to natural disasters,
such as those caused by volcanoes, tsunamis and earthquakes, which increase their
sustainable development challenges,
Noting with appreciation the ongoing efforts of the Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean, including in launching the debt swap initiative and
the Caribbean Resilience Fund, to support Caribbean economies to mitigate and adapt
to the consequences of climate change, and noting also the particular efforts to address
and reduce debt burdens, including through the Caribbean Resilience Fund,
__________________

Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
Ibid., vol. 993, No. 14537.
22
Ibid., vol. 996, No. 14583.
23
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
20
21

22-28780

3/8

Towards the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations

A/RES/77/163

Bearing in mind the heavy reliance of most of the Caribbean economies on their
coastal areas, as well as on the marine environment in general, to achieve their
sustainable development needs and goals,
Acknowledging that the intensive use of the Caribbean Sea for maritime
transport, as well as the considerable number and interlocking character of the
maritime areas under national jurisdiction where Caribbean countries exercise their
rights and duties under international law, present a challenge for the effective
management of resources,
Noting the problem of marine pollution caused, inter alia, by land-based sources
and the continuing threat of pollution from ship-generated waste and sewage, as well
as from the accidental release of hazardous and noxious substances in the Caribbean
Sea area,
Noting with concern the impact of plastic pollution, including in the marine
environment, on the Caribbean Sea area, encouraging further efforts at all levels to
prevent, reduce and eliminate plastic pollution, and welcoming the decision by the
United Nations Environment Assembly at its resumed fifth session to convene an
intergovernmental negotiating committee to develop an international legally binding
instrument on plastic pollution, including in the marine environment, 24
Recalling the call upon all stakeholders to conserve and sustainably use the
oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development by, inter alia,
accelerating actions to prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds,
in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris, plastics and
microplastics, nutrient pollution, untreated wastewater, solid waste discharges,
hazardous substances, pollution from ships and abandoned, lost or otherwise
discarded fishing gear, while at the same time recognizing that small island
developing States are among the most vulnerable to the impacts of marine pollution,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions of the General Conference of the
International Atomic Energy Agency on the safe transport of radioactive materials,
Welcoming the decision taken by the United Nations Environment Assembly at
its resumed fifth session to strengthen global action on the sound management of
chemicals and waste and to prevent pollution, in line with United Nations
Environment Assembly resolutions 5/7 25 and 5/8 26 of 2 March 2022,
Mindful of the diversity of and dynamic interaction and competition among
socioeconomic activities for the use of the coastal areas and the marine environment
and their resources, and noting with deep concern the findings about cumulative
human impacts on the ocean, including ecosystem degradation and species
extinctions, as highlighted in the second World Ocean Assessment and the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services,
Mindful also of the efforts of the Caribbean countries to address in a more
holistic manner the sectoral issues relating to the management of the wider Caribbean
Sea region and, in so doing, to promote the integrated management of the wider
Caribbean Sea region in the context of sustainable development, through a regional
cooperative effort among Caribbean countries,
Noting the progress that has been made on regional ocean governance by the
Caribbean Large Marine Ecosystem Project, and the opportunity to further advance
__________________

UNEP/EA.5/Res.14.
UNEP/EA.5/Res.7.
26
UNEP/EA.5/Res.8.
24
25

4/8

22-28780

Towards the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations

A/RES/77/163

marine spatial planning through the commencement of the global PROCARIBE+
project,
Welcoming the continued efforts of the States members and associate members
of the Association of Caribbean States to develop and implement regional initiatives
to promote the sustainable conservation and management of coastal and marine
resources, and recognizing in this regard the firm commitment by Heads of State and
Government of the Association to take the steps necessary to ensure the recognition
of the Caribbean Sea as a special area in the context of sustainable development,
without prejudice to relevant international law,
Recalling the creation by the Association of Caribbean States of the Caribbean
Sea Commission, and welcoming its ongoing work, including its plan of action for
the period 2022–2028, and its contribution to the sustainable development of the
Caribbean Sea,
Cognizant of the importance of the Caribbean Sea to present and future
generations and to the heritage and the continuing economic well-being and
sustenance of people living in the area and of the urgent need for the countries of the
region to take appropriate steps for its preservation and protection, with the support
of the international community,
1.
Recognizes that the Caribbean Sea is an area of unique biodiversity and a
highly fragile ecosystem that requires relevant regional and international
development partners to work together to develop and implement regional initiatives
to promote the sustainable conservation and management of coastal and marine
resources, including the consideration of the concept of the Caribbean Sea as a special
area in the context of sustainable development, including its designation as such
without prejudice to international law;
2.
Underlines the need to address the economic, social and environmental
impacts of climate change, and emphasizes the need for regional and international
action to enhance efforts at the national and subnational levels, as appropriate, to
build resilience;
3.
Stresses that the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to support
and invest in adaptation and action at all levels to build resilience through, inter alia,
disaster risk reduction, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, the sustainable
management of ecosystems and the protection and sustainable use of biodiversity, and
in this regard urges Member States to adopt a climate- and environment-responsive
approach to COVID-19 recovery efforts;
4.
Notes the efforts of the Caribbean States and the work undertaken by the
Caribbean Sea Commission of the Association of Caribbean States, including the
development of their concept of the designation of the Caribbean Sea as a special area
in the context of sustainable development, and invites the international community to
support such efforts;
5.
Reaffirms its support for the plan of action adopted by the Caribbean Sea
Commission, including its scientific and technical components and its governance
and outreach components, and invites the international community and the United
Nations system to enhance their support, including financial, technical and capacity building assistance, as appropriate, to Caribbean countries and their regional
organizations in their efforts to implement the plan of action;
6.
Welcomes the resources provided by some donors to support the work of
the Caribbean Sea Commission, and invites the international community to continue
and to enhance its support, as appropriate, to the Commission, including through the
provision of financial resources, capacity-building and technical support, the transfer
22-28780

5/8

Towards the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations

A/RES/77/163

of technology on mutually agreed terms and the sharing of experience in the areas of
work of the Commission;
7.
Also welcomes the convening of the sixth International Cooperation
Conference of the Association of Caribbean States, held in Havana on 10 and
11 November 2022, which aims to boost cooperation and attract funding to address
new strategies and the implementation of projects and initiatives in support of the
sustainable development of the Greater Caribbean;
8.
Acknowledges the need to scale up the efforts of the Caribbean Sea
Commission for the delivery of its programme of work, in particular in promoting the
designation of the Caribbean Sea as a special area in the context of sustainable
development, alongside plans to advance new initiatives at the sixth International
Cooperation Conference of the Association of Caribbean States, and invites the
international community to support these next steps;
9.
Looks forward to the convening of the ninth summit of the Association of
Caribbean States, to be held in La Antigua Guatemala in May 2023 , and the adoption
of its plan of action for the period 2022–2028, which focuses on strategizing to
reposition the Greater Caribbean for enhanced resilience;
10. Recognizes the efforts of Caribbean countries to create conditions leading
to sustainable development aimed at combating poverty and inequality, and in this
regard notes with interest the initiatives of the Association of Caribbean States in the
focal areas of sustainable tourism, trade, transport and natural disasters;
11. Calls upon the United Nations system and the international community to
assist Caribbean countries and their regional organizations, as appropriate, in their
efforts to ensure the protection of the Caribbean Sea from degradation as a result of
pollution from ships, in particular through the illegal release of oil and other harmful
substances, and pollution from the illegal dumping or accidental release of hazardous
waste, including radioactive materials, nuclear waste and dangerous chemicals, in
violation of relevant international rules and standards, as well as pollution from landbased activities;
12. Invites the Association of Caribbean States to submit to the Secretary General a report on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution,
for consideration by the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session;
13. Calls upon all States to become parties to the relevant international
agreements to enhance maritime safety and to promote the protection of the marine
environment of the Caribbean Sea from pollution, damage and degradation from ships
and ship-generated waste;
14. Reaffirms, in this regard, the Special Area designation for the wider
Caribbean region under annex V to the International Convention for the Prevention
of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, 27
which entered into force in May 2011;
15. Supports the efforts of Caribbean countries to implement sustainable
fisheries management programmes and to meet the principles of the Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations;
16. Calls upon States, taking into consideration the Convention on Biological
Diversity, to develop national, regional and international programmes to halt the loss

__________________
27

6/8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1340, No. 22484.
22-28780

Towards the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations

A/RES/77/163

of marine biodiversity in the Caribbean Sea, in particular fragile ecosystems such as
coral reefs and mangroves;
17. Invites the international community to actively support efforts of
Caribbean countries to implement regional strategies and action plans on marine
pollution and marine biodiversity to further promote the achievement of Sustainable
Development Goal 14, to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine
resources for sustainable development;
18. Notes with deep concern that invasive alien species, such as Pterois miles
and P. volitans, known as lionfish, constitute an acute threat to biodiversity in the
wider Caribbean region, and urges the United Nations system and the international
community to continue to provide assistance and support in addressing this issue in
the region;
19. Also notes with deep concern the sargassum seaweed influx and its
negative impact on the people, the territory and the economy of the Caribbean, as
well as the deterioration of the coral reefs;
20. Encourages continued collaboration and resource mobilization by the
international community and all other sources, including public and private, bilateral
and multilateral, to support capacity-building mechanisms and strengthen sargassum
seaweed management for the Caribbean;
21. Invites Member States and intergovernmental organizations of the United
Nations system to continue their efforts to assist Caribbean countries in becoming
parties to the relevant conventions and protocols concerning the management,
protection and sustainable utilization of Caribbean Sea resources and in implementing
those conventions and protocols effectively;
22. Calls upon the international community, the United Nations system and
the multilateral financial institutions, and invites the Global Environment Facility,
within its mandate, to actively support the national and regional activities of the
Caribbean States for the promotion of the sustainable management of coastal and
marine resources;
23. Expresses deep concern about the severe destruction and devastation
caused to several countries by heightened hurricane activity in the wider Caribbean
region in recent years, in particular the 2017 Atlantic hurricane season;
24. Notes with appreciation the ongoing activities of the Intergovernmental
Coordination Group for the Tsunami and Other Coastal Hazards Warning System for
the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission, and invites Member States and other partners to support early warning
systems in the region;
25. Urges the United Nations system and the international community to
continue to provide aid and assistance to the countries of the Caribbean region in the
implementation of their long-term programmes of disaster prevention, preparedness,
mitigation, management, relief and recovery, on the basis of their development
priorities, through the integration of relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction into a
comprehensive approach to sustainable development;
26. Acknowledges the pivotal role of the Association of Caribbean States in
regional dialogue and in the consolidation of a wider Caribbean cooperation zone in
the field of disaster risk reduction, as well as the importance of the international
community in deepening existing cooperation and consolidating new initiatives with
that regional mechanism in the context of the outcomes of the High-level Conference
on Disaster Reduction of the Association of Caribbean States, held in Saint -Marc,

22-28780

7/8

A/RES/77/163

Towards the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations

Haiti, from 14 to 16 November 2007, and the plan of action approved by the
Ministerial Council of the Association upon the recommendation of the Conference;
27. Invites Member States, international and regional organizations and other
relevant stakeholders to consider training programmes for the development of human
resources capacity at different levels and to develop research aimed at enhancing the
food security of Caribbean countries, as well as the sustainable management of
renewable marine and coastal resources;
28. Calls upon Member States to improve, as a matter of priority, their
emergency response capabilities and the containment of environmental damage,
particularly in the Caribbean Sea, in the event of natural disasters or an accident or
incident relating to maritime navigation;
29. Encourages the international community and the United Nations system,
in line with their programming priorities, to support initiatives aimed at addressing
mitigation of and adaptation to climate change in the wider Caribbean region included
in the plan of action of the Association of Caribbean States for the peri od 2022–2028;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly
at its seventy-ninth session, under the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States” of the
item entitled “Sustainable development”, on the implementation of the present
resolution, emphasizing the three dimensions of sustainable development, including
a section on the possible legal and financial implications of the concept of the
Caribbean Sea as a special area in the context of sustainable development, including
its designation as such, without prejudice to relevant international law, taking into
account the views expressed by Member States and relevant regional organizations,
unless otherwise agreed.

53rd plenary meeting
14 December 2022

8/8

22-28780
