Geom-al Assembly-Thirty-first Session

36

deem appropriate within their respective fields of competence.
96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976
31/71. Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it overwhelmingly commended the
idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also its resolution 3474 (XXX) of 11
December 1975 in which it recognized that the establishment of a n~clear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East enjoys wide support in the region,
Mindful of the prevailing political situation in the
region and the potential danger emanating therefrom
that would be further aggravated by the introduction of
nuclear weapons in the area,
Concerned that the lack of any appreciable progress
in the direction of the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone, in the present atmosphere in the
region, will further complicate the situation,
Convinced that progress towards the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East will
greatly enhance the cause of peace both in the region
and in the world,
Conscious of the particular nature of the problems
involved and the complexities inherent in the situation
in the Middle East, and the urgency of keeping the
region free from involvement in a ruinous nuclear-arms
race,
1. Expresses the need for further action to generate
momentum towards realization of the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East;
2. Urges all parties directly concerned to adhere
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 27 as a means of promoting this objective;
3. Reiterates its recommendation that the Member
States referred to in paragraph 2 above, pending the
establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free zone under
an effective system of safeguards, should:
(a) Proclaim solemnly and immediately their intention to refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, acquiring or in any other way possessing nuclear
weapons and nuclear explosive devices and from permitting the stationing of nuclear weapons in their territory or the territory under their control by any third
party;
( b) Refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from any other
action that would facilitate the acquisition, testing or
use of such weapons, or would be in any other way
detrimental to the objective of the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region under an effective system of safeguards;
( c) Agree to place all their nuclear activities under
the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
4. Reaffirms the recommendations to the nuclearweapon States to refrain from any action contrary to
27 Resolution 23 73

( XXII) , annex.

the purpose of the present resolution and the objective
of establishing, in the region of the Middle East, a
nuclear-weapon-free zone under an effective system of
safeguards and to extend their co-operation to the
States of the region in their efforts to promote this
objective;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to explore the possibilities of making progress towards the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the area of the Middle
East;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of
the Middle East".
96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976
31/72.

Convention on the Prohibition of Military
or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3264 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3475 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
Recalling its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20 December
1961, in which it recognized that all States have a deep
interest in disarmament and arms control negotiations,
Determined to avert the potential dangers of military
or any other hostile use of environmental modification
techniques,
Convinced that broad adherence to a convention on
the prohibition of such action would contribute to the
cause of strengthening peace and averting the threat
of war,
Noting with satisfaction that the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament has completed and transmitted to the General Assembly, in the report on its
work in 1976,28 the text of a draft Convention on the
Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of
Environmental Modification Techniques, 29
Noting further that the Convention is intended to
prohibit effectively military or any other hostile use
of environmental modification techniques in order to
eliminate the dangers to mankind from such use,
Bearing in mind that draft agreements on disarmament and arms control measures submitted to the
General Assembly by the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament should be the result of a process of
effective negotiations, and that such instruments should
duly take into account the views and interests of all
States so that they can be adhered to by the widest
possible number of countries,
Bearing in mind that article VIII of the Convention
makes provision for a conference to review the operation of the Convention five years after its entry into
force, with a view to ensuring that its purposes and
provisions are being realized,
A !so bearing in mind all relevant documents and
negotiating records of the Conference of the Committee
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27).
29 Ibid., Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27), vol. I, annex I.

III.

37

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

on Disarmament on the discussion of the draft Convention,
Convinced that the Convention should not affect the
use of environmental modification techniques for peaceful purposes, which could contribute to the preservation
and improvement of the environment for the benefit of
present and future generations,
Convinced that the Convention will contribute to
the realization of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Anxious that during its 1977 session the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament should concentrate
on urgent negotiations on disarmament and arms limitation measures,
l. Refers the Convention on the Prohibition of
Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental
Modification Techniques, the text of which is annexed
to the present resolution, to all States for their consideration, signature and ratification;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, as Depositary
of the Convention, to open it for signature and ratification at the earliest possible date;
3. Expresses its hope for the widest possible adherence to the Convention;
4. Calls upon the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament, without prejudice to the priorities established in its programme of work, to keep under review
the problem of effectively averting the dangers of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents relating to the discussion by the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session of the question of
the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of
environmental modification techniques.
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976

Desiring to prohibit effectively military or any other hostile
use of environmental modification techniques in order to
eliminate the dangers to mankind from such use, and affirming
their willingness to work towards the achievement of this
objective,
Desiring also to contribute to the strengthening of trust
among nations and to the further improvement of the international situation in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE I

1. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes not to
engage in military or any other hostile use of environmental
modification techniques having widespread, long-lasting or
severe effects as the means of destruction, damage or injury
to any other State Party.

2. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes not to
assist, encourage or induce any State, group of States or
international organization to engage in activities contrary to
the provisions of paragraph 1 of this article.
ARTICLE II

As used in article I, the term "environmental modification
techniques" refers to any technique for changing-through the
deliberate manipulation of natural processes-the dynamics,
composition or structure of the Earth, including its biota,
lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere, or of outer space.
ARTICLE IH

1. The provisions of this Convention shall not hinder the
use of environmental modification techniques for peaceful
purposes and shall be without prejudice to the generally
recognized principles and applicable rules of international law
concerning such use.
2. The States Parties to this Convention undertake to
facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of scientific and technological information on
the use of environmental modification techniques for peaceful
purposes. States Parties in a position to do so shall contribute,
alone or together with other States or international organizations, to international economic and scientific co-operation in
the preservation, improvement and peaceful utilization of the
environment, with due consideration for the needs of the
developing areas of the world.
ARTICLE

ANNEX
Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other
Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques

The States Parties to this Convention,
Guided by the interest of consolidating peace, and wishing
to contribute to the cause of halting the arms race, and of
bringing about general and complete disarmament under strict
and effective international control, and of saving mankind
from the danger of using new means of warfare,
Determined to continue negotiations with a view to achieving
effective progress towards further measures in the field of
disarmament,
Recognizing that scientific and technical advances may open
new possibilities with respect to modification of the environment,
Recalling the Declaration of the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment, adopted at Stockholm on 16
June 1972,
Realizing that the use of environmental modification techniques for peaceful purposes could improve the interrelationship of man and nature and contribute to the preservation and
improvement of the environment for the benefit of present and
future generations,
Recognizing, however, that military or any other hostile use
of such techniques could have effects extremely harmful to
human welfare,

IV

Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to take any
measures it considers necessary in accordance with its constitutional processes to prohibit and prevent any activity in violation
of the provisions of the Convention anywhere under its jurisdiction or control.
ARTICLE V

1. The States Parties to this Convention undertake to
consult one another and to co-operate in solving any problems
which may arise in relation to the objectives of, or in the
application of the provisions of, the Convention. Consultation
and co-operation pursuant to this article may also be undertaken through appropriate international procedures within the
framework of the United Nations and in accordance with its
Charter. These international procedures may include the
services of appropriate international organizations, as well as
of a Consultative Committee of Experts as provided for in
paragraph 2 of this article.
2. For the purposes set forth in paragraph 1 of this article,
the Depositary shall, within one month of the receipt of a
request from any State Party to this Convention, convene a
Consultative Committee of Experts. Any State Party may appoint an expert to the Committee whose functions and rules
of procedure are set out in the annex, which constitutes an
integral part of this Convention. The Committee shall transmit
to the Depositary a summary of its findings of fact, incorporating all views and information presented to the Committee
during its proceedings. The Depositary shall distribute the
summary to all States Parties.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

38

3. Any State Party to this Convention which has reason to
believe that any other State Party is acting in breach of
obligations deriving from the provisions of the Convention
may lodge a complaint with the Security Council of the
United Nations. Such a complaint should include all relevant
information as well as all possible evidence supporting its
validity.
4. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to cooperate in carrying out any investigation which the Security
Council may initiate, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, on the basis of the complaint
received by the Council. The Security Council shall inform
the States Parties of the results of the investigation.
5. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to
provide or support assistance, in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, to any State Party
which so requests, if the Security Council decides that such
Party has been harmed or is likely to be harmed as a result
of violation of the Convention.
ARTICLE

deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession and the
date of the entry into force of this Convention and of any
amendments thereto, as well as of the receipt of other notices.
6. This Convention shall be registered by the Depositary in
accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
ARTICLE

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto, have signed this Convention.
DONE at ... , on the ... day of ... , ....so
Annex to the Convention

VI

Any State Party to this Convention may propose amendments to the Convention. The text of any proposed amendment
shall be submitted to the Depositary, who shall promptly
circulate it to all States Parties.
2. An amendment shall enter into force for all States
Parties to this Convention which have accepted it, upon the
deposit with the Depositary of instruments of acceptance by
a majority of States Parties. Thereafter it shall enter into
force for any remaining State Party on the date of deposit
of its instrument of acceptance.
1.

ARTICLE VII

This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.
ARTICLE VIII

1. Five years after the entry into force of this Convention,
a conference of the States Parties to the Convention shall be
convened by the Depositary at Geneva, Switzerland. The
conference shall review the operation of the Convention with
a view to ensuring that its purposes and provisions are being
realized, and shall in particular examine the effectiveness of
the provisions of paragraph 1 of article I in eliminating the
dangers of military or any other hostile use of environmental
modification techniques.
2. At intervals of not less than five years thereafter, a
majority of the States Parties to this Convention may obtain,
by submitting a proposal to this effect to the Depositary, the
convening of a conference with the same objectives.
3. If no conference has been convened pursuant to paragraph 2 of this article within ten years following the conclusion
of a previous conference, the Depositary shall solicit the views
of all States Parties to this Convention concerning the convening of such a conference. If one third or ten of the States
Parties, whichever number is less, respond affirmatively, the
Depositary shall take immediate steps to convene the conference.
ARTICLE IX
1. This Convention shall be open to all States for signature.
Any State which does not sign the Convention before its entry
into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by
signatory States. Instruments of ratification or accession shall
be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. This Convention shall enter into force upon the deposit
of instruments of ratification by twenty Governments in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article.
4. For those States whose instruments of ratification or
accession are deposited after the entry into force of this Convention, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of
their instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The Depositary shall promptly inform all signatory and
acceding States of the date of each signature, the date of

X

This Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
who shall send duly certified copies thereof to the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.

Consultative Committee of Experts
The Consultative Committee of Experts shall undertake
to make appropriate findings of fact and provide expert views
relevant to any problem raised pursuant to paragraph 1 of
article V of this Convention by the State Party requesting the
convening of the Committee.
1.

2. The work of the Consultative Committee of Experts
shall be organized in such a way as to permit it to perform
the functions set forth in paragraph 1 of this annex. The Committee shall decide procedural questions relative to the organization of its work, where possible by consensus, but otherwise
by a majority of those present and voting. There shall be no
voting on matters of substance.
3. The Depositary or his representative shall serve as the
Chairman of the Committee.
4. Each expert may be assisted at meetings by one or more
advisers.

5. Each expert shall have the right, through the Chairman,
to request from States, and from international organizations,
such information and assistance as the expert considers desirable for the accomplishment of the Committee's work.

31/73.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in South Asia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3476 B (XXX) of 11 December
197 5 concerning the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in South Asia,
Reiterating its conviction that the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the
world is one of the measures which can contribute
most effectively to halting the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and to promoting progress towards nuclear
disarmament as a step towards general and complete
disarmament under effective international control, with
the ultimate goal of total destruction of all nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery,
Bearing in mind the comprehensive study prepared
by the Ad Hoe Group of Qualified Governmental Experts for the Study of the Question of Nuclear-WeaponFree Zones, 31
Believing that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfrec zone in South Asia, as in other regions, will
30 The Convention was opened for signature at Geneva on
18 May 1977.
31 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27A (A/10027/Add.1), annex I.
