38

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

the central responsibilities of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for co-ordinating
action in the field of industry, as entrusted to it by
the General Assembly;
( c) Requests for Special Industrial Services project
approvals will be forwarded simultaneously by the
resident representatives of the United Nations Development Programme to the headquarters of the Programme
and to the headquarters of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization;
(d) Most projects, including plans for their implementation and level of financing, will be approved
jointly by the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the Executive Director of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization; in the remaining small number of cases, especially
when another agency is proposed as an executing
agency, the system of joint approval of the Special
Industrial Services projects will be followed with appropriate flexibility by agreement between the Administrator
and the Executive Director;
( e) The executing agency will be authorized to
commence project operations upon the issuance of
financial authorization by the Administrator;
(f) The programme of Special Industrial Services
will be financed on a continuing basis from the resources
of the United Nations Development Programme; the
level of maximum annual expenditures will be fixed
from time to time by the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme, taking into
account current programme requirements as well as
desirable growth in the light of demonstrated needs;
(g) The Administrator and the Executive Director
will report regularly to thdr respective governing bodies
on the activities carried out under the programme;
(h) The Administrator and the Executive Director
will jointly establish detailed working arrangements and
procedures designed to give effect to the principles
herein established;
6. Welcomes the system of consultation machinery
and periodic meetings between the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization referred to in paragraphs 20
to 24 of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on Cooperation between the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;16
1. Invites the Industrial Development Board and
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to take the necessary measures on the
basis of the progress reports and consultations' by the
Administrator and the Executive Director, as provided
in paragraph 22 of the ,report of the Ad Hoe Committee on Co-operation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to ensure the most
harmonious and effective co-operation in their common
objectives of assisting the developing countries in their
industrialization;
8. Stresses the need to strengthen the links of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
with the developing countries through the programme
of industrial field advisers, whose increasing importance
for the development of operational programmes has
been fully recognized, particularly in connexion with
16 A/8646.

the formulation and implementation of the long-term
country programmes and the development of special
measures of assistance to the least developed among
the developing countries, as envisaged in Indust,rial
Development Board resolution 31 (VI) of 2 June
1972;17
9. Urges the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to provide at its next
session additional financing necessary to increase the
number of industrial field advisers of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization serving the developing countries, in order to achieve in 1973 the
level envisaged by the Goveming Council at its
thirteenth session. 18
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972

2969 (XXVII). Reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its thirteenth 19 and fourtccnth 20
sessions.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2970 (XXVII).

United Nations Volunteers
programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 December
1970, by which it established the United Nations
Volunteers programme within the United Nations
system, and its resolution 2810 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Expressing its satisfaction with the efforts directed
towards the implementation of its resolution 2659
(XXV),

Taking note of the decision adopted by the Economic
and Social Council at its fifty-third session, 21
Noting with appreciation the statement of the Coordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme,22
Convinced that the United Nations Volunteers programme has the potential to render valuable service
to the d~velopment needs of the developing countries,
and particularly of the least developed among them,
Reaffirming that the involvement of youth in the
collective efforts of the United Nations system will
enhance international understanding and co-operation
between nations,
17 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentvseventh Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/8716), an~ex II. ·
18 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/5092).
'
19 Ibid.
2 0 Ibid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5185/Rev.1).
21 Ibid., Supplement No. 1 (E/5209), Other decisions, p. 12.
22 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentyseventh Session, Second Committee, 1478th meeti~g paras
68-78.
'
.
