II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

-----------------Taking note of activities carried out in 1987 under the
major programme on marine atfairs, set forth in chapter 25 of the medium-term plan for the period 1984-1989,
in accordance with the report of the Secretary-Generai, 66
as approved in General Assembly resolution 38/59 A, and
the report of the Secretary-General, 67

Recalling its approval of the financing of the expenses of
the Preparatory Commission from the regular budget of
the United Nations,
Taking special note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral prepared in pursuance of paragraph 13 of General Assembly resolution 41/34,67
l. Recalls the historie significance of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as an important
contribution to the maintenance of peace, justice and progress for all peoples of the world;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the increasing and overwhelming support for the Convention, as evidenced, inter alia, by the one hundred and fifty-nine signatures and
thirty-five of the sixty ratifications or accessions required
for entry into force of the Convention;
3. Calls upan all States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention at the earliest possible date to allow the etfective entry into force of
the new legal régime for the uses of the sea and its resources;
4. Calls upan all States to safeguard the unified character of the Convention and related resolutions adopted
therewith;
5. Also calls upan States to observe the provisions of
the Convention when enacting their national legislation;
6. Further calls upan States to desist from taking actions which undermine the Convention or defeat its object
and purpose;
1. Notes the progress being made by the Preparatory
Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and
for the International Tribunal for the Law ofthe Sea in all
areas of its work;
8. Expresses its satisfaction at the successful resolution
of conflicts of overlaps that had arisen in the claims of applicants for registration as pioneer investors and with
those of certain potential applicants under resolution II of
the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea;
9. Further expresses its satisfaction at the historie decision of the Preparatory Commission of 17 August 1987 to
register the first pioneer investor, namely India, and at the
decision of the Preparatory Commission to convene its
General Committee from 7 to 18 December 1987 for the
purpose of considering the applications of France, Japan
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for registration as pioneer investors;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for bis etforts in support of the Convention and for the effective execution of the major programme on marine affairs set forth in chapter 25 of the medium-term plan for
the period 1984-1989;
11. Further expresses its appreciation for the report of
the Secretary-General prepared in pursuance of General
Assembly resolution 41/34 and requests him to contmue
to carry out the activities outlined therein, as well as those
aimed at the strengthening of the legal régime of the sea,
special emphasis being placed on the work of the Prepara66 A/38/570 and Corr. l and Add. l and Add.1/Corr.1
67 A/ 42/688.

41

tory Commission, including the implementation ofresolution II of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea;
12. Calls upan the Secretary-General to continue to assist States in the implementation of the Convention and in
the development of a consistent and uniform approach to
the legal régime thereunder, as well as in their national,
subregional and regional etforts towards the full realization of the benefits therefrom and invites the organs and
organizations of the United Nations system to co-operate
and lend assistance in these endeavours;
13. Approves the decision of the Preparatory Commission to hold its sixth regular session at Kingston from
14 March to 8 April 1988 and notes that the Preparatory
Commission will decide upon the summer meeting for
1988 during its next session; 65
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on developments pertaining to the Convention and all related activities and on the implementation of the present resolution;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Law of the sea".
73rd plenary meeting
18 November 1987
42/21.

Application of the Republic of Nauru to become
a party to the Statute of the International Court
of Justice

Whereas the Government of Nauru, by a communication6 8 dated 21 August 1987 addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, has expressed the desire to learn the conditions
on which Nauru could become a party to the Statute of the
lnternational Court of Justice,
Whereas Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations provides that a State which is nota Member ofthe United Nations may become a party to the Statute of the Court on conditions to be determined in each
case by the General Assembly upon the recommendation
of the Security Councíl,
Whereas the Security Cou11cil has adopted a rernmme11datio11 011 this matter, 69
The General Assembly
Determines, in pursua11ce of Article 93, paragraph 2, of
the Charter and upo11 the recomme11datio11 of the Security
Cou11cil, the co11ditio11s on which Nauru may become a
party to the Statute of the Internatio11al Court of Justice,
as follows:
"The Republic of Nauru will become a party to the
Statute 011 the date of the deposit with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations of an instrument, signed
011 behalf of the Government of the Republic of Nauru
and ratified as may be required by the constitutional law
of the Republic of Nauru, containing:
"(a) Acceptance of the provisions of the Statute of
the International Court of Justice;
"(b) Acceptance of ali the obligations of a Member
of the U11ited Natio11s under Article 94 of the Charter;
"(e) An undertaki11g to contribute to the expenses of
the Court such equitable amount as the General Assem-

68 See Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-second Year,
Suf¡Iement for Ju/y, August and September 1987, document S/19137.
See Officwl Records oj thc General Assembiy. Forty-second Session.
Annexcs, agenda ítem 144. document A/42/242.

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

42

bly shall assess from time to time after consultation with
the Government of Nauru."
73rd plcnary meeting
18 November 1987

42/23.

Policies of apartheid ofthe Government ofSouth
Africa 70
A
INTERNATIONAL SOLIDARITY WITH THE
LIBERATION STRUGGLE IN SOUTH AFRICA

5. Considers that the implementation of the abovedemands would create the appropriate conditions for free
consultations among ali the people of South Africa with a
view to negotiating a just and lasting solution to the conflict in that country;
6. Appeals to ali States, intergovernmental and nongovcrnmental organizations, mass media, and city and
other local authorities as well as individuals to increase urgently
political,
economic,
educational,
legal,
humanitarian and ali other forms of necessary assistance
to the people of South Africa and their national liberation
movements;
7. Also appeals to ali States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to step up material, financia( and other forms of support to the front-line and
other member States of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference and thus as<;ist them in resisting the aggression, terrorism, destabilization, political
subversion and economic blackmail perpetrated by the racist régime;
8. Urges ali States to contribute generously to the Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid
Fund set up by the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or
Government ofNon-Aligned Countries with the aim ofincreasing support to the liberation movements fighting the
apartheid régime and to the front-line States;

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/35 A of 10 November 1986,
Having considered rhe report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid. 71 in particular paragraphs 137 to 139
and 148,
Grave/y concerned at the escalating repression of and
State terror against opponents of apartheid and the increasing intransigence ofthe racist régime ofSouth Africa,
demonstrated by the extension of the state of emergency,
the vast number of arbitrary detentions, trials, torture and
killing, including of women and children, the increased
use of vigilante groups and the muzzling of the press,
Outraged by the racist régime's escalation of acts of aggression and destabilization against neighbouring independent African Statcs, including assassinations and abductions of South Africans in thosc States, and the
continuing illegal occupation of Namibia,
l. Reaffirms its full support to the people of South
Africa in their struggle, under the leadership of their national liberation movements, to eradicate apartheid totally, so that they can exercise their right to selfdetermination in a free, democratic, unfragmented and
non-racial South Africa;
2. Reaffirms further the legitimacy of the struggle of
the people of South Africa and their right to choose the
necessary means, including armed resistance, to attain the
eradication of apartheid;
3. Condemns the policy and practice of apartheid and,
in particular, the execut1on of patriots and captured freedom fighters in South Africa and demands that the racist
régime:
(a) Stay the execution of those now on death row;
(b) Abide by the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
194944 and Additional Protocol I of 1977 thereto;43
. 4. D~mands again that the racist régime end repress1on agamst the oppressed people of South Africa; lift the
state of emergency; release unconditionally Nelson Mandela, Zephania Mothopeng, ali other political prisoners,
trade union leaders, detainees and restrictees and, in particular, detained children; lift the ban on the African National Congress of South A frica, the Pan Africanist Congress . of_ Azania and other political parties and
orgamzat1ons; allow free political association and activity
of_the South African peoplc and the return nf ali political
ex1les; put an end to the policy of bantustanization and
forced population removals; eliminate apartheid laws and
end military and paramilitary activities aimed at the
neighbouring States:

Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid,7 1 in particular paragraphs 10 and 11
and 141 to 149,
Considering that measures taken by States individually
and collectively, while commendable, vary in coverage
and degree of enforcement, which allows the racist régime
to exploit existing gaps,
Commending the action taken by labour unions,
women's organizations, student groups and other
anti-apartheid organizations for the total isolation of the
apartheid régime,

70 See also sect. I, footnote 8, and ,~el. X.B.J. decis1on 42/409.
71 Official Records o[ the Gencrul A rn!mbly. Forty-second Session.
Supplonent No. 22 (,\ 142.'22).

1. Urges ali State~ that have not yet done so, pending
the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions, to adopt legislative and/or comparable measures so
as to impose effective sanctions against South Africa and,
111 particular:

9. Decides to continue the authorization of adequate financia! provision in the regular budget of the United Nations to enable the South African liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity namely, the African National Congress of South Africa
and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania-to maintain
offices in New York in order to participate effectively in
the deliberations of the Special Committee against Apartheid and other appropriate bodies;
10. Requests Governments and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to exert their influence
towards the implernentation of this resolution.

77th plenary meeting
20 November 1987
B
APPLICATION OF CO-ORDINATED ANO STRICTLY
MONITORED MEASURES AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions on sanctions
against South Africa,
