General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

94

of the International Women's Year" and an item entitled "Status and role of women in society, with special
reference to the need for achieving equal rights for
women and to women's contribution to the attainment of the goals of the Second United Nations Development Decade, to the struggle against colonialism,
racism and racial discrimination and to the strengthening of international peace and of co-operation between
States".
2311 th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3277 (XXIX). Consuitative Committee for the
Conference of the International Women's
Year" 8

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1851
(LVI) of 16 May 1974, in which the Secretary-General was requested to convene, in consultation with
Member States, specialized agencies and interested
non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Council, an international conference during
the International Women's Year, in 1975,
Realizing the importance of consultations, at the
highest possible level, for the preparation of the Conference of the International Women's Year,
1. Expresses the hope that the preparation of the
Conference of the International Women's Year will be
given the full attention which it warrants, having regatd
to the importance of the question;
2. Decides to establish a Consultative Committee
for the Conference of the International Women's Year
composed of not more than twenty-three Member
States designated by the Chairman of the Third Committee after consultation with the different regional
groups, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution;~9
3. Expresses the hope that the Consultative Committee will be comprised of highly qualified individuals
designated by their respective Governments;

4. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
Consultative Committee not later than March 1975
at United Nations Headquarters, for a period not
exceeding ten working days, to advise him on the preparation of an international plan of action to be finalized by the Conference;

5. Decides that all the costs of convening the Consultative Committee, including the travel expenses of
its members, will be met from the fund for voluntary
contributions for the International Women's Year established under Economic and Social Council resolution
1850 (LVl) of 16 May 1974;
6. Appeals to Member States to make, in so far
as it lies within their power, voluntary contributions
to the above-mentioned fund in order to meet the
necessary financial implications for the convening of
the Consultative Committee;
7. P :!quests the Secretary-General to prepare a
draft 111ternational plan of action in time to be considered by the Consultative Committee and to submit
a progress report on the preparation of the Conference
r.9 See also p. 95, item

12.

to the organizational session of the Economic and Social Council in January 1975.

2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974

•

•

•

At the 2311th plenary meeting, on JO December 1974, the
President of the General Assembly announced that the Chairman of the Third Committee, in pursuance of paragraph 2
of the above resolution, had designated the members of the
Consultative Committee for the Conference of the International
Women's Year.
As a result. tire Consultatfre Committee is composed of
the following Member States: AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL,
FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, INDIA, IRAN, JA.
MAICA, JAPAN, JORDAN, MEXICO, NIGER, PHILIPPINES, ROMANIA,
RWANDA, SENEGAL, SIERRA LEONE, SWEDEN, TUNISIA, UNION
OF SOVIET SoCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
and VENEZUELA.

3278 (XXIX). Contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3145 (XXVIII) and 3146
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
' Realizing that drug abuse control is a iong-term
problem the resolution of which requires sustained international action,
Recognizing. that the United Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control was established to provide the international community with a means to assist in undertaking the required action to eliminate illicit drug
supply, trafficking and demand,
Noting that the Fund, which has already undertaken
many useful programmes, requires larger resources in
order to respond affirmatively to requests from Governments for assistance,
Urgently appeals to Governments for generous and
sustained cont,ributions to the United Nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control.
2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3279 (XXIX). Abuse of and illicit traffic
in narcotic drugs

The General Assembly,
Noting with concern that the abuse of and illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs have transcended national
boundaries and affect the well-being and health of
mankind as a whole,
Mindful of the dangers of the increasing abuse of
psychotropic substances and the greater volume of the
illicit traffic in these substances, as well as of various
narcotic drugs,
Recalling with appreciation the activities of the International Narcotics Control Board and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in this matter,
Appealing for global participation in all efforts to
stop the abuse of and the illicit traffic in those drugs,
Reaffirming that the misuse of narcotic and psychotropic substances presents an actual as well as a potential danger to the health and future of mankind,
especially that of youth,
