S/PRST/2002/30

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4639th meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 October 2002, in
continuation of its consideration of the item entitled “Small arms” at its 4623rd
meeting on 11 October 2002, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms the Statement of its President of 24
September 1999 (S/PRST/1999/28) and its resolution 1209 (1998) of 19
November 1998, the statement of its President of 31 August 2001
(S/PRST/2001/21), takes note with appreciation of the Report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled Small Arms (S/2002/1053) of 20 September 2002, and
welcomes all initiatives taken by Member States following the adoption of the
Programme of Action by the July 2001 United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects. The Council
expresses grave concern at the harmful impact of small arms and light
weapons on civilians in situations of armed conflict, particularly on vulnerable
groups such as women and children, and recalls in this regard its resolutions
1296 (2000) of 19 April 2000, 1314 (2000) of 11 August 2000, 1379 (2001) of
20 November 2001, and the statement of its President of 7 May 2002
(S/PRST/2002/12).
“The Security Council encourages all Member States to continue to take
all measures to fully implement at the national, regional and international
levels the recommendations contained in the Programme of Action. The
Council recognizes its responsibility to examine ways and means in which it
can further contribute to dealing with the question of illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in situations under its consideration.
“The Security Council reaffirms the inherent right of individual or
collective self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations and, subject to the Charter, the right of each State to import,
produce and retain small arms and light weapons for its self-defence and
security needs. Bearing in mind the considerable volume of licit trade in small
arms and light weapons, the Council encourages States to adopt legislative and
other measures to ensure effective control over the export, import, transit,
stocking and storage of small arms and light weapons. The Council urges
Member States to consistently and responsibly use end-user certificates in their
transfers of small arms and light weapons and calls on States to establish an
effective national end-user certificate system and to study the feasibility as

02-67162 (E)

311002

*0267162*

S/PRST/2002/30

appropriate of developing an end-user certificate system at the regional and
global levels, as well as an information exchange and verification mechanism.
“Arms-exporting countries are encouraged to exercise the highest degree
of responsibility in small arms and light weapons transactions. All States have
the responsibility of preventing the illegal diversion and re-export of small
arms and light weapons. The Security Council welcomes the establishment of
the United Nations Group of Governmental Experts with a mandate to examine
the feasibility of developing an international instrument to enable States to
identify and trace in a timely and reliable manner illicit small arms and light
weapons. The Security Council encourages international cooperation in the
consideration of the origin and transfers of small arms and light weapons.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of further steps to enhance
international cooperation in preventing, combating and eradicating illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons, and calls upon States that have not
already done so to establish, where applicable, a national register of arms
brokers and, in the case of supply of arms to embargoed destinations, of
intermediary firms, including transport agents. The Council urges States to
impose appropriate penalties for all illicit brokering activities, as well as arms
transfers that violate Security Council embargoes, and to take appropriate
enforcement action.
“The Security Council stresses the need for cooperation and sharing of
information among the Member States, among the different Sanctions
Committees, and among the panels of experts and the monitoring mechanism
on arms traffickers that have violated arms embargoes established by the
Council. The Security Council welcomes the identification in cooperation with
the States concerned of those arms traffickers who have violated the arms
embargoes. The Security Council calls upon Member States to impose
appropriate penalties on those arms traffickers who have violated its arms
embargoes. In this connection, the Council calls on Member States to provide
technical and financial support to Interpol’s International Weapons and
Explosives Tracking System (IWETS).
“The Security Council recognizes the important role that the United
Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms (CASA) mechanism can play in
assisting Member States with the implementation of the Programme of Action.
In this regard, the Council notes the proposal of the Secretariat to create a
Small Arms Advisory Service.
“The Security Council recognizes the important role of arms embargoes
as targeted measures and their contribution to an overall strategy for
preventive diplomacy particularly with respect to illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. In this regard, the Council underlines the importance of
pursuing more vigorously and expeditiously the application of arms embargoes
in countries or regions threatened by, engaged in or emerging from armed
conflict and to promote their effective implementation. The Council shall also
consider taking measures to restrict the supply of ammunition to such regions.
“The Security Council recognizes that the primary responsibility for the
implementation of sanctions measures rests with States. At the same time, the
Council underlines the importance of establishing on a case-by-case basis

2

S/PRST/2002/30

specific monitoring mechanisms or similar arrangements as appropriate to
oversee the strict implementation of arms embargoes decided by the Council.
The Council may wish to study ways to strengthen such mechanisms with a
view towards better coordinating their work. The Security Council should
consider innovative strategies to address the close interrelationship between
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and, among others, drug
trafficking, terrorism, organized crime and the illicit exploitation of natural
and other resources. In this regard the Council calls on Member States to make
available all relevant information concerning such activities.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the effective implementation
of arms embargoes imposed by the Council in its relevant resolutions, and
encourages Member States to provide the Sanctions Committees with available
information on alleged violations of arms embargoes. The Security Council
also calls on Member States to give due consideration to the recommendations
of the report of the Monitoring Group established pursuant to resolution 1390
(2002) (S/2002/1050 and Corr.1); the Report of the Monitoring Mechanism on
Angola Sanctions (S/2000/1225 and Corr.1 and 2); the Report of the Panel of
Experts on Sierra Leone Diamonds and Arms (S/2000/1195); and the Report of
the Panel of Experts on Liberia (S/2001/1015 and S/2002/470).
“The Council also stresses the need to engage the relevant international
organizations, non-governmental organizations, business and financial
institutions and other actors at the international, regional and local levels to
contribute to the implementation of arms embargoes.
“Arms embargoes help to reduce arms flows to the targeted regions and
groups but do not address weapons already existing in conflict areas. The
Security Council therefore reiterates the importance of carrying out
Disarmament,
Demobilization
and
Reintegration
Programmes
as
comprehensively and effectively as possible in post-conflict situations under
its consideration.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report, no later
than December 2003, on the implementation of all the recommendations
contained in his report.”

3
