A/66/PV.43

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

43

rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 26 October 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.

The General Assembly now has before it the
second report of the Committee, dated 20 October 2011
(A/66/360/Add.1), concerning the credentials of
representatives of Member States to the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly other than the
credentials of the representatives contained in the first
report.

Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
Second report of the Credentials Committee
(A/66/360/Add.1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee
in paragraph 11 of its report reads as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the second report of the
Credentials Committee and the recommendation
contained therein,
“Approves the second
Credentials Committee.”

report

of

the

I now give the floor to the Chairman of the
Credentials Committee, His Excellency Mr. Pablo
Antonio Thalassinós of Panama.
Mr. Thalassinós (Panama), Chairman of the
Credentials Committee: I have the honour to introduce
the second report of the Credentials Committee for the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
approved the first report of the Credentials Committee
(A/66/360) at its meeting on 16 September, pursuant to
resolution 66/1.

As the second report of the Credentials
Committee indicates, the Committee decided, after
having
examined
the
credentials
of
those
representatives to the sixty-sixth session listed in the
report, to accept the credentials of all the
representatives of the Member States concerned. This
proposal was adopted without a vote.
I would also like to recall that, since the adoption
of the report by the Credentials Committee, the
following Member States have submitted formal
credentials in the form required by rule 27 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly: Moldova,
Mauritania, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.
Finally, I would request that the General
Assembly proceed to approve the second report of the
Credentials Committee as contained in document
A/66/360/Add.1.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly will now take action on the draft resolution
recommended by the Credentials Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report (A/66/360/Add.1).
The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution entitled “Credentials of representatives to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-56448 (E)

*1156448*

A/66/PV.43

the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly”
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 66/1 B).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 3.
Agenda item 72
Report of the International Court of Justice
Report of the International Court of Justice
(A/66/4)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/295)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly will now consider the report of the
International Court of Justice covering the period
1 August 2010 to 31 July 2011, which is contained in
document A/66/4. May I take it that the General
Assembly takes note of the report of the International
Court of Justice?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In connection
with this item, the Assembly also has before it a report
of the Secretary-General, circulated in document
A/66/295, on his Trust Fund to Assist States in the
Settlement of Disputes through the International Court
of Justice.
It is now my great honour to welcome to United
Nations Headquarters His Excellency Mr. Hisashi
Owada, President of the International Court of Justice,
and to give him the floor.
Mr. Owada, President of the International Court
of Justice: It is an honour and privilege for me to
address the General Assembly for the third time as
President of the International Court of Justice on the
report of the International Court of Justice for the
period from 1 August 2010 to 31 July 2011 (A/66/4). I
wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Ambassador Al-Nasser, on your election as President
of the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session, and to wish
you every success in your office.
I would now like, as is traditional, to present a
succinct review of the judicial activities of the Court
during the past year, that is, from October of last year
to September this year.

2

The international community of States continues
to bring a wide variety of legal disputes to the Court.
Since I addressed the Assembly in October 2010 (see
A/65/PV.38), the Court has altogether rendered four
judgments and three orders. They are a judgment on
the merits in the case concerning Ahmadou Sadio
Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of
the Congo); one order on provisional measures, in the
case concerning Certain Activities carried out by
Nicaragua in the Border Area (Costa Rica v.
Nicaragua); a judgment on preliminary objections in
the case concerning Application of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation); two
judgments denying requests for intervention in the case
concerning Territorial and Maritime Dispute
(Nicaragua v. Colombia), respectively filed by Costa
Rica and Honduras; as well as an order granting an
application for permission to intervene in the case
concerning Jurisdictional Immunities of the State
(Germany v. Italy), filed by Greece; and an order on
provisional measures in the case concerning Request
for Interpretation of the Judgment of 15 June 1962 in
the Case concerning the Temple of Preah Vihear
(Cambodia v. Thailand) (Cambodia v. Thailand).
These cases have involved States from all regions of
the world, and have raised a broad range of legal
questions.
Let me recapitulate them one by one in strict
chronological order. First, on 30 November 2010, the
Court rendered its judgment on the merits in the case
concerning Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea
v. Democratic Republic of the Congo). As will no
doubt be recalled, this case concerned alleged
violations of the rights of Mr. Diallo, a Guinean citizen
who settled in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in 1964 and founded two companies: Africom-Zaire
and Africontainers-Zaire. At the end of the 1980s,
Africom-Zaire and Africontainers-Zaire, acting through
their gérant, Mr. Diallo, instituted proceedings against
their business partners in an attempt to recover various
debts. The disputes over the debts continued
throughout the 1990s and remained largely unresolved.
On 25 January 1988, Mr. Diallo was arrested and
imprisoned and released a year later. On 5 November
1995, Mr. Diallo was again arrested and placed in
detention with a view to his expulsion, which was
carried out on 31 January 1996.

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

In its prior judgment of 24 May 2007 on
preliminary objections, the Court had held the
application of the Republic of Guinea to be admissible
insofar as it concerned the protection of Mr. Diallo’s
rights as an individual and the protection of
Mr. Diallo’s direct rights as associé in Africom-Zaire
and Africontainers-Zaire, but declared it inadmissible
insofar as the application concerned the protection of
Mr. Diallo in respect of alleged violations of rights of
Africom-Zaire and Africontainers-Zaire.
In its final judgment of 30 November 2010,
which is the subject matter of the report today, the first
question was that of the protection of Mr. Diallo’s
rights as an individual. As a preliminary matter, the
Court found that the claim relating to Mr. Diallo’s
arrest and detention in 1988 to 1989 should be
excluded from its consideration, as it had not been
raised by Guinea until its reply and was neither
implicit in the original application nor arose directly
out of a question in that application, which concerned
events in 1995 to 1996.
On that basis, the Court considered Guinea’s
claim that the circumstances in which Mr. Diallo was
arrested, detained and expelled during the period 1995
to 1996 constituted a breach by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of its international obligations.
Guinea argued that Mr. Diallo’s expulsion from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo breached article 13
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and article 12, paragraph 4, of the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights.
On this point, the Court observed that, in order to
comply with those provisions, the expulsion of an alien
lawfully in the territory of a State which is a party to
those instruments must be decided in accordance with
applicable domestic law and must not be arbitrary in
nature. The Court held that the expulsion decree of
31 October 1995 did not comply with Congolese law
and that the expulsion was therefore in violation of
article 13 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and article 12, paragraph 4, of the
African Charter. The Court also found that Mr. Diallo’s
right, afforded by article 13 of the Covenant, to have
his case reviewed by a competent authority had not
been respected, and that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo had not demonstrated compelling reasons of
national security to justify the denial of that right.

11-56448

Furthermore, the Court held that Mr. Diallo’s
arrests and detention also violated article 9 of the
Covenant and article 6 of the African Charter,
concerning liberty and security of the person. It found
that the deprivations of liberty suffered by Mr. Diallo
did not take place in accordance with the law of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, that they were
arbitrary, and that Mr. Diallo had not been informed, at
the time of his arrests, of the reasons for those arrests
or the charges against him. In addition, the Court found
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo had also
violated article 36, paragraph 1 (b) of the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations by not informing
Mr. Diallo, at the time of his arrests, of his right to
request consular assistance from his country.
On the other hand, with regard to the claim of
Guinea that Mr. Diallo was subjected to inhuman or
degrading treatment while in detention, the Court
concluded that Guinea had failed to establish that such
had been the case.
The second question that the Court dealt with in
accordance with the disposition of the earlier judgment
was the question of the protection of Mr. Diallo’s direct
rights as associé in Africom-Zaire and AfricontainersZaire. On this question, the Court considered Guinea’s
claim that the Democratic Republic of the Congo had
committed several internationally wrongful acts that
engaged its responsibility towards Guinea, in particular
the claim that there had been breaches of Mr. Diallo’s
right to take part and vote in general meetings, of his
rights relating to the gérance of the companies, of his
right to oversee and monitor that management and the
right to property of Mr. Diallo over his parts
sociales — that is, the shares — in the companies. The
Court found that the alleged rights of Mr. Diallo as
associé were not legally denied, even though their
exercise may have been made more difficult by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s expulsion of
Mr. Diallo. The Court did not find that any of those
claimed breaches had occurred.
In the light of the circumstances of the case, in
particular the fundamental character of the human
rights obligations breached, the Court upheld Guinea’s
claim for reparation in the form of compensation for
the injury suffered by Mr. Diallo.
Secondly, the next decision rendered by the Court
in the period under review was its order of 8 March
2011 on the request for the indication of provisional

3

A/66/PV.43

measures, pursuant to Article 41 of the Statute of the
Court, in the case concerning Certain Activities
Carried Out by Nicaragua in the Border Area (Costa
Rica v. Nicaragua). The case was brought by Costa
Rica by an application filed on 18 November 2010, in
which it founded the jurisdiction of the Court on article
XXXI of the Pact of Bogotá and on the declarations
made by the two States pursuant to Article 36,
paragraph 2, of the Statute. The application was filed in
regard to an alleged “incursion into, occupation of and
use by Nicaragua’s Army of Costa Rican territory as
well as breaches of Nicaragua’s obligations towards
Costa Rica”. Costa Rica claimed that Nicaragua had
occupied the territory of Costa Rica on two separate
occasions in connection with the construction of a
canal, as well as certain related works of dredging on
the San Juan River.
Pending the determination of the case on the
merits, Costa Rica requested the Court to order, as
provisional measures, that Nicaragua not station troops
or other personnel, engage in the construction or
enlargement of a canal, fell trees, remove vegetation or
dump sediment in the area concerned; that Nicaragua
suspend its dredging programme; and that Nicaragua
refrain from any other action that might prejudice the
rights of Costa Rica.
In its order on provisional measures of protection,
the Court determined that the instruments invoked by
Costa Rica appeared, prima facie, to afford a basis on
which the Court had jurisdiction to rule on the merits,
enabling it to indicate provisional measures if it
considered that the circumstances so required. The
Court also found that the rights to be protected by
those requested measures — in particular the right to
assert sovereignty over a contested area along the
boundary — were plausible and that a link existed
between the rights the protection of which was being
sought and the provisional measures requested.
On the basis of that finding that it had the power
to indicate provisional measures, the Court proceeded
to examine whether there was a real and imminent risk
that irreparable prejudice might be caused to the rights
in dispute before the Court had given its final decision,
and found that, given that Nicaragua intended to carry
out certain activities, if only occasionally, in the
contested area, a real risk of irreparable prejudice to
Costa Rica’s claimed title to sovereignty over the said
territory did exist. It further found that the situation
gave rise to a real and present risk of incidents liable to

4

cause irremediable harm in the form of bodily injury or
death.
On the basis of those findings, the Court decided
to indicate provisional measures to both of the parties,
ordering that each party refrain from sending to or
maintaining in the disputed territory any personnel,
whether civilian, police or security, until such time as
the dispute on the merits had been decided or the
parties had come to an agreement on the subject.
In addition, the Court held that Costa Rica may
dispatch civilian personnel charged with the protection
of the environment of the disputed territory, insofar as
it is necessary to avoid irreparable prejudice being
caused to the part of the wetland where that territory is
situated, on the condition that Costa Rica consult with
the secretariat of the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands
in regard to those actions, and give Nicaragua prior
notice of them. The Court also ordered that each party
refrain from any action that might aggravate or extend
the dispute before the Court or make it more difficult
to resolve, and that each party inform the Court as to
its compliance with the provisional measures.
Thirdly, the third decision of the Court related to
its judgment of 1 April 2011 on preliminary objections
in the case concerning Application of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation). As
members no doubt recall, proceedings in that case were
instituted on 12 August 2008, when Georgia brought a
case against the Russian Federation, alleging a
violation by the latter of the 1965 International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (CERD). Georgia founded the
jurisdiction of the Court on article 22 of that
Convention.
The Court gave its judgment in 2008 on the
application in respect to provisional measures of
protection, finding that it had prima facie jurisdiction.
In the next phase of the case, which is the present
phase, the Russian Federation raised four preliminary
objections to the Court’s jurisdiction under article 22
of CERD. Its objections were, first, that no dispute
between the parties existed concerning the
interpretation or application of CERD; secondly, that
the procedural requirements of article 22 of CERD had
not been fulfilled; thirdly, that the alleged wrongful
conduct had taken place outside the territory of the
Russian Federation, and thus the Court lacked

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

jurisdiction ratione loci; and fourthly, that any
jurisdiction that the Court might have was limited
ratione temporis to events that had occurred after the
entry into force of CERD between the parties on 2 July
1999.
The Court examined the Russian Federation’s
first preliminary objection in relation to events during
three distinct time periods. With respect to the first
period, which was the period before CERD had entered
into force between the parties on 2 July 1999, the Court
concluded that there was no evidence of the existence
of a dispute about racial discrimination during that
period and that even if a dispute had been found to
have existed, it could not have been a dispute between
the parties with respect to the interpretation or
application of CERD.
With regard to the second period, from the time
when CERD entered into force between the parties and
before the beginning of armed conflict between the
parties in early August 2008, the Court reviewed the
documents and statements during that period and
concluded that none of the documents or statements
from that period provided any basis for a finding that
there was a dispute between Georgia and the Russian
Federation with respect to the interpretation and
application of CERD during that time frame.
With respect to the events that occurred during
the third period, August 2008 — in particular after the
armed hostilities in South Ossetia that began during the
night of 7 and 8 August — the Court found that, while
Georgia’s claims were primarily focused on allegations
of unlawful use of force, they also expressly referred to
ethnic cleansing by Russian forces. All of those claims
had been made against the Russian Federation directly
and had been rejected by the latter. The Court therefore
concluded that, by 12 August 2008, there was a dispute
between Georgia and the Russian Federation about the
latter’s compliance with its obligations under CERD.
The Court accordingly dismissed the Russian
Federation’s first preliminary objection.
The Court then examined the Russian
Federation’s second preliminary objection, concerning
the procedural requirements under article 22 of CERD,
which provides that
“[a]ny dispute ... which is not settled by
negotiation or by the procedures expressly
provided for in this Convention, shall ... be

11-56448

referred to the International Court of Justice for
decision”.
The Court found, based on an analysis of the ordinary
meaning of the phrase used, that article 22 did establish
certain preconditions to be fulfilled before the
applicant could seize the Court on the basis of article
22.
On that basis, the Court examined whether such
preconditions had been met. In the instant case, with
regard to the requirement to follow “the procedures
expressly provided for” in CERD, the Court noted that
both sides agreed that, prior to the seizing of the Court,
Georgia did not claim that it had used or attempted to
use that mode of dispute resolution. The Court
therefore focused on the question of whether
negotiation was a required precondition and, if so,
whether that condition had been fulfilled. It observed,
in the light of its finding on the first preliminary
objection, that the dispute had arisen only as of
9 August 2008, and that the issue could be examined in
relation to the period between that date and 12 August
2008, when the application was filed.
After reviewing the facts in the record relating to
that period, the Court found that, although certain
claims and counterclaims had been made by the parties
during that period concerning ethnic cleansing, which
might evidence the existence of a dispute as to the
interpretation and application of CERD, they did not
amount to attempts at negotiations by either party. The
Court therefore concluded that Georgia had not
established that, in the relevant period, it had attempted
to negotiate CERD-related matters with the Russian
Federation, and that Georgia and the Russian
Federation had engaged in negotiations with respect to
the latter’s compliance with its substantive obligations
under CERD.
Having determined that the requirement
established in article 22 had not been satisfied, the
Court concluded that it did not need to determine
whether the two conditions set out in article 22 were
cumulative or alternative. The Court accordingly held
that article 22 of CERD could not serve to found the
Court’s jurisdiction, and upheld the Russian
Federation’s second preliminary objection. It therefore
concluded that the case could not proceed to the merits
phase, noting that it did not need to consider the
Russian Federation’s third or fourth preliminary
objections.

5

A/66/PV.43

Let me now turn to the two judgments of 4 May
2011 relating to the requests to intervene in the case
concerning the Territorial and Maritime Dispute
(Nicaragua v. Colombia), filed by Costa Rica and
Honduras, respectively.

Honduras, in its application, made it clear that it
primarily sought to be permitted to intervene in the
pending case as a party. It was only if the Court did not
accede to that request that Honduras requested, in the
alternative, to be permitted to intervene as a non-party.

The principal case between Nicaragua and
Colombia concerns the disputed sovereignty over
several maritime features in the Caribbean Sea, as well
as the plotting of the maritime boundary between the
parties. On 25 February and 10 June 2010,
respectively, Costa Rica and Honduras filed requests
for permission to intervene in the case.

In its judgment of 4 May 2011 on whether to
grant the application of Honduras to intervene, the
Court devoted a significant part of its analysis to the
question of intervention as a party.

In its application, Costa Rica stated that it sought
to intervene as a non-party for the purpose of
informing the Court of the nature of its legal rights and
interests and of seeking to ensure that the Court’s
decision regarding the maritime boundary between
Nicaragua and Colombia did not affect those rights and
interests.
In its judgment of 4 May on whether to grant
Costa Rica’s application to intervene, the Court first
defined the legal framework for intervention provided
for under Article 62 of its Statute and article 81 of the
Rules of Court.
The Court examined whether Costa Rica had
established an interest of a legal nature that may be
affected by the decision in the main proceedings. The
Court accepted that although Nicaragua and Colombia
differed in their assessments as to the limits of the area
in which Costa Rica might have a legal interest, they
both recognized the existence of Costa Rica’s interest
of a legal nature in at least some areas claimed by the
parties to the main proceedings.
However, the Court, in examining whether Costa
Rica had established that the interest of a legal nature
that it had set out was one which “may be affected” by
the decision of the Court in the main proceedings,
concluded that Costa Rica had not succeeded in
establishing that point. The Court stated that, in
accordance with its consistent practice, when drawing a
line delimiting the maritime areas between the parties
to the main proceedings, that it would, whenever
necessary, end the line in question before it reached an
area in which the interests of a legal nature of third
States might become involved. In that situation, the
Court held that Costa Rica’s application for permission
to intervene in the case could not be granted.

6

The Court noted that while neither Article 62 of
the Statute nor article 81 of the Rules of Court
specified the category in which a State might seek to
intervene — namely, as a party or as a non-party — it
is accepted by the case law of the Court that a State
might be permitted to intervene either as a non-party or
as a party. The Court pointed out, however, that
whatever the capacity in which a State is seeking to
intervene, whether as a party or a non-party, it must
fulfil the condition laid down by Article 62 of the
Statute and demonstrate that it has an interest of a legal
nature that might be affected by the future decision of
the Court.
On that basis, the Court turned to an examination
of whether Honduras had satisfied that condition. The
area in which Honduras had specified that it had an
interest of a legal nature that might be affected by the
decision in the main proceedings was an area that had
been the subject of the Court’s judgment of 8 October
2007 in the case concerning Territorial and Maritime
Dispute between Nicaragua and Honduras in the
Caribbean Sea (Nicaragua v. Honduras). The question
on which the Court focused was whether that judgment
of 2007, to which Honduras was a party, barred it from
making the request to intervene in a case in which
Honduras claimed to have an interest of a legal nature.
The Court decided that by virtue of the principle
of res judicata, as applied to the judgment of 8 October
2007, Honduras could not have an interest of a legal
nature in the area south of the maritime boundary line
established by the Court in that decision. With respect
to the area north of that boundary line, the Court
concluded that Honduras could have no interest of a
legal nature that might be affected by the decision in
the main proceedings for the simple reason that neither
of the parties to the new proceedings, Nicaragua nor
Colombia, was contesting the rights of Honduras over
that area.

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

The Court held that Honduras had no interest of a
legal nature that might be affected in any of the
maritime areas it had identified in its application. The
Court further observed that Honduras could not claim
an interest of a legal nature in the effects that the
decision of the Court in the main proceedings might
have on the rights of Honduras under the 1986
Maritime Delimitation Treaty, which had been agreed
between Honduras and Colombia, inasmuch as it was a
bilateral treaty and the matter was exclusively between
Honduras and Colombia and as such had no relevance
to the Court’s eventual determination of the maritime
boundary between Nicaragua and Colombia. For those
reasons, the Court held that the Honduran application
for permission to intervene in the case, either as a party
or as a non-party, could not be granted.
Now I will move to the fifth case. That case, in
which the Court handed down its decision in the form
of an order on 4 July 2011, relates to a request to
intervene by Greece in the case concerning
Jurisdictional Immunities of the State (Germany v.
Italy).
The Hellenic Republic filed an application for
permission to intervene in that case on 13 January
2011. The main proceedings to which the application
relates concern a dispute over whether Italy has
violated the jurisdictional immunity of Germany by
allowing civil claims against it in Italian courts based
on violations of international humanitarian law by the
Third Reich during the Second World War.
The basis for Greece’s application to intervene
was that it had an interest of a legal nature to the extent
that the Court, in the decision it would be called upon
to render in the case between Germany and Italy,
would rule on the question of whether a judgment
handed down by a Greek court can be enforced on
Italian territory, having regard to Germany’s
jurisdictional immunity. Greece stated that the decision
of the Court as to whether Italian and Greek judgments
for which the Italian Court had given judgment to
enforce in Italy may be enforced in Italy was directly
and primarily of interest to Greece and could affect its
interest of a legal nature.
The Court took the position that, in a judgment
that it would render in the main proceedings between
Germany and Italy, it might find it necessary to
consider also the decisions of Greek courts in the
context of the principle of State immunity — which

11-56448

was the issue in the main proceedings — for the
purposes of examining the request in Germany’s
submissions relating to the issue of whether Italy
committed a breach of Germany’s jurisdictional
immunity by declaring Greek judgments as enforceable
in Italy. Given that possibility, the Court held that this
element was sufficient to conclude that Greece had an
interest of a legal nature that may be affected by the
judgment in the main proceedings. The request for
intervention was therefore granted.
Greece having fulfilled the criteria for
intervention laid down in article 81 of the Rules of
Court, the Court granted its request to intervene as a
non-party, insofar as the intervention would be limited
to decisions relating to illegal acts committed by
Germany during the Second World War rendered by
Greek domestic courts and declared enforceable by
Italian courts. The request having been granted, the
Court gave its decision in the form of an order of a
procedural nature, specifying the forms of procedure to
follow, rather than in the form of a judgment, as it was
in the two previous judgments that I discussed earlier
in this report.
Let me turn now to the sixth case — an order on
provisional measures handed down by the Court on
18 July 2011 in the case concerning the Request for
Interpretation of the Judgment of 15 June 1962 in the
Case concerning the Temple of Preah Vihear
(Cambodia v. Thailand) (Cambodia v. Thailand). The
case was brought before the Court by Cambodia.
Cambodia filed a request for interpretation of an
earlier judgment rendered by the Court on 15 June
1962, under Article 60 of the Statute of the Court, on
28 April 2011. Cambodia claimed that a dispute existed
between the parties as to the meaning and scope of the
1962 judgment. In the 1962 judgment, the Court had
found, inter alia, that Cambodia held sovereignty over
the Temple of Preah Vihear, situated in the boundary
area between Cambodia and Thailand.
On the same day that it filed its application for
interpretation of the 1962 judgment, Cambodia also
submitted a request for the indication of provisional
measures in order to cause the incursions onto its
territory by Thailand to cease, pending the Court’s
decision on the request for interpretation of the 1962
judgment.
At this stage of the proceedings, when the Court
dealt with the request for provisional measures, it first

7

A/66/PV.43

addressed the issue of whether a dispute appeared to
exist as to the meaning or scope of the 1962 judgment,
relating in particular, first, to the meaning and scope of
the phrase “vicinity on Cambodian territory” as used in
the operative clause of that judgment; secondly, to the
nature of the obligation imposed on Thailand by the
operative clause to withdraw any military or police
forces, or other guards or keepers; and thirdly, to the
issue of whether the judgment did or did not recognize
with binding force the line shown on the map
submitted by Cambodia in the original proceedings as
representing the frontier between the two parties.
In its order of 18 July 2011, the Court held that
the rights claimed by Cambodia, insofar as they were
based on the 1962 judgment as interpreted by
Cambodia, were plausible and that the necessary link
between the alleged rights and the measures requested
had been established. Examining whether there was a
real risk of irreparable prejudice that might be caused
to the rights which were in dispute, the Court
concluded that because of the persistent tensions and
absence of a settlement to the conflict, there was a real
and imminent risk of irreparable prejudice being
caused to the rights claimed by Cambodia, and that
there was urgency.
On that basis, the Court decided to indicate
provisional measures to both parties. In the order, the
Court in particular established a provisional
demilitarized zone, the coordinates of which were set
out in its order, and ordered both parties immediately
to withdraw their military personnel from that zone and
to refrain from any military presence within that zone
and from any armed activity directed at that zone.
The Court also ordered both parties, first, to
continue the cooperation that they had entered into
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and, in
particular, to allow the observers appointed by the
organization to have access to the provisional
demilitarized zone; secondly, to refrain from any action
that might aggravate or extend the dispute before the
Court or make it more difficult to resolve; and thirdly
and finally, to inform the Court as to compliance with
the provisional measures. It also ordered Thailand not
to obstruct Cambodia’s free access to the Temple of
Preah Vihear or Cambodia’s provision of fresh supplies
to its non-military personnel in the Temple.
Those are the cases that the Court has disposed of
during the period covered by this presentation.

8

However, in addition to those seven decisions
handed down during the 2010-2011 reporting period,
the Court held hearings in March 2011 in the case
concerning Application of the Interim Accord of
13 September 1995 (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia v. Greece). This case has completed its
written and oral proceedings and is now under
deliberation by the Court. I should also mention that,
outside of the reporting period, the Court also
completed and held hearings in the case concerning
Jurisdictional Immunities of the State (Germany v.
Italy; Greece intervening), which is now under
deliberation by the Court with a view to its final
decision. In addition, the Court is currently considering
the request for an advisory opinion made by the
International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD) in respect of Judgment No. 2867 of the
Administrative Tribunal of the International Labour
Organization. Those three cases are now being dealt
with by the Court on a parallel basis.
As can be seen, given the remarkable increase in
the number of cases on its docket, the Court is now
dealing with more than a few cases on a parallel basis,
thereby making its best endeavour to eliminate a
backlog of judicial work. Our current docket stands at
15 cases, most of which are still in the hands of the
parties, who are presenting their written proceedings in
advance of the oral hearings.
The two most recent cases filed during the
reporting period in are the case concerning Certain
Activities carried out by Nicaragua in the Border Area
(Costa Rica v. Nicaragua) and the case concerning the
Request for Interpretation of the Judgment of 15 June
1962 in the case concerning the Temple of Preah
Vihear (Cambodia v. Thailand) (Cambodia v.
Thailand). I know that the Court is making its best
efforts to respond to the high expectations of the
international community for an expeditious handling of
the cases referred to the International Court of Justice.
This marks my final address to the Assembly as
President of the International Court of Justice. It
therefore seems an appropriate moment to reflect on
the trust that the international community of States
continues to place in the Court to handle a wide variety
of legal disputes. States from all corners of the world,
faithful to their attachment to international law,
continue to have recourse to the Court to find judicial
settlements of their disputes. In the three years of my
presidency, the docket has never contained fewer than

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

15 cases. In fact, in the past 10 years the docket has
averaged at least 15 cases, and sometimes as many as
28.
As is apparent from the overview I have given
today of the Court’s work in the past year, the
substantive areas on which it is asked to rule are
broader in scope than ever before, with each case
presenting distinct legal and factual elements.
Furthermore, cases are frequently made up of different
incidental phases, from preliminary objections to
provisional measures to requests for intervention and
requests for interpretation. As a result, the Court has
been consistently handling cases in parallel and
shortening the time between the closure of written
proceedings and the opening of the oral proceedings.
It is no exaggeration to say that all regions of the
world have become closely intertwined. In this twentyfirst century international politics are undeniably
interconnected. A truly global economy has emerged,
and the natural environment and global climate change
have created new challenges. In these times of
unprecedented interconnections between States and
peoples, it is my sincere belief that a firm reliance on
international law must underpin any and all future
developments on the global stage. The International
Court of Justice, as guardian of international law, is
proud to play a vital role in our increasingly
globalizing world.
It is my hope that Member States will continue to
rely on the International Court of Justice to assist them
in the pacific settlement of their disputes and that more
States will accept the Court’s jurisdiction, whether
through a declaration under Article 36, paragraph 2, of
the Statute, or through signatures of the many
multilateral treaties that now contain compromissory
clauses that refer to the Court disputes relating to
interpretation or application of those treaties.
Let me conclude by offering my profound thanks
not only for the opportunity to address the Assembly
today, but also for the trust Members have placed in the
Court over the past three years. I wish the Assembly a
most productive sixty-sixth session.
The President: I thank the President of the
International Court of Justice.
Mr. Kessel (Canada): On behalf of Australia,
New Zealand and Canada, I would like to thank the
President of the International Court of Justice, Judge

11-56448

Owada, for his excellent report on the work of the
Court over the past year, and to express our
appreciation to him and to the Vice-President, Judge
Tomka, for their leadership of the Court. Judge
Owada’s report highlights the invaluable role that the
Court plays in the peaceful resolution of disputes
between States. Canada, Australia and New Zealand
have always been, and will continue to be, strong
supporters of the International Court of Justice as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
The past year was a busy one for the Court. As its
annual report (A/66/4) indicates, 14 contentious cases
and one advisory proceeding were on the Court’s List
during the past year. The Court deliberated four cases
consecutively, and two new cases were initiated before
it.
The cases before the Court cover an impressively
wide range of issues, from environmental concerns to
jurisdictional immunities of the State to violations of
human rights, and a wide range of the countries around
the world.
Despite the increasing complexity of the cases
before it, the Court has managed to clear its backlog of
cases. Canada, Australia and New Zealand are
encouraged by the Court’s continued commitment to
ensuring the efficiency of its working methods.
The regional and subject-matter diversity of the
contentious cases before the Court illustrates both the
Court’s universality and the ever-growing confidence
of the international community in its decisions.
As noted in the report, the Court, as a court of
justice and the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, occupies a special position in promoting the
rule of law through its judgments and advisory
opinions. Canada, Australia and New Zealand look
forward to the International Court of Justice continuing
to play its vital role in the peaceful settlement of
international disputes and the promotion of the rule of
law, as mandated by the Charter of the United Nations.
Wider acceptance of its compulsory jurisdiction
enables the Court to fulfil its role more effectively.
Accordingly, we continue to urge Member States that
have not done so to deposit with the Secretary-General
a declaration of acceptance of the Court’s compulsory
jurisdiction.
Mr. Ahamed (India): I would like to thank Judge
Hisashi Owada, President of the International Court of

9

A/66/PV.43

Justice, for his comprehensive and detailed report
covering the judicial activities of the Court over the
past year. I also thank him and Vice-President
Judge Tomka for their leadership of the Court over that
period.
India attaches the highest importance to the Court
as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
The peaceful resolution of disputes is fundamental to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Court has fulfilled that task admirably since its
establishment and has acquired a well-deserved
reputation as an impartial institution with the highest
legal standards, in accordance with its mandate under
the Charter of the United Nations.
The Court remains the only judicial body with
legitimacy derived from the Charter and possessing
universal character with general jurisdiction, while
other
international
judicial
institutions
have
competence and jurisdiction in specific areas only. The
Statute of the Court is an integral part of the Charter of
the United Nations, a unique status enjoyed only by the
International Court of Justice.
One of the primary goals of the United Nations,
as stated in the Preamble to the Charter, is to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations of international law can be maintained. The
International Court of Justice, as the only international
Court with general jurisdiction in international law, is
uniquely placed to fulfil that role.
The report of the Court (A/66/4) clearly
illustrates the confidence that States have in it, as
shown by the number and scope of cases entrusted to
it. It also shows the Court’s growing specialization in
complex aspects of public international law and
demonstrates the Court’s universality and the great
importance that Member States attach to it.
I am especially glad to see that the Court’s docket
of pending cases has grown consistently in recent
years. It now stands at 17, involving more than
30 different States, as well as one request for an
advisory opinion, as Judge Owada mentioned. The
variety in the subject matter of recent cases, from
territorial and maritime disputes to the obligation to
prosecute or extradite, also demonstrates the
significant role the Court plays in solving disputes
between States and providing its opinion on important
questions of international law.

10

The judgments delivered by the International
Court of Justice have played an important role in the
interpretation and clarification of rules of international
law, as well as in the progressive development and
codification of that law. In the performance of its
judicial functions, the Court has remained highly
sensitive in respecting States’ political realities and
sentiments, while acting within the provisions of the
Charter, its own Statute and other applicable
international law. It has contributed significantly to
settling legal disputes between sovereign States, thus
promoting the rule of law in international relations.
Since its inception, the Court has dealt with a
variety of complex legal issues. It has pronounced
judgment in areas covering territorial and maritime
delimitation, diplomatic protection, environmental
concerns, racial discrimination, violations of human
rights, and the interpretation and application of
international treaties and conventions. The Court’s
second function, of providing advisory opinions on
legal questions referred to it by the organs of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies, continues
to fulfil the important role of clarifying key
international legal issues.
It is commendable that the Court has taken
significant steps in recent years to enhance its
efficiency in coping with the steady increase in its
workload, including, inter alia, re-examining its
procedures and working methods, updating its Practice
Directions for States appearing before it, and setting a
particularly demanding schedule of hearings and
deliberations so that it can consider several cases at the
same time. As a result, we are happy to note that the
Court has successfully cleared its backlog of cases,
with the effect of further strengthening the confidence
of States in its competency and efficiency.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the great
importance that the international community attaches
to the work of the International Court of Justice and to
draw the Assembly’s attention to the importance of
strengthening its functioning, including by the
provision of additional staff as the Court has requested.
India reaffirms its strong support for the International
Court of Justice.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to express Egypt’s appreciation to Judge Hisashi
Owada, President of the International Court of Justice,
for his comprehensive presentation of the report of the

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

Court on its activities over the past year (A/66/4). I
also wish to reaffirm Egypt’s full support for the
Court’s key role in ensuring the implementation of the
provisions of international law, adjudicating disputes
between States and providing advisory opinions to
States and international organizations to guide them on
how best to carry out their roles and functions.
Since its establishment as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, the Court has
strengthened important legal principles and rules
through its advisory opinions on the Legality of the
threat or use of nuclear weapons (A/51/218, annex), on
the Legal consequences of the Construction of a Wall
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (A/ES-10/273),
on the Accordance with international law of the
unilateral declaration of independence in respect of
Kosovo (see A/64/881) and many other decisions on
territorial and maritime border disputes, which have
and will continue to contribute to the peaceful
settlement of disputes around the world, preventing
them from escalating into armed conflicts.
Egypt also recognizes the important contribution
of the Court’s decisions and orders delivered during the
past year, inter alia, the order delivered in March 2011
on the provisional measures in the case concerning
Certain Activities carried out by Nicaragua in the
Border Area (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua) and its decision
in July 2011 on the provisional measures in the case
concerning Request for Interpretation of the Judgment
of 15 June 1962 in the case concerning the Temple of
Preah Vihear (Cambodia v. Thailand) (Cambodia v.
Thailand). The Court’s efforts in this field also
contribute to and supplement the theme proposed by
the President of the General Assembly for the current
session, which reaffirms the importance of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the role mediation can play
in that regard.
Egypt therefore emphasizes the need to
encourage States and United Nations organs and
specialized agencies to request advisory opinions of the
Court on important legal questions arising within the
scope of their activities, because such opinions
constitute development and codification of the rules of
international law. They also assist in consolidating the
principles of justice and equality at the international
level, because of the high moral and legal values they
embody, and thus promote the maintenance of
international peace and security.

11-56448

Furthermore, Egypt expresses its appreciation for
the pioneering role played by the Court in fostering the
rule of law at the international level and in promoting a
democratic and equitable international order. We stress
the need to draw on the experiences of the Court in
consolidating established legal rules in many spheres.
Among them are the criteria and procedures for
accepting new Members into the United Nations, which
is relevant to the current discussions on the application
by Palestine; the responsibility of States to protect their
citizens in accordance with international law; and the
distinction between legitimate armed struggle, in the
framework of the right to self-determination, and
terrorism.
Egypt believes that it is important to provide the
Court with the chance to consider the legality of the
encroachment by certain principal organs of the
Organization on the competence of other principal
organs, which are more representative and democratic
in nature, contrary to the delicate balance established
in the Charter. In the same vein, it is necessary to
monitor and assess the implementation of the Court’s
judgments, decisions and advisory opinions to enhance
international recognition of the moral and legal values
of its advisory opinions. Egypt reiterates its proposal to
establish a mechanism within the United Nations for
that purpose; first, to ensure that, as required under the
Charter, States respect the advisory opinions and
judgments issued by the Court at the request of one or
the other of the principal organs; secondly, to monitor
the damages caused by failure to implement opinions
and judgments; and thirdly, to adopt modalities for
compensating affected States, similar to the one formed
to assess the damages caused by the construction of the
separation wall in Palestine — which so far still faces
major obstacles.
In that regard, it is also important to act on the
decision of the League of Arab States in October 2011
to present to the General Assembly a draft resolution
requesting an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the legal status of the Palestinian
and Arab prisoners and detainees in the prisons of
Israel, the occupying Power, under the relevant rules of
international law, and to reassert their status as
prisoners of war and their legitimate right to freedom.
Egypt also welcomes the steps taken by the Court
to increase its effectiveness in dealing with the steady
increase in cases before it and encourages the Court’s
continued examination of its procedures and working

11

A/66/PV.43

methods. Egypt supports the Court’s request for
additional posts financed by the regular budget in order
to strengthen its existing security team and its
Department of Legal Matters and Publications
Division. Egypt will work with other States in the Fifth
Committee to respond positively to those demands,
especially since they come at a time of increasing
international efforts to utilize good governance at the
international level as a means to fulfil the
commitments of the Court.
In this regard, Egypt welcomes the reference in
the Court’s report to the ongoing work on the
technological renovation of the Peace Palace halls and
the replacement and modernization of the audio-visual
equipment in its historic courtroom and nearby rooms,
so as to enable the Court to perform its tasks in a way
befitting its international standing.
In conclusion, Egypt expresses its appreciation to
all the judges of the Court, the Registrar and staff for
their efforts in the year covered by the report and
wishes them success in performing the lofty role of the
Court in the future.
Mr. Chuquihuara (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Before making my statement, I wish to join in the
expressions of condolence on the great loss of
Mr. Antonio Cassese, a great jurist, who contributed
greatly to the body of international law. We will always
regret his loss.
I would like to thank the President of the
International Court of Justice, Judge Hisashi Owada,
for being with us this morning and for his very
interesting introduction of the report on the intense
work of the Court in the past year (A/66/4).
The purpose of the United Nations is to ensure
that States resolve their disputes by peaceful means, in
accordance with the principles of justice and
international law. To that end, the United Nations
Charter itself recognizes the peaceful resolution of
disputes as a general principle, whereby States should
refrain from the use or threat of use of force.
Underscoring the essential role that the United Nations
Charter ascribes to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to fostering relations of
friendship and cooperation, Member States declared in
resolution 2625 (XXV) that they would refrain, in their
international relations, from the threat or use of force
against
the territorial
integrity or
political

12

independence of any State, or in any other manner
contrary to the principles of the United Nations.
Likewise, they believed that it is essential, to that
end, for all States to resolve their international disputes
through peaceful means, in keeping with the Charter.
In that regard, the International Court of Justice was
established as the principle judicial organ of the United
Nations to institute a universal system that would
enable States to resolve their disputes by peaceful
means. Article 94 of the Charter provides for the
Court’s decisions to be complied with in such a way as
to put an end to legal disputes. For that reason, Peru, as
a country that respects international law, reiterates its
commitment to comply with the obligations that arise
from the statutes of the Court and urges all other States
to comply with the decisions of the Court.
Despite the sensitivity of the topics taken up by
the Court — including issues of territorial and
maritime boundaries, environmental issues, the
interpretation of treaties and the immunities regime,
just to mention a few — States have opted freely, in
exercise of their sovereignty, to go before the Court so
that it would be the Court that would resolve their
disputes. That is the result of the judicial quality of its
rulings, as well as of the independence and impartiality
of its judges, which has led to universal recognition of
the Court’s high degree of legitimacy.
Peru’s commitment to the work of the
International Court of Justice is reflected in the
American Treaty on Pacific Settlement of 1948, also
known as the Bogotá Pact, by which the States parties
agreed always to refer procedures to the Court for
peaceful resolution. Likewise, in keeping with Article
36, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the Court, Peru gave
unconditional recognition to its jurisdiction in
contentious matters.
Moreover, through the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Resolution of International Disputes, which
was adopted by consensus through resolution 37/10 in
1982, it was reiterated that legal disputes should,
generally speaking, be brought by parties to the
International Court of Justice, and that bringing a case
before the Court should not be viewed as an unfriendly
act between States.
As a result of that recognition, Peru believes that
it is of the greatest importance for the Court’s
jurisdiction be universally accepted by all States. As
indicated in its report, currently only 66 States have

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

issued statements indicating that they recognize the
compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, although in many
cases those statements were made with reservations.
Peru therefore urgently calls on all States that have not
yet done so to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the
Court in contentious matters.
We reaffirm our full endorsement and support of
the work of the Court in both its judicial and its
advisory capacities. At the same time, we wish to stress
the prominent work of its judges, with respect both to
the high level of their legal skills and to their efficient
management, which have made it possible for the
Court to adopt measures aimed at making its work
more effective.
We would also like to recognize that the support
of the Secretariat has been critical in meeting those
objectives. The Court has had an agenda packed with
litigation over the past several years, with the
presentation of two new cases. Those new tasks must
be added to the pending cases and an advisory opinion
procedure, which means that in the current session a
total of 14 cases have been heard, along with one
advisory procedure.
We should also mention the Court’s important
role in communication through its official publications
and its electronic portal, all of which provide an
invaluable tool, as does the dialogue of the Court with
other institutions, such as the International Law
Commission, with various regional and national courts
and with academic institutions, all of which enables an
exchange of views that benefits and enriches the legal
community.
All of those efforts, it is clear, contribute
substantively to the promotion of the rule of law at the
international and national levels. States should ensure
that the Court has sufficient resources available to
carry out the task assigned to it. In that regard, we
believe that the requirements characterized as
indispensable in the report with regard to the Court’s
needs in the area of human resources (A/66/333), such
as security, legal assistance and publications, are fully
reasonable and should be addressed as quickly as
possible.
Finally, Peru would like to publically
acknowledge those who have contributed to the Trust
Fund to Assist States in the Settlement of Disputes
through the International Court of Justice. We would

11-56448

like to join the Secretary-General’s appeal to all States
and relevant entities to collaborate with the Fund.
Ms. Flores (Honduras): We thank the president of
the International Court of Justice, Mr. Hisashi Owada,
for the presentation of the Court’s most recent report
(A/66/4). We also express our gratitude to the other
distinguished members of the Court.
Honduras, as a peace-loving and law-abiding
country, has relied on the Court’s rulings on several
occasions to settle mayor territorial disputes with
neighbouring nations. Our Constitution clearly states
that Honduras shall adhere to the principles and
practices of international law based on human
solidarity, our people’s self determination, the
non-intervention of others in our internal affairs and
the consolidation of peace and universal democracy.
Historically, our two-century-old boundary
disputes and other matters pertaining to our territorial
and maritime rights, which we have not been able to
resolve directly with other parties by means of peaceful
negotiations, mediation or arbitration, have been
submitted to the consideration of the International
Court.
My country, which has overcome difficult periods
of unrest, political and social upheaval and the
polarization of conflict in the Central American region,
has always respected the Court’s decisions. Where
there has been any room for further interpretation, we
have voluntarily deferred to the better judgement and
advice of the International Court of Justice. We are
therefore thankful to the Court for the many times we
have settled our differences with other States by
submitting to its jurisdiction.
The most recent cases dealt with our sovereign
rights in the Fonseca Gulf and secure passage for our
country to the Pacific Ocean and, most recently, with
maritime delimitation in the Caribbean as pertaining to
the Caribbean Sea Maritime Limits Treaty, which we
signed with Colombia in 1999.
Following our last petition to the International
Court, the Court found that the application for
permission to intervene in the proceeding, either as a
party or as non-party, filed by the Republic of
Honduras under Article 62 of the Statute of the Court,
could not be granted, since Honduras could not claim
an interest of a legal nature that might be affected in
any of the maritime areas identified in its application.

13

A/66/PV.43

Having relied on several occasions on the
wisdom of the International Court of Justice for
settling serious and heartfelt disputes, we can certainly
attest here today as to the Court’s contribution to
peaceful coexistence and the valuable role it continues
to play in regional and world peace.
The willingness of Member States to join in
efforts to combat impunity and strengthen universal
justice is essential to the United Nations. We can fairly
say that it enables them to work for accountability.
Those efforts undoubtedly help to secure the road to
reconciliation and provide victims with redress. The
role the Court will play in this new century, with a
jurisdiction based on consent, will depend on its
activity and on its acceptance in the international
community as an effective tribunal that can truly serve
as a world court.
Despite all the achievements in our region with
respect to securing and strengthening the rule of law,
we live in an everyday reality where criminal activities
and corruption threaten the core of governance and
hinder, or even paralyse, States’ national justice
systems. Violence and crime are eating through the
valued weave of our societies from deep within. We
have to find a way to prevail in our common goals
while making our systems work. We need to provide
security while guaranteeing rights to our citizens, and
we have to provide relief to the needy and protection to
the innocent.
We therefore require a coordinated, strong
institutional and international judicial framework.
Close to home, we can praise the efforts of the
International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG), established under an agreement
with the United Nations, in contributing to that
accountability process. So far, as we know, CICIG has
assisted the Guatemalan State to investigate and
dismantle violent criminal organizations believed to be
responsible for widespread crime and paralysis in that
country’s justice system.
In that same vein, I would like to stress the
importance of several issues in the Court’s report that
constitute good ideas that have been dormant in our
agenda, including the right to protect or the issue of
human security. Recently, the Assembly decided to
continue to debate the human security issue in order to
address the lack of a definition of the concept. The
concept has serious legal implications for Member

14

States. It would be of paramount importance if the
Court would, for illustrative purposes, pronounced
itself on the rights and responsibilities of States with
relation to human security.
It is indeed difficult to see the splendors of justice
shadowed by the hindrances of social inequity,
disparity and unrest. There will be no rest as long as
one part of the population enjoys the benefits of the
system and the opportunity to participate, while the
vast majority remains isolated, powerless and
marginalized from the blessings of development.
The sense of powerlessness resulting from the
inability to achieve a decent standard of living —
rightly deserved by the immense, motley multitudes
who, in various latitudes of the Earth subsist in the
most precarious economic and social conditions — is
undeniably a latent source of conflict. Only by
recognizing and respecting the rights of each other will
the world have a chance at peace.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin my statement by thanking Mr. Hisashi
Owada, President of the International Court of Justice,
for his comprehensive and detailed report on the
activities of that organ from 1 August 2010 to 31 July
2011. I also thank the staff of the Court.
My country, Senegal, takes the opportunity
provided by this annual meeting to review the report of
the International Court of Justice (A/66/4) to highlight
the Court’s productivity in moving forward the ideals
of peace and justice upon which the Organization was
founded. A better time could hardly be imagined to
commend the invaluable role of the Court in
establishing a more just and peaceful world by
promoting respect for the rule of law and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. In that connection, my
delegation would like to urge the International Court of
Justice, as the only international court of universal
character, to continue its efforts to strengthen
international justice, develop international law and
maintain international peace and security.
The growing role of the Court for States is clearly
manifested in the increased number of applications
presented to the Court. Such a demonstration of
confidence also reflects the growing acceptance of the
primacy of law as well as the interest of countries in
the peaceful settlement of disputes. By promoting the
legal settlement of disputes, the Court has contributed
to peaceful relations among States, thereby greatly

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Similarly, in basing its actions on the rule of law,
the International Court of Justice contributes at the
same time to the interpretation and development of
international law in accordance with respect for the
rule of law at the international level. In addition, the
Court’s orders and decisions serve as juridical
precedent in many situations, enriching the codification
and consolidation of international law.
For all of those reasons, my delegation reiterates
its full support to the International Court of Justice and
its appreciation for its praiseworthy efforts to enhance
its effectiveness. We urge that the Court be provided
with the necessary means to appropriately accomplish
its noble mission.
In conclusion, on the occasion of the review of
the report of the International Court of Justice, my
delegation would recall that today the positive effects
of the peaceful settlement of disputes are obvious.
From that perspective, the work of the Court clearly
contributes to achieving the purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular those pertaining to the
peaceful settlement of disputes in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law.
Given its deep commitment to the promotion of
justice and the rule of law and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, Senegal reiterates its confidence in the
Court, the clearest demonstration of which was my
country’s acceptance of the Court’s compulsory
jurisdiction in line with Article 36 of its Statute.
Mr. Gevorgyan (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation would like to
express, through the presidency of the Assembly, its
gratitude to Mr. Hisashi Owada, President of the
International Court of Justice, for his presentation of
the Court’s report (A/66/4). Given its staunch
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
Russian Federation has always attached great
importance to the Court’s activities.
We are pleased to note the dynamic work of the
primary judicial organ of the United Nations. The
increasing geographic and thematic diversity of the
Court’s cases, as it has rightly noted in its report,
speaks to the unique universal nature of that organ.
Over the past year, once again, the Court upheld
the highest standards of judicial practice, objectivity

11-56448

and political independence. My country is pleased with
the judgment rendered on 1 April 2011, concerning the
Application of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(Georgia v. Russian Federation). We believe that the
judgment goes far beyond the framework of bilateral
inter-State relations. Its adoption has made a notable
contribution to enhancing not only the integral system
of the peaceful settlement of disputes, but also the
foundation of the peacekeeping process. In its
judgment, the Court confirmed the growing
significance of key tools of the peaceful settlement of
disputes, including negotiation. It enhanced the
authority of relevant treaty bodies and United Nations
bodies and prevented an attempt to abuse established
legal procedures and circumvent the provisions of
international treaties.
Secondly, the Court supported a State that was
actively participating in peacekeeping. The suit was
filed against a State that was not party to a dispute but
that was in good faith fulfilling its role as peacekeeper
and mediator in the negotiations. At the same time, the
application was made to the Court after an armed
attack was carried out against those very same
peacekeepers and civilians in a conflict region.
If the Court had ruled otherwise, any activities of
peacekeepers could risk violating the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination. In our view, thanks to the Court’s
success in rendering an impartial and de-politicized
judgment, there has been an obvious and consistent
increase over the past years in confidence in the Court,
that has been reflected in the increasing number of
States that have accepted the Court’s jurisdiction, as
well as in the growing scope of the international legal
issues that have been put before the Court.
The Russian Federation would like to note
another facet of the Court’s activities. Within the
United Nations, active discussions are under way on
the issue of the rule of law. We have seen the process
of transforming the rule of law into a practical tool for
reconstruction and at times, even survival, in conflict
and post-conflict societies. We feel that the Court is
itself a key mechanism for ensuring the rule of law
internationally. As duly noted by the Court in its report,
its activities are aimed at bolstering the rule of law. It
carries out such activities through the clarification of
international law and the just settlement of the most

15

A/66/PV.43

delicate of international disputes, working as an
independent judiciary for other judicial bodies.
We closely follow the legal activities of the Court
and, at the same time, try to accord due attention to the
everyday issues of the Court. Despite its busy calendar
of hearings, where some cases are heard
simultaneously, the Court has nevertheless succeeded
in maintaining the high judicial quality of its decisions.
We believe that the Court’s request for the provision of
human resources and additional funding to adapt its
judicial processes and to maintain its unique status
merit the closest attention. For its part, the Russian
Federation stands ready to spare no efforts in that area.
Elections to the Court are set for the near future.
We will select five of the 15 judges of the International
Court of Justice. We hope that from the number of
highly qualified candidates, we will choose the most
outstanding individuals to carry the torch of
international justice through the halls of the Peace
Palace in The Hague.
Mr. Zellweger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
My delegation would first like to thank the President of
the International Court of Justice for the presentation
of his very comprehensive report (A/66/4).
Switzerland is firmly committed to a stable and
just international order, to which international
jurisdictions, and the International Court of Justice in
particular, make a major contribution. Switzerland
believes that the International Court of Justice plays an
irreplaceable role. It has always recognized the
competence of the Court, and calls on all other States
to do the same. All States should bring their disputes
before the Court in order to settle them peacefully. The
increasing number of legal matters and issues brought
before the Court demonstrates the confidence placed in
it by the international community.
Moreover, my delegation welcomes the measures
taken by the Court to increase its effectiveness and to
deal with its increasing workload. It supports the Court
in its undertakings to ensure its smooth functioning.
The International Court of Justice devotes some
paragraphs in its report to the case of Jurisdiction and
Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
Matters (Belgium v. Switzerland). While welcoming
the swift settlement of this case, my delegation would
like to make the following clarification. In its report,
the Court quotes word for word from the letter in

16

which Belgium announced its withdrawal. In the letter,
Belgium refers to, and paraphrases, paragraph 85 of
Switzerland’s preliminary objections. However, it goes
without saying that only the original text of paragraph
85 of the preliminary objections conveys Switzerland’s
unwavering position.
I am convinced that, through its activities, the
International Court of Justice will continue its specific
efforts towards a more peaceful world.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): It is my great pleasure
and honour, on behalf of the Government of Japan, to
address the General Assembly under the presidency of
His Excellency Ambassador Al-Nasser. I would like to
express my gratitude to President Hisashi Owada for
his in-depth report summarizing the current situation of
the International Court of Justice (A/66/4). As a State
resolutely devoted to peace and firmly dedicated to the
promotion of the rule of law and respect for the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, Japan
appreciates the strenuous efforts and work of the Court,
presided over by Judge Owada, to deliver decisions
and opinions based on exhaustive deliberations.
We are especially impressed by the wide regional
range of Member States seeking to resolve
international legal disputes by referring cases to the
Court. This fact illustrates the universality of the Court
and the great importance that Member States attach to
it. The variety in the subject matter of recent cases,
from territorial and maritime delimitation to the
interpretation and application of international
conventions and treaties, also demonstrates the
significant role played by the Court in solving
international disputes between States and in providing
its opinions on important questions in international
law. While dealing with the variety and complexity of
such cases, the Court has taken effective measures to
conduct its activity at a sustainable level. The
Government of Japan commends the Court for its
continuous efforts to re-examine its procedures and
working methods.
In the current international environment, where
we continue to witness armed conflicts and acts of
terrorism, the firm establishment of law and order is
indispensable. There has been increasing recognition in
the international community of the necessity of
establishing and maintaining the primacy of
international law, as well as the importance of settling
disputes through peaceful means.

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

In that regard, the role of the International Court
of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations is paramount and cannot be overstated. We
believe that the Court must bring to bear not only a
profound knowledge of international law but also the
farsighted view of the international community, given
that the world is now experiencing rapid change. Japan
respects the Court’s ability to meet that requirement
and continues to fully support its work.
Since 1958, two years after becoming a State
Member of the United Nations, Japan has recognized
the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. We urge
Member States that have not yet done so to accept the
Court’s jurisdiction in order to facilitate the
establishment of the rule of law in the international
community.
In concluding my remarks, I wish to reiterate the
great importance that the international community
attaches to the lofty cause and work of the
International Court of Justice and to draw the
Assembly’s attention to the importance of
strengthening the functioning of the Court. Japan, for
its part, will continue to contribute to the invaluable
work and the efficient and effective operation of the
Court.
Mr. Yee (Singapore): My delegation thanks
President Owada for his presentation of the
comprehensive report of the International Court of
Justice covering its activities over the past year
(A/66/4). We also thank President Owada and VicePresident Tomka for their able leadership of the Court
in that period. It is a testament to their vigorous efforts
that the Court has been able to discharge its duties to
the highest standards for another full year.
Singapore is firmly committed to a stable and
peaceful international order governed by the rule of
law. In our view, the international rule of law is
indispensable to realizing the purposes and principles
of the United Nations, including the maintenance of
international peace and security, and the preservation
of friendly relations. In the exercise of its contentious
jurisdiction, the Court fulfils a key function in
facilitating the Charter obligation to settle disputes
peacefully. In the exercise of its advisory jurisdiction,
the Court provides guidance on important issues of
international law.
Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the
continued regional and subject-matter diversity of the

11-56448

cases standing on the Court’s List as of the end of the
reporting period. We also note that the legal issues on
the Court’s List are not only diverse but complex.
Those factors will ensure that the Court’s jurisprudence
will continue to command immense influence and have
a deep impact on the development of international law.
In that regard, there have been several jurisprudential
developments during the period under review that my
delegation has followed with great interest, including
those relating to jurisdictional immunities of the State
and the rights of shareholders. We note that two new
cases were referred to the Court during the reporting
period, and look forward to receiving the Court’s views
on those cases and others pending on its List.
Turning next to the administration of the Court,
my delegation commends the Court for successfully
clearing its backlog of cases. We welcome the Court’s
efforts to keep its procedures and working methods
under continual review, so as to ensure that its users
can be confident that proceedings before the Court will
be as efficient as possible. We are also encouraged to
read that work continues on the modernization of the
Great Hall of Justice, including the introduction of
information technology resources on the judges’ bench.
We look forward to their speedy completion.
Singapore notes the request made by the Court
for additional security posts in paragraph 27 of its
report. My delegation continues to hold the view that
this request is not made lightly. Given the central role
that the Court plays, and the range of issues which it
has to deal with, including those of a highly
controversial nature, it is only right and prudent that
we renew our support for this request. Singapore also
notes the requests for an additional P-2 post in
paragraph 28, and for an additional post in the General
Service category in paragraph 29. My delegation
believes that it is important for the Court to be
adequately resourced in order to perform its work. As
such, Singapore supports both these requests.
In conclusion, Singapore reaffirms its strong
support for the work of the Court, which plays a vital
role in the institutional dimension of the international
rule of law. We wish the Court every measure of
success in meeting its future challenges and in the
discharge of its duties in the year ahead.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the President of the International
Court of Justice, Judge Hisashi Owada, for his detailed

17

A/66/PV.43

and exhaustive presentation on the undertakings of the
Court from 1 August 2010 to 31 July 2011. I should
also like to express the appreciation of my delegation
for his presidency of that important organ of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Algeria underscores the particular role of the
judicial settlement of disputes as one of the pillars of
the peaceful settlement of disputes in the maintenance
of peace and international security.
As one of the principal organs of the Charter,
whose Statute makes it an integral part of the
Organization, the International Court of Justice
occupies a unique place within the international legal
system.
The
multiplication
of
international
jurisdictions, in particular those that have become
specialized over the past several decades, has in no
way detracted from the prestige of the Court.
The number of cases on the Court’s docket,
including two new ones added during the most recent
session, the diversity of the issues subjected to
litigation, which touch on many areas of international
law, as well as the fact that parties to disputes brought
before the Court belong to every geographic region of
the world, bear witness to the universal nature of this
institution.
Algeria would like to emphasize the eminent role
that the Court plays in the implementation and
strengthening of the rule of law at the international
level, in particular with respect to its sustained efforts
on behalf of the application, promotion and elucidation
of international law, as well as in the dissemination of
the Court’s activities through relevant programmes.
In that spirit, the Court deserves a pre-eminent
place in all high-level debates devoted to the rule of
law that will be held during the opening of the sixtyseventh session of the General Assembly in September
2012.
The execution of the Court’s determinations in
establishing the primacy of international law and
implementing the rule of law at the international level
is of critical importance. Initiatives and ideas intended
to contribute to improved implementation of the
Court’s rulings deserves to be encouraged.
It is vital for the International Court of Justice to
receive the resources it needs to function effectively, to
render its decisions with due speed and to rule between
the plaintiffs who come before it. The complexity and

18

multiplicity of the cases the Court hears, as well as the
diversity of their procedural phases, in particular with
regard to certain cases that become increasingly
protracted, implies a requisite adjustment with respect
to both human and material resources. The 14 matters
currently pending before the Court, several of which
have been on the docket for a number of years, might
find swifter resolution if the additional resources
requested by the Court were made available.
My delegation wishes to acknowledge the efforts
of the Court to adapt and streamline its workload,
which continues to grow in volume year by year, by
reworking its calendar, its procedures and its work
methods.
It remains for the United Nations, and for its
Member States in particular, to explore the best ways
to continue to provide the requisite support to the
Court.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
its firm support for role of the International Court of
Justice in the development of international law. In
addition to ruling on disputes, the Court interprets and
elucidates the rules of international law, especially
through its important practice of providing advisory
opinions, whose positive influence we would do well
to emphasize. Although they do not entail obligatory
consequences for States, advisory opinions nonetheless
offer clarifying guidance, in particular for international
organizations, chief among them the United Nations.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Judge Hisashi Owada,
President of the International Court of Justice, for his
very complete and detailed report on the activities of
the Court during the period 2010-2011 (A/66/4). As
this is the last time that Judge Owada will address the
Assembly in his capacity as President of the highest
world court, I should like to pay tribute to him for his
stewardship of that organ over the past three years.
For those delegations that participate in the work
of the General Assembly, it is very useful to be made
familiar with the development of contentious cases and
advisory cases before the Court and the manner in
which the principal judicial organ of the Organization
is performing the task assigned to it by the Charter.
We note that during the year covered by the
report there was a constant flow of cases submitted to
the Court, with three cases declared concluded and two

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

new contentious cases put before the Court. Over the
decades, States from different regions of the world
have gone before the Court to request its ruling on
various controversies, in accordance with international
law, covering a wide range of aspects of international
life.
It is also important to take into account that in the
various cases brought before the Court a wide range of
other issues also arose, all of which required intense
labour on the part of the members of the Court and its
secretariat. In clear contrast with that, we note that the
Court continues to receive very few requests for
advisory opinions.
We are pleased to note that the Court has worked
with exceptional diligence in order to tackle the
considerable challenges presented by the many cases
on its docket and ensure adequate and sufficient
consideration thereof.
The Court has adapted its practice and procedures
through the adoption and subsequent adjustment of the
Practice Directions, which have been very useful to
litigating States. Likewise, the Court has implemented
an intense agenda of hearings and deliberations, which
now makes it possible to consider various cases with
the requisite swiftness, including the various incidental
proceedings that arise. The success in the Court’s
putting measures into place is tangible and reflected in
the fact that it has been able to keep delays brought
about by the very busy docket to a minimum. States
considering the possibility of going before the Court
can now be certain that the transition from the written
phase to the oral phase in each proceeding will take
place in an expedited manner.
The delegation of Colombia would also like to
highlight the very worthwhile contribution that the
International Court of Justice can make with regard to
addressing another issue on the General Assembly’s
programme of work, namely, the state of the rule of
law in the international arena. As correctly reflected in
the report, in this context the Court plays a special role
within the United Nations institutional architecture
since, by definition, as it is a judicial organ, everything
it does is geared towards promoting the rule of law. It
can therefore be said that all its actions and decisions
could potentially contribute to the promotion and
clarification of norms in international law that it is
called upon to interpret and apply, including norms that
regulate its practice and procedure.

11-56448

For that reason, we would like to join those
delegations that have indicated that the President of the
Court should be invited to participate in the opening
session of the high-level event on this topic that will
take place on 24 September 2012. That important event
would thereby benefit from the perspective of one of
the principal organs of the Organization entirely
devoted, in the most efficient and laudable manner, to
promoting the rule of law at the level of international
relations.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico would like to express its deep
appreciation to the International Court of Justice for
the arduous efforts it has undertaken this year. We
would also like to thank its President, Judge Hisashi
Owada, for his presentation of the Court’s report
(A/66/4).
Mexico welcomes the periodic review of
proceedings, methods of work and guidelines
undertaken by the Court in recent years, which has
facilitated expedited attention to cases and has been
key in ensuring that this legal organ can sustain its
pace of activity.
Moreover, Mexico wishes to thank the General
Assembly for its willingness to increase the number of
the Court’s legal assistants and security staff, as well as
for its willingness to create a new General Service post
for telecommunications technician. Along the same
lines, Mexico calls for the General Assembly to
continue to provide the Court with tools to ensure its
optimal performance as the principal judicial organ of
the Organization.
The report currently before us illustrates with
clarity and conciseness the contentious cases before the
Court and is evidence of its universal nature. In this
regard, my delegation wishes to indicate that, of the
17 cases before the Court under the period under
review, a number of them concerned States from Latin
America and the Caribbean, which clearly shows the
commitment of the region to compliance with
international law and the peaceful resolution of
disputes.
My delegation would like to highlight the great
legal value of the Court’s rulings not only for States
parties involved in a case, but also for the creation of
international jurisprudence that is of interest for the
international community as a whole. The Court plays a
fundamental role in developing international law. The

19

A/66/PV.43

ruling in the case concerning Pulp Mills on the River
Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), is a clear example of
this fact. We also see it in the constant evolution of the
thematic complexity of the cases before the Court.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Mexico’s
attachment to the International Court of Justice as the
main legal organ for the peaceful solution of disputes.
Mr. Arguello-Gómez (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua would like to express its gratitude
to Judge Hisashi Owada, President of the International
Court of Justice, for his introduction of the Court’s
report (A/66/4).
The fact that the 2010-2011 judicial year, like the
previous period, continues to be an extremely busy one
and that, moreover, it is expected that next year will be
equally intensive due to the initiation of two
contentious cases, illustrates the relevance of the
International Court of Justice as the principal United
Nations judicial organ and as the only international
court of a universal character and with general
jurisdiction. In this regard, we would like to highlight
that the work of the Court not only contributes to
promoting,
consolidating
and
disseminating
information about the rule of law, but also that its work
is key to international security in that it promotes the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, which is one of the
main purposes of the United Nations and a constant
desire of humankind.
We regret that, once again, the report reflects the
fact that only 66 States have recognized the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice and that some of those recognitions contain
reservations that, in many cases, void the very meaning
of the acceptance of such jurisdiction. We urge all
States that have not yet done so to recognize the
Court’s
jurisdiction,
thereby
contributing
to
strengthening the rule of law internationally.
Nicaragua’s international relations are based on a
policy of friendship, solidarity and reciprocity between
peoples, which is why we not only recognize the
principle of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes by means of international law, but why we
have also resorted to such means many times and will
continue to do so. In the past 26 years, Nicaragua has
participated as a plaintiff or defendant in eight major
cases and various incidental ones before the
International Court of Justice. Those cases include that
of Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against

20

Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America),
which ruled 25 years ago that the United States was
obliged to indemnify Nicaragua for all the damage
caused by its activities violating international law. This
judgment by the Court is still pending compliance,
which is why Nicaragua still reserves the right to claim
the compensation it is due.
Among the cases involving Nicaragua is the
currently pending Territorial and Maritime Dispute
(Nicaragua v. Colombia) brought by Nicaragua
10 years ago, whose continuation is due in part to
incidental proceedings arising from the case. Here, it
should be mentioned that in May the Court decided
that applications for permission to intervene presented
by Costa Rica and Honduras could not be granted, and
most recently reaffirmed the scope of the judgment of
8 October 2007 in the case of the Territorial and
Maritime Dispute between Nicaragua and Honduras in
the Caribbean Sea (Nicaragua v. Honduras).
Similarly, in the recent case concerning Certain
Activities carried out by Nicaragua in the Border Area
(Costa Rica v. Nicaragua), President Daniel Ortega
was the first to propose publicly that both countries
should refer the matter to the Court if they could not
reach a bilateral agreement. In March, the Court
handed down its ruling on the provisional measures
requested by Costa Rica, deciding that both parties
should refrain from sending or maintaining personnel
in the disputed territory and should find common
solutions to care for the environment, among other
things. Nicaragua is pleased to say that it has faithfully
abided by all the points in the ruling and will continue
to do so.
Nicaragua has demonstrated its confidence in
international justice not only by its actions; it has also
turned to the Court on a number of occasions and has
used its judgments to endorse and propose mechanisms
for the peaceful settlement of disputes. In that regard,
allow me to recall that the initiative for declaring the
United Nations Decade of International Law came
from Nicaragua, which proposed it under the auspices
of the Non-Aligned Movement in 1988. This initiative
included a basic concept, that of promoting universal
compulsory mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, particularly through the International Court of
Justice.
With this purpose in mind, a ministerial meeting
of the Non-Aligned Movement was held at The Hague

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

in 1989, culminating in a declaration by the
Movement’s more than 80 member States — which at
the time represented a significant majority of the
membership of the United Nations — approving the
initiative of presenting the proposal for the Decade of
International Law to the General Assembly. The basic
reason for this initiative was to bring back the spirit of
the first two peace conferences held in The Hague in
1899 and 1907, which sought to establish a universal
compulsory mechanism for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. That mechanism, which those first
conferences were unable to achieve, has now been
realized in the International Court of justice. Our task
is to enable it to truly become a universal compulsory
mechanism without loopholes that undermine the
compulsory nature of its jurisdiction and with genuine
resources that can ensure compliance with its
decisions.
Nicaragua believes that while perhaps because of
international factors prevailing at the end of the 1980s
this could not be fully achieved, we may now take it up
again in order to advance universal acceptance of the
Court’s compulsory jurisdiction. With this in mind,
Nicaragua will once again retrace the steps that can
enable us to revive this initiative of almost a quarter of
a century ago.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express our great satisfaction with the work of the
Court and to once again thank Mr. Owada, the
President of the Court, for his report.
Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): At the outset, allow
me to express our sincere sympathies on the passing
away of Judge Antonio Cassese. He was, in the truest
sense, a giant of international law whose experience
and expertise in the field are widely and rightly
recognized.
Our debate today comes at a most opportune time
as we commemorate International Law Week here at
the United Nations. As we renew our pledge to build a
more peaceful, progressive and prosperous world, we
are reminded once again of our solemn duty to further
strengthen the ramparts upon which our world is built,
on justice and the rule of law. That commitment finds
its fullest expression in the International Court of
Justice and in the Court’s faithful exercise of its
mandate. As the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the Court is the primary institution tasked
with ensuring respect for the rule of law in

11-56448

international relations, as it upholds an integral legal
order founded on the primacy of the rule of law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
In this regard, the Philippines welcomes the
report of the International Court of Justice contained in
document A/66/4, and the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document A/66/295. These
documents are a comprehensive and detailed
demonstration of the Court’s important work and
activities. The Philippines wishes to thank and
commend Judge Hisashi Owada, President of the
International Court of Justice, for the preparation of the
report.
The importance of the Court cannot be
overstated. It is the only international court of a
universal character with general jurisdiction. The Court
handles cases that are growing in legal and factual
complexity. The subject matter of those cases is
extremely varied, including, among other issues,
territorial and maritime delimitation, environmental
concerns, the jurisdictional immunities of States,
violations of territorial integrity, racial discrimination,
violations of human rights, and the interpretation of
international conventions and treaties. These cases,
coming from diverse regions, illustrate the Court’s
universality. The Philippines notes the sustained level
of activity of the Court. During the period under
review two new cases were brought before the Court,
bringing the number of contentious cases on its List to
14 as of 31 July. The Philippines continues to follow
developments in these cases closely.
My country commends the Court for taking steps
that have allowed it to sustain its level of activity. With
continuous re-examination of its procedures and
working methods, regular updating of the practices it
adopted in 2001 for use by States appearing before it,
and the setting of an exacting schedule, the Court has
been able to clear its backlog of cases and thus increase
the confidence placed in it by States submitting a
dispute for fair and timely resolution.
To continue doing so, however, the Court needs
vital support, particularly in the area of human
resources. The Philippines notes that the Court’s
budget submission for 2012 to 2013 includes requests
for the establishment of several posts. The Philippines
reiterates its call for Member States to continue to
provide the Court with the means necessary for
ensuring its proper and efficient functioning.

21

A/66/PV.43

My delegation wishes to register its approval of
the work done by the International Court of Justice to
make itself and its decisions more widely accessible to
the public, to academia, to the international legal
community and to media professionals through
publications, visits, sustained engagement with the
media and the use of innovative information and
communications technology. The annual publication of
the reports on judgments, advisory opinions and orders,
the yearbook and the bibliography, among others, as
well as the inclusion in the Court’s website of its entire
jurisprudence and that of the Permanent Court of
International Justice, are particularly to be
commended. The Court’s website — with dynamic
developments in its content and user interface — will
continue to play an important role in keeping the Court
engaged and connected with the world by providing a
platform for access at various points and at different
levels throughout the world.
The Philippines submits that in order to
strengthen the foundations for global respect for the
rule of law and its effective implementation,
transparency and accessibility, along with integrity and
independence, must be the Court’s cornerstones. Yet,
transparency and accessibility must never compromise
the Court’s security. It is on that point that the
Philippines notes the Court’s reiteration of its request
to strengthen the Court’s security team to enable it to
confront new technological threats in respect of
information systems security.
In recent years, we have witnessed a steady rise
in the number of States, entities and even individuals
resorting to specialized tribunals and forums in
attempts to address the increasing demands of
interdependence.
My
delegation
views
that
development as a reflection of increased confidence in,
and recourse to, the rule of law, which the Court has
helped to propagate.
In that regard, we continue to count on the
Court’s function of elucidating norms to provide a
basic framework of case law and norms, as well as to
harmonize jurisprudence in general international law,
in order to provide guidance for specialized tribunals.
In the exercise of its mandate as the only
international court of universal character with general
jurisdiction, our obligation is to continue to provide the
support crucial for the International Court of Justice to

22

maintain and strengthen the rule of law, which
underpins peaceful relations between States.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
takes this opportunity to express its appreciation to the
President of the International Court of Justice, The
Honourable Judge Hisashi Owada, for presenting the
comprehensive report covering the period from
1 August 2010 to 31 July 2011 (A/66/4).
The great responsibilities of the International
Court of Justice and its work as the highest judicial
organ of the United Nations deserve to be highlighted
before the international community. The Court’s
mission of fulfilling an advisory role and peacefully
settling disputes, as entrusted to it under the United
Nations Charter, is reflected in the report introduced by
its President, which we are pleased to welcome.
The Court is central to the international legal
system, and States recognize its leading role of
providing guarantees to all members of the
international community. We once again reiterate that
the advisory role of the International Court of Justice is
particularly important. Its opinions, which are founded
on international law, provide reasoned arguments to
States and sound support for the functions of the
United Nations Organization.
The Court makes an ongoing contribution, in the
framework of the multilateral system of peace and
security, to strengthening relations among countries
and to instilling a sense of respect for the law in the
international legal order, by combining the
fundamental principles and the mandates of the Charter
of the United Nations, which is its backbone.
As its President has explained, the Court has
extensive and complex jurisdiction, which it exercises
for the good of the international community. It carries
out its mandate in a framework of coexisting
international, multilateral and bilateral treaties, through
which it is entrusted with the judicial settlement of
disputes and the application of mechanisms accepted
by States in their unilateral declarations.
As the Court is the highest judicial organ of the
system, we must make our voices heard and support it
by ensuring that the necessary material and human
resources are made available to it for the exercise of
those competencies, according to its judicial tasks and
the important functions that it must carry out.

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

We also express our appreciation for the efforts
being made by the International Court of Justice to
widely publicize its work and make it broadly
accessible to international public opinion, using
modern methods and technologies.
Those efforts have strengthened international law,
and the Court should therefore receive ongoing and
broad support for its activities. We note the progress
made in the use of electronic media to publicize the
work of the Court and facilitate access to its documents
and to information on its work.
I shall conclude by reiterating our appreciation
for the praiseworthy work of the Court and for its
invaluable contribution to the effectiveness and
observance of international law.
Mr. Silva (Brazil): Before I begin, allow me to
express my country’s condolences on the irreparable
loss of Mr. Antonio Cassese. Although he is no longer
with us, Mr. Cassese’s lessons on international law will
certainly remain.
I join previous speakers in extending a warm
welcome to Judge Hisashi Owada and thanking him for
his comprehensive presentation. My delegation very
much appreciated Judge Owada’s briefing yesterday to
the Security Council (see S/PV.6637), in particular his
thoughts on how the Council could make fuller use of
the International Court of Justice in the settlement of
disputes. Judge Owada spoke of the organic linkage
that exists between the Council and the Court. My
country believes that the Council would benefit from a
closer relationship with the Court.
I was also very interested in his observations on
the parallel and complementary roles of the Court and
the Security Council, as illustrated by the case between
Cambodia and Thailand, a matter that the Council dealt
with last February (see S/PV.6480), under the Brazilian
presidency, and one in which my country was very
directly involved.
The International Court of Justice is a key
element in efforts to uphold the principles and norms
of international law and to ensure the peaceful
settlement of disputes. In the Preamble to the Charter,
Member States made a commitment to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law could be maintained. The
reinforcement of the rule of law on a global scale is a

11-56448

major contribution that the Court has given to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
an accomplishment should not be taken for granted.
The advisory jurisdiction of the Court has also
played a major role in clarifying legal questions put
forward by United Nations organs and other
specialized agencies. The authoritative views expressed
by the Court in its advisory opinions have made an
important contribution to international law. The
General Assembly should continue to rely on the Court
whenever necessary.
The Court’s latest report (A/66/4) shows the
heavy demands placed on it, with cases covering
myriad issues, from the jurisdictional immunity of the
State to racial discrimination, and from environmental
concerns to territorial and maritime delimitation. Those
issues relate to cases in all continents. It also
demonstrates the genuinely universal character of the
Court and its importance as the principle judicial organ
of the United Nations.
Brazil welcomes the continued efforts of the
Court to keep up with its increasing workload. As
highlighted in the report, cases are increasingly
complex, often involving a number of phases and
requests for urgent provisional measures. We
appreciate the steps taken to enhance the efficiency of
the Court. The continued re-examination of its
procedures and working methods are important
measures in order to face a very demanding level of
activity.
The international community has many good
reasons to celebrate this year’s sixty-fifth anniversary
of the International Court of Justice. Brazil praises the
Court for its role in the development of international
law and in upholding the principles of the Charter. The
work of the Court is crucial to ensuring the primacy of
law in international affairs, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the promotion of more just, equitable and
fair international relations.
We are proud to have contributed to that process,
along with the Court’s history, with highly qualified
Brazilian judges. I take this opportunity to pay tribute
to their work for the cause of justice, a tradition
honoured currently by Judge Antonio Augusto Cançado
Trindade. In a matter of days, six judges will be elected
both by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. Brazil wishes them every success in the
discharge of their duties.

23

A/66/PV.43

I take this opportunity to express once again
Brazil’s full support of the International Court of
Justice and our appreciation to President Owada.
Mr. Adoke (Nigeria): On behalf of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, let me extend our sincere
appreciation to Mr. Owada, President of the
International Court of Justice, for his comprehensive
and incisive report on the activities of the Court
(A/66/4).
As a peace-loving State, Nigeria expresses its
resolve and unequivocal support for the settlement of
disputes by the peaceful means of mediation,
preventive diplomacy, arbitration and, in particular
cases, adherence to the judgments of the Court as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
Recalling the international dimension and the
diverse legal issues upon which the Court has to
adjudicate, such as contentious cases, the jurisdiction
of the Court and advisory proceedings, to mention but
a few, serves to underline the universality of the
Court’s rulings, in line with modern trends, which my
delegation
believes
merits
accolades
and
commendation. Nigeria therefore calls on countries
that have not yet honoured the Court’s decisions to do
so.
Nigeria is a role model in adhering to the ruling
of the Court in the Bakassi case. It thanks the Court for
its judgment, which has been implemented under the
Greentree Agreement, of which I am the co-Chair
under the auspices of the United Nations.
Nigeria praises the Court and its role in the
development of international law and assures it of our
support at all times.
Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): I would like to
take this opportunity to join previous speakers in
referring to the essential role of the International Court
of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations.
In the light of that, the report before us (A/66/4)
and its presentation today by President Owada once
again accentuate the fundamental place of the Court in
the system of the settlement of disputes in accordance
with international law. As indicated in the report, on
1 April, the Court delivered the judgment in the case
submitted by Georgia against the Russian Federation
on the Application of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,

24

upholding the second preliminary objection of the
Russian Federation.
Notwithstanding the fact that Georgia has
repeatedly attempted to resolve existing disputes under
the Convention with the Russian Federation through
negotiations, including both prior to and since the
commencement of the major hostilities in August 2008,
in the light of the Court’s recent judgment, Georgia
formally invited the Russian Federation to participate
in further negotiations to resolve the existing disputes
that have arisen with respect to the Russian
responsibility for breaches of the Convention.
Georgia invokes the responsibility of Russia,
inter alia, for the prevention of the exercise of the right
of return of ethnic Georgians who were expelled from
the Tskhinvali region and Abkhazia during the early
1990s and as a result of the 2008 Russia-Georgia war.
We also invoke the responsibility of Russia for
discrimination in the period prior to the
commencement of major hostilities in August 2008
against ethnic Georgians living in areas of the
Tskhinvali region and Abkhazia controlled by Russia
and the proxy regimes, including with respect to
ethnically motivated violence, the destruction of
property, the violation of educational, cultural and
linguistic rights, freedom of movement and issuing of
passports.
While the Government of Georgia is taking all
adequate measures to ensure that the breaches of the
Convention by the Russian Federation are brought to
an immediate end, as I end my intervention I would
like to draw the Assembly’s attention to paragraph 172
of the report and paragraph 186 of the judgment of the
Court, where the Court unequivocally indicates that the
parties are under a duty to comply with their
obligations under the Convention.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Costa Rica thanks Judge Hisashi
Owada, President of the International Court of Justice,
for his clear report on the work of the Court (A/66/4)
and for his presence before the Assembly. His
leadership is a source of motivation and strength to the
current and the ongoing work of the Court. We are also
grateful for the report of the Secretary-General on the
Trust Fund to Assist States in the Settlement of
Disputes through the International Court of Justice
(A/66/295).

11-56448

A/66/PV.43

This is the right time to once again express our
country’s complete adherence to the primacy of
international law, our full respect for the instruments
and organizations of international law, and our
commitment to faithfully comply with the decisions to
which they give rise.
Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the
United Nations recognizes the peaceful resolution of
international disputes as an essential purpose of the
Organization, in keeping with the principles of justice
and international law. As the only universal
international tribunal fully incorporated into the United
Nations system, the Court’s responsibilities in that area
are indispensable to the international community,
hence the responsibility of the Organization and its
States Member to support the Court in carrying out its
tasks. Of course, that support also includes a financial
and logistic dimension that should be appropriately
reflected through the allocation of adequate resources
to the Court so that it can efficiently and effectively
and with absolute legal independence tackle the cases
brought before it.
Even more important, States must respect the
decisions of the Court without distinction, whether
they are substantive matters or provisional measures,
which are especially important in the case of conflicts
already taking place on the ground. Such respect

11-56448

should be provided in good faith without any
manoeuvring or provocations or attempts to undermine
the Court’s decisions and based on the conviction that
any damage to the Court’s integrity or its mandate or
hindrance of its functions will work against the
international community as a whole. Respecting the
Court and its decisions is the best way to guarantee the
integrity and proper functioning of each proceeding
and the best way of once again consolidating the
Court’s indisputable role.
In conclusion, Costa Rica notes the well
established experience of the candidates among whom
the Court’s five new Judges will be chosen shortly. We
wish those who will be elected every success. We also
thank the Court for its efficient work and express our
confidence that it will continue resolutely along the
path towards fully accomplishing its duties,
overcoming all challenges and promoting peace and
respect through the application of international law.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 72. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

25
