UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/602
31 July 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 31 JULY 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 11 July 1997,
which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I would appreciate your bringing it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

97-20826 (E)

310797

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/602
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 11 July 1997 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) addressed to the
Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
sixth monthly report on Stabilization Force (SFOR) operations. I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1997/602
English
Page 3

Appendix
Monthly report to the United Nations Security Council
on SFOR operations

SFOR operations
1.
Approximately 35,000 SFOR troops are currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with contributions from all members of NATO and from 20 non-NATO
countries.
2.
Ireland joined SFOR on 27 May 1997, and is providing a Military Police
contingent. An advance party arrived in Sarajevo in June, and the main body is
expected to deploy at the beginning of July. Over the reporting period
(23 May-22 June), there were no other significant changes in the overall size
and composition of the force. SFOR has continued to conduct reconnaissance and
surveillance by means of ground and air patrols, and to make random inspections
of weapons cantonment sites. During the period, approximately 17,000 sorties
were flown by combat aircraft, while the SFOR helicopter fleet flew over 2,500
hours. Since the end of April, the number of aircraft available has been
reduced from 126 to 92. Those remaining provide sufficient capability to
support SFOR's mission. SFOR's Operational Reserve troops continued their
training, which began in April, as noted in last month's report, with the
conduct of exercise Joint Resolve from 16 to 22 June.
3.
Support continues to be provided to the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES), with
SFOR maintaining its regular, coordinated training missions over Eastern
Slavonia in order to exercise plans to provide close air support if necessary.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
4.
Overall, the parties are assessed as being substantially compliant with the
military provisions of the Peace Agreement. Nonetheless, illegal movements,
unauthorized training and inventory shortages continue to be discovered, and
illegal checkpoints have again been found and dismantled over the reporting
period. All parties continue to be responsible for violations due to reprisals
and maltreatment of other ethnic groups. Some returning ethnic groups have been
attacked, houses have been destroyed and some have been forcibly evicted.
Further details are provided in paragraphs 5 to 11 below.
5.
On 3 June, an air defence radar at a Bosnian Serb army site was confiscated
after being activated on 28 May, outside its approved operational period. The
confiscation was completed without incident. An immediate ban was imposed on
all Bosnian Serb army flights, until 18 June.
6.
On 10 June, following an inspection of the General Staff Headquarters of
the Bosnian Serb army, SFOR discovered and confiscated a piece of undeclared
radio equipment without incident.

/...

S/1997/602
English
Page 4

7.
On 18 June, SFOR confiscated heavy vehicles (1 tank and 2 infantry fighting
vehicles) and artillery (2 x 76mm mountain howitzers) which had been detected in
a non-declared Bosnian Serb army site. The operation was conducted without
incident.
8.
Over the reporting period, SFOR troops conducted a total of 588 site
inspections: 190 combat and infrastructure sites belonging to the Bosniacs; 153
combat and infrastructure sites belonging to the Bosnian Croats; and 225 combat
and infrastructure sites belonging to the Bosnian Serbs. As a result of these
inspections, together with inspections of civil police stations, monitoring of
illegal checkpoints and routine patrolling, the following weapons (including
those mentioned above) were confiscated: from the Bosniacs, 1 unauthorized
military vehicle, 1 EW radio receiver and 1 sniper rifle; from the Bosnian
Croats, 1 electronic warfare device and 12 small arms; from the Bosnian Serbs, 1
infantry fighting vehicle, 1 tank destroyer, 1 armoured fighting vehicle, 1 SA-6
radar, 3 x 76mm mountain guns, 2 mortars and 114 small arms; and from civilian
elements, 1 armoured personnel carrier, 1 radio and 2 small arms. Most of the
confiscated weapons have already been destroyed, and the rest will be destroyed
shortly.
9.
SFOR monitored a total of 1,268 training and movement activities: 514 by
the Bosniacs, 313 by the Bosnian Croats, 434 by the Bosnian Serbs and 7 by the
Federation.
10. Freedom of movement continues to be impaired. Implementation of the new
SFOR/International Police Task Force (IPTF) checkpoint policy, outlined in last
month's report, has led to a dramatic increase in the number of unauthorized
checkpoints dismantled, and SFOR removed, or participated in the removal of, 53
unauthorized checkpoints over the reporting period - 2 Bosniac, 6 Croat, 18
Bosnian Serb, 2 Federation and 25 unidentified. The new checkpoint policy is
receiving a mixed response from the parties, being implemented with the full
cooperation of Federation officials but with less support from Republika Srpska
officials.
11. Over the reporting period there have been a number of incidents involving
the return of refugees and displaced persons. On 21 June, Bosniac refugees
blocked the Zenica-Maglaj road to protest against expulsions from several
villages in the area by unarmed Bosnian Croats, despite an agreement with local
authorities to allow them to work on their homes and farms during the day. The
demonstration dispersed peacefully after an agreement was reached between SFOR,
the other international organizations in the theatre and the mayors of Maglaj
and Zepce. Under the terms of this agreement, Bosniacs were allowed to return
to their homes between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. daily in order to carry out repairs to
make them suitable for future occupation. In Mostar, there have been reports of
eviction threats against Bosnian Serbs and Bosniacs living in the Bosnian Croat
controlled western part of the city. On 23 June, Bosnian Croat police attempted
to prevent approximately 100 Bosniacs from participating in a Muslim holiday
celebration in a village in the Bosnian Croat enclave of Kiseljak. The Bosniacs
reacted by erecting road blocks, thereby completely stopping traffic. After the
intervention of SFOR troops, using armoured vehicles and helicopters, the
ceremony proceeded with the agreement of the police, and the road blocks were
dismantled.
/...

S/1997/602
English
Page 5

12. Continued close coordination between SFOR, IPTF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has enabled the UNHCR bus
lines to continue to operate over the reporting period. Fourteen lines are now
open across the Inter-Entity Boundary Line. The European Union bus lines
operating in ethnic majority areas have also benefited from this close
coordination.
13. During the reporting period, the Entity Armed Forces, under SFOR
supervision, removed 2,305 explosive devices from 231 mined areas. In the
period since October 1996 when the linkages was first made between demining
efforts and freedom of training and movement, 8,177 mines and unexploded
ordnance have been removed from a total of 775 mined areas. It is expected that
the demining activity will continue to increase throughout the summer. A
training ban was imposed from 23 May until 21 June, and was subsequently
extended until 7 July, on the third Bosnian Serb Army Corps due to a lack of
demining effort.
14. On 6 June, at a meeting of the Joint Military Commission in Sarajevo, the
army commanders of the parties reported on mine clearance, the reduction of
cantonment sites and the recovery of vehicles belonging to the United Nations.
Revised instructions to the parties were issued, reflecting amendments to
procedures governing, inter alia, the definition of ordnance factories and the
tasking of helicopters for medical evacuations or search and rescue missions.
Cooperation with international organizations
15. SFOR continues to provide assistance, within its capabilities, to the
international organizations in theatre. SFOR liaises directly with officials of
the Office of the High Representative in Sarajevo, Mostar and Brcko and
continues to provide technical experts and assistance in telecommunications and
engineering. Air transportation and information campaign assets also provided
on a routine basis.
16. In cooperation with the Office of the High Representative, SFOR continues
to work towards the opening of airfields within Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
re-constitution of the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) to reflect equal
representation from the entities. However, the parties have not yet signed
memoranda of understanding with SFOR to enable the regional airports of Banja
Luka, Mostar and Tuzla to be opened. Added impetus to this initiative was
provided at the Peace Implementation Council Ministerial Steering Board meeting
in Sintra, Portugal, on 30 May, when Ministers insisted that the parties show
progress on opening the regional airports, and reconstitute CAA by the end of
July. If progress is not made by that time, international cooperation with the
existing CAA will cease. On 19 June, the SFOR Commander met with Dr. Silajdzic,
the Co-Chairman of the Council of Ministers, to impress upon him the importance
of the matter. A meeting of the Council of Ministers was subsequently held, on
20 June, at which a large number of amendments were presented by the Minister
for Civil Affairs and Communications, Mr. Albijanic. No date for a further
meeting of the Council of Ministers has been set.
17. The Standing Committee on Military Matters (SCMM) met for the first time on
1 June 1997, in the presence of the United States Secretary of State. The
/...

S/1997/602
English
Page 6

meeting had been called by the outgoing High Representative, Carl Bildt. The
SFOR Commander and representatives from the Office of the High Representative
and the OSCE attended as observers. It was agreed to set up a working group to
consider a proposed set of rules of procedure. After being postponed from
16 June, the first official SCMM meeting was held on 19 June, to consider the
draft rules of procedure. No agreement was reached on a large number of
amendments presented by President Krajisnik, and a revised set of rules of
procedure is currently being worked on by the Office of the High Representative
in cooperation with SFOR.
18. With respect to the forthcoming municipal elections, SFOR continues to
guarantee the secure environment necessary for the conduct of voter registration
and for campaigning by the political parties. Logistic assistance is being
provided, as required, to OSCE, and SFOR also continues to provide personnel to
support the OSCE Joint Election Operation Centre.
19. SFOR is continuing to support IPTF through surveillance, communications,
transportation and the ability to call for armed reinforcements. SFOR also
provides general area support to IPTF.
20. SFOR provides direct liaison to UNHCR on a permanent basis, as a member of
its International Housing Commission, and works with UNHCR on organized returns,
especially in the Zone of Separation. SFOR has also provided assistance through
humanitarian civic action projects aimed at assisting displaced persons and
refugees. The SFOR Civil-Military Task Force has now assessed the conditions
for return in 83 cities and made this information available to the Repatriation
Information Centre which it helped UNHCR to establish in Sarajevo.
21. SFOR is continuing to provide information on cantonment holdings of heavy
weapons to the Personal Representative of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office for the
Article IV Subregional Arms Control Agreement. Recently, SFOR's offer to move
heavy weapons to reduction sites was accepted by the Bosnian Serb army.
Multinational Division North helped the Bosnian Serb army to move 39 tanks,
5 armoured personnel carriers and an assortment of howitzers and mortars to
reduction sites. On a national basis, some NATO members are providing technical
expertise and equipment to the parties for the destruction of heavy weapons
under the reduction provisions of article IV.
22. SFOR is also continuing to confirm with OSCE that the parties are notifying
exercises, in accordance with the provision of the Article II Confidence-andSecurity-Building-Measures (CSBM) Agreement. If this is not the case, SFOR will
not grant permission to hold such exercises. With respect to the implementation
of CSBM, a seminar on military doctrine took place on 11 and 12 June, in which
participants from both entities agreed on a number of elements for their joint
military doctrines. These include, inter alia, that armed forces should operate
in accordance with the Peace Agreements; that there should be no use of force to
solve outstanding issues; that there should be democratic control of the armed
forces and the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. In
addition, Hungary and Romania carried out an Open Skies demonstration flight
over Bosnia and Herzegovina.

/...

S/1997/602
English
Page 7

Outlook
23. Although the overall situation in the theatre is expected to remain stable,
resettlements in minority areas and in key towns such as Brcko over the coming
weeks and months could lead to incidents.
24. A forthcoming milestone in implementing the Peace Agreement are the
municipal elections in September. SFOR will provide the general security
framework for the elections as well as other direct support to OSCE, including
appropriate logistic and communications support and assistance. The force will
be adjusted accordingly.

-----
