S/PV.7961

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7961st meeting

Wednesday, 7 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycrof
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-16002 (E)
*1716002*

S/PV.7961

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Kobler is joining this meeting via videoconference
from Tunis.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Kobler and Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would
like to wish peace, harmony and serenity to all those
who observe the holy month of Ramadan in Tunisia
and Libya.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would also like to congratulate Bolivia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I am participating in today’s meeting to update
the Council on the latest developments in Libya. Today,
I would like to take a moment to reflect on the past
before setting our priorities for the future.
(spoke in English)
When I came to Libya in November 2015, I
continued the work of my predecessor, Mr. Bernardino
León, who had patiently forged a political agreement
after a year of diplomacy. As mediators will know,
concluding an agreement is one thing, but implementing
an accord is another. In Libya, the transition process
has not been fully implemented. Parallel institutions
continue to exist. The House of Representatives has not
2/7

07/06/2017

yet recognized the Government of National Accord nor
has it adopted the constitutional amendment.
That said, the Libyan Political Agreement, however,
has changed the facts on the ground. The Presidency
Council has been working in Tripoli since 2016. Libyan
oil production now exceeds 800,000 barrels per day, up
from 200,000 barrels per day a few months ago. Da’esh,
while still a threat, is a shadow of what it was just one
year ago. Most importantly, whether one is a Libyan
from Benghazi, Tripoli or Sabha, the Agreement
remains the greatest hope for a solution to the crisis in
Libya. The people of Libya desire peace; they desire
security; they desire a country where their children
have a brighter future.
In my last statement (see S/PV.7927), I laid out
several priorities that still must be addressed. Where
do we stand on the most important issues today?
First, there is consensus that the Libyan Political
Agreement remains the framework of the political
process. Despite criticism, there is overwhelming
national and international support for the Libyan
Political Agreement. However, the Agreement is
not set in stone. After months of consultations with
Libyan, regional and international stakeholders, we are
developing a road map to allow limited amendments to
the Libyan Political Agreement through an inclusive
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process.
I also see broad agreement on the areas where
amendments are still needed. There are still different
ideas on the format of talks. There is an agreement on
the principles guiding the future talks however. My
advice to the international community is to provide
the necessary assurances and guarantees to implement
what Libyans will agree upon. They cannot do this alone
without the support of the international community.
They need the Council’s strong and unified support.
Secondly, let me turn to the military situation. The
adversaries of a political solution seek to use violence
to undermine efforts to reach a settlement. The attack
on the Brak al-Shatti airbase on 18 May is an example.
Radical elements, including some affiliated with
Al-Qaida, massacred dozens of people. That inhuman
act not only demonstrated complete disregard for
human life, but was a deliberate attempt to undermine
the political process. Unfortunately, the closer a
settlement, the higher the threat of such violence. More
of the same was seen when forces affiliated with the
Salvation Government attacked in Tripoli at the end
17-16002

07/06/2017

The situation in Libya

of May. Fortunately, forces supporting the Presidency
Council successfully defended the city and now control
the capital.
Thirdly, there is an urgent need to unify the Libyan
security apparatus. Yesterday, 6 June, I once more met
with Field Marshal Haftar in Benghazi. He assured
me that he wants to proceed on the basis of the Libyan
Political Agreement, supporting a political process to
amend the Agreement. I encouraged him to let politics
prevail and not to pursue military confrontation.
We agreed that a united Libyan security apparatus
is vital for peace and prosperity. I recommended to
Field Marshal Haftar that officers from all parts of the
country should meet to discuss military matters. We
stand ready to facilitate such a meeting, as we have
done before.
In Tripoli, the security plan must now be extended
to the entire city. State authority must be expanded.
The authority of the Presidency Council over armed
groups has to be strengthened. Those forces must be
consolidated within the relevant ministries; command
and control must be unified. The unification of the
security apparatus must also occur at a national level.
The only alternative is military violence.
In line with the guidance of Secretary-General
Guterres on the prevention of conflicts, we do our utmost
to ensure that dialogue prevails over confrontation, that
unity prevails over division and that security prevails
over chaos. The continued use of the military to achieve
political goals will only harden positions. Instead, a
political solution, including agreement on a civilian
authority to command the security apparatus, is needed.
Fourthly, weaknesses in the economy and financial
situation need to be urgently addressed. Despite the
increase in oil revenue and the ability of the Presidency
Council to agree on a new budget for 2017, the
fundamentals of the Libyan economy remain flawed.
The division of financial institutions, instability and
low confidence in the banking sector continue to feed
inflation and the lack of liquidity. The Central Bank has
to decisively address the fiscal and monetary problems
of Libya. Libya is still spending beyond its means and
its foreign currency reserves are constantly shrinking.
The dire economic situation and the explosion of the
black market is feeding criminality and violence. It
must be addressed if Libya is to pull itself out of its
downward spiral.

S/PV.7961

Fifthly, national reconciliation is vital for establishing
a durable peace in Libya. In that regard, I welcome
the steps taken by the Presidency Council towards
establishing a national reconciliation commission and
beginning official consultations. Women and youth
will play a critical role in any reconciliation effort. I
am awed by the energy and optimism of the Libyan
youth. During the youth conference convened by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in
May, numerous initiatives were proposed and linkages
formed. Those efforts must and will be supported.
Sixthly, Many Libyans call for the increased
involvement of the international community. Today
I would like to recognize the contributions made by
neighbouring States. As elsewhere, it is the neighbours
who first feel the consequences and it is they who are
part of the solution. On 8 May, I attended the 11th
ministerial meeting of Libya’s neighbouring States
meeting in Algiers and am encouraged by the efforts
of this forum to find a common position and solution.
Yesterday, the meeting in Algiers of Tunisia, Egypt and
Algeria took place and concluded with a declaration
supporting United Nations efforts and the coherence of
the international community.
With regard to politics, both the regional and
international communities must come together to
support the Libyan peace process — not in the spirit
of interference, but rather in partnership and respect
for the sovereignty of Libyan and international law.
The Quartet’s meeting in Brussels on 23 May was
an increasingly important forum for harmonizing
the positions of regional and international
organizations — the African Union, the European
Union, the League of Arab States and the United Nations.
The African Union also sent two delegations to
Libya recently, including its High Representative and a
ministerial delegation of the African Union High-Level
Ad Hoc Committee on Libya. A collaborative approach
in which all initiatives work in a complementary manner
to advance the United Nations-facilitated political
process is very much needed. Uncoordinated or parallel
efforts risk undermining progress and complicating
an already complex situation. We must move forward
in supporting Libyan-led efforts to find a durable
solution. Without progress in politics, the symptoms of
the conflict will only worsen.
Migrants continue to die as they seek a better life.
Women and men in detention facilities and prisons

17-160023/7

S/PV.7961

The situation in Libya

live a nightmare. Basic humanitarian principles and
humanitarian space are under threat. Five hospitals
have been bombed this year and humanitarian supplies
cannot reach many regions of Libya due to insecurity.
The human rights situation remains of deep concern.
Since March, 65 civilians were killed during armed
conflict, some by indiscriminate bombing. We cannot
remain numb to the suffering this conflict is causing;
we cannot compromise the basic principles that unite
us, that make us human; nor can we afford to abandon
our hopes and desires for a better, more united Libya.
Finally, I would like to thank all the men and women
of UNSMIL today, as well as the United Nations family.
I admire the dedication I see in all of them — engineers,
analysts and administrators alike. I know their work
is often unrecognized. I would therefore like to take
this opportunity to recognize them and salute their
efforts. My last message, as always, goes to the people
of Libya. I reflect upon the words of Libyan author
Hisham Matar:
“Dreams have consequences. There is no
turning back. A revolution is not a painless march
to the gates of freedom and justice. It is a struggle
between rage and hope, between the temptation to
destroy and the desire to build.”
I am sure of one thing. The women and men of Libya
will succeed in building a nation that of which they and
their children will be proud. Their sacrifices have been
too deep for anything less, their communities too strong
to collapse and their hearts too full of courage to fail.
The President: On behalf of the Security Council,
I thank Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 20 April
to 7 June, during which time the Committee met once
in informal consultations and conducted additional
work via the silence procedure.
During the informal consultations held on 19 May,
the Committee heard a presentation by the Panel of
Experts on its final report under resolution 2278 (2016)
and discussed the recommendations contained therein.
I will not summarize the report, as it will be published
shortly under document symbol number S/2017/466. As
4/7

07/06/2017

per practice, Libya was invited to read the report after
discussion in the Committee and prior to publication, in
the offices of the Secretariat.
While the report received mixed reactions,
Committee members expressed their support and
appreciation for the work of the Panel of Experts. The
main issues raised by Committee members during
the discussion of the final report included violations
of the arms embargo, human trafficking and migrant
smuggling, issues related to oil and oil products from
Libya, control over Libya’s public financial institutions,
the implementation of the assets freeze and the Panel’s
limited access to Libya. The Committee is in the process
of concluding its consideration of the recommendations.
With respect to the arms embargo, during the period
under review, the Committee approved three requests
for exemption for temporary export to Libya, submitted
under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011). Those
requests came from Austria, the Netherlands and
Germany. The Committee also received a post-delivery
notification from Austria and a notice of cancellation of
temporary export from the Netherlands. Furthermore,
the Committee responded to a request from the Republic
of Serbia for guidance on the scope and implementation
of the arms embargo. The Commimttee also dispatched
a letter to Libya on the same subject. In connection with
a previous request for guidance received from Greece,
following the receipt of certain information from
Libya, the Committee wrote to both Greece and Libya
again on the matter. The Committee also received an
initial written report, submitted pursuant to paragraph
l0 of resolution 2292 (2016), by the European Union
Operation Sophia, of a vessel inspection undertaken on
the high seas off the coast of Libya. Arms and related
materiel were found on board that vessel, which was
flying the flag of Libya. According to the ship master,
the ports of origin and destination were Misrata and
Benghazi, respectively. The Committee notified Libya
of the inspection.
Also in the context of the arms embargo, the
Committee received the name of its new focal point
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2278 (2016),
namely, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed T.H. Siala,
Minister for Foreign Affairs. Mr. Siala recently provided
written briefings to the Committee with respect to the
Libyan coast guard, explosive ordnance disposal units,
and the presidential guard.
17-16002

07/06/2017

The situation in Libya

Concerning the assets freeze, the Committee
approved a request for exemption, submitted by
Switzerland in accordance with paragraph 19 (b)
of resolution 1970 (2011 in relation to the assets of
the Libya Africa Investment Portfolio. Following
the receipt of additional details from Canada, on an
exemption request pertaining to an asset owned by a
listed individual, the Committee’s consideration of the
matter is ongoing.
With regard to the travel ban, during the period
under review, the Committee approved an exemption
under paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011),
received through the Committee secretariat as “the
relevant UN office” pursuant to section 9 (b) of
the provisional guidelines of the Committee, from
Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi, a listed individual who
was authorized to travel between Egypt and Oman on
the grounds of humanitarian need.
Lastly, the Committee continued its consideration
of the previously reported two letters received from
Malta concerning the activities of two vessels that,
reportedly, were illicitly attempting to export petroleum
products and fuel from Libya to other destinations.
That concludes my report. I would like to voice
my appreciation for the work of the Panel of Experts,
under the Committee and other committees. We
know that at times the Panel works under very
challenging circumstances.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Skoog for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler and Ambassador Olof
Skoog for their briefings. I believe that they both
know that they have the full support of the delegation
of Uruguay.
A year and a half after the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement, regrettably, there is still no visible
progress being made in the country’s political transition.
The support received by the Government of National
Accord within the Libyan political system has been
negligible, which militates against the chances that it
will be able to swiftly stabilize the country and again
place it on the path towards normalcy. It is therefore
imperative that the new Government galvanize broad
support from the population in order to gain full

S/PV.7961

legitimacy. Otherwise, it will be very challenging for
it to eventually govern the country, or even most of its
territory. Meanwhile, violence and clashes continue to
spread. Dozens of militias on the ground hold the real
power in Libya, turning a profit from various economic
interests in an attempt to gain control of the oil industry
and the illegal migrant trade.
We are also concerned that the date for the
endorsement of the Political Agreement by the Tobrukbased House of Representatives has been postponed. A
way to ensure that that occurs should be made in order
to remove uncertainty and instability. Efforts should
be intensified to allow for national reconciliation
that meets the demands and proposals of all parties
concerned.
In conclusion, we would like to voice our concern
about the frustrating situation faced by migrants who
use Libya as a transit country as they make their
way to Europe. We continue to bear witness every
day to tragic developments that result in hundreds of
deaths, including of women and children. Hundreds of
thousands of sub-Saharan migrants are now in Libya,
hoping to be able to cross the Mediterranean. They are
ill-treated and face gross human rights violations. We
reiterate that, as we seek solutions to that problem, we
must focus on the human rights of migrants and refugees.
Only political and institutional stability in Libya will
help to considerably reduce that phenomenon.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia is grateful for the briefings made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Head of Mission of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, Mr. Martin Kobler, and by Ambassador Olof
Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya. We take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the sensitive duties with which
they have been entrusted.
We commend the work of regional and international
actors to enhance coordination efforts in support of
the political process and help Libya in its transition
to democracy, such as the meeting held in Brussels on
23 May by the European Union, the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the United Nations.

17-160025/7

S/PV.7961

The situation in Libya

We are also especially alarmed by the plight of
internally displaced persons. According to a report
issued by the International Organization for Migration
on 2 June, the more than 250,000 internally displaced
persons are, to a large extent, the result of ongoing
clashes among the various armed groups. Unfortunately,
that is a clear illustration of the widespread violence
in Libya. Similarly, we are very concerned about the
incident that occurred on 18 May at Brak Al-Shati,
which resulted in summary executions, in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. We remind
all actors and parties concerned that the only solution to
the conflict is through a political transition, which has
already begun and must continue. We therefore urge
them to stop the fighting and relinquish any approach
that calls for the use of weapons as a method to settle
this or any other conflict.
In conclusion, we believe that such developments
should encourage the actors and parties involved
in the Libyan Political Agreement to redouble their
efforts and take a decisive and resolute step towards
agreement and consensus, which would enable them
to conclude a peaceful, inclusive and orderly political
transition, by and for the Libyan people, which respects
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Libya.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. I wish you very success in
your duties.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
for the Secretary-General Martin Kobler for his
important briefing. We highly commend the continuous
efforts by Mr. Kobler to bring together the different
points of views among the Libyan political actors and
put an end to the political divisions and deterioration
in Libya. I would also like to thank Ambassador Skoog
of Sweden for the briefing in his capacity as President
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning the latest developments on the
sanctions dossier in Libya.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has achieved the maximum possible level
6/7

07/06/2017

of convergence of viewpoints of the different political
parties fighting over power. That convergence was
exemplified in the signing of the Libyan Political
Agreement on 17 December 2015. At the time, that
Agreement garnerned wide support from all over
Libya, as well as the approval of the majority of the
House of Representative and the General National
Congress. However, the intransigent positions of some
parties have stalled the aqequate implementation of the
Agreement. In that vein, we perceive the role played by
the United Nations to be an important one. The United
Nations ought to continue its efforts to surmount the
political bottlenecks, which may include undertaking
some limited amendments to the Political Agreement in
a way that would ensure the commitment of all parties
to implement it. That would lead the Government of
National Accord to be the sole legitimate Government
in Libya, which would pave the way for such a
Government undertake all governmental functions all
over Libya, including providing security.
Such an agreement requires the unification of the
military under one civilian leadership. Its primary
duty is to secure Libyan cities and borders and disarm
militias, as well as facing the different challenges in
the country, such as terrorism, illegal migration and
securing the oil fields.
In that context, we would like to inform the Council
that the security situation in Tripoli has recently
experienced great improvement after forces affiliated
with the Government of National Accord extended their
control over all vital facilities. That has paved the way
for the full return of UNSMIL to Tripoli.
I would be remiss not to commend the efforts made
by Libya’s neighbours to bring about a convergence in
the differing points of view among the parties. The most
recent communiqué issued by the ministerial meeting
of Libya’s neighbouring countries, which was held in
Algeria on 5 June, stressed the need to abide by the
Political Agreement under the auspices of the United
Nations. It also stressed that there are no military
solutions to the crisis in Libya.
We express our appreciation for all endeavours
undertaken by the League of Arab states and the
African Union to close the gap among the political
parties and lead to a consensus that would contribute to
stabilizing the situation and alleviating the suffering of
the Libyan people.
17-16002

07/06/2017

The situation in Libya

Everyone is aware that my country faces numerous
crises as a result of the worsening security situation,
including the smuggling of fuel and oil products by
armed gangs of criminals. Those gangs partake in
many illegal acts, including human trafficking. In
that regard, we hope that the Council will take into
consideration the need to confront the perpetrators of
those and other illegal acts, in order to safeguard the
wealth of the Libyan people.
Turning to the frozen Libyan assets, according
to resolution 1970 (2011), the Council called upon all
Member States to freeze Libyan financial assets and
other economic resources in their territories without
delay in order to protect the interests of the Libyan
people. The freeze on Libyan assets was lifted under
resolution 2009 (2011), especially those relating to the
Libyan Central Bank. However, the freeze continues to
be imposed on a number of other entities, including the
Libyan Investment Authority, which faces huge losses
amounting to almost $1 billion annually. That is due to
its inability to issue instructions to the entities keeping
the books of those frozen accounts so that they might
manage assets adequately.

S/PV.7961

When it was first introduced, the regime was not
meant to punish Libya. Rather, it was a preventive
measure to protect the assets against dissipation during
the revolution and during the interim period after the
fall of the previous regime. The freeze is leading to
negative repercussions that hurt the interests of the
Libyan people. I would like refer to the letter sent by
Libya’s Ambassador to the President of the Council
(S/2016/275). We hope that the Council will take
expeditious measures to amend resolutions 1970 (2011),
1973 (2011) and 2009 (2011) in order to allow for the
Libyan Investment Authority to openly participate in
managing funds in those frozen accounts and prevent
further losses of Libyan assets. In that connection, the
Libyan authorities are not calling for the lifting of the
freeze on any assets. Rather, we ask for a resolution
that includes an article that allows moving the money
deposited in frozen accounts, investing that money and
opening and closing accounts so that we can protect the
value of the assets and increase the returns while they
are frozen.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

17-160027/7
