UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2497th

MEETING:

NEW

17 NOVEMBER

198u,~/s~,

~3ir~~~;~;~~,q

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2497)

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.........

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/16150);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Greece
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16151). . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2497

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficialRecords of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2497th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 17 November
President: Mr. Victor J. GAUCI

(Malta).

of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Iacovou (Cyprus),
Mr. Haralambopoulos (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey)
took places at the Council table; Mr. Woolcott (Australia),
Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Fonseka
(Sri Lanka) and Mr. GoIob (YugosIavia) took the pIaces
reserved for them at the side of the CounciI chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2497)
1. Adoption

1983, at 11.30 a.m.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16150);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Greece addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16151)

2. The PRESIDENT:
On behalf of all the members of
the Council, myself included, I wish to extend a warm
welcome to the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus
and Greece, who have graced us with their presence in the
Council chamber and who are prepared to take part in this
important debate.
3. The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. As representatives know, we are
gathered to discuss a very serious situation, having direct
repercussions on the fate of a small island, a Member of
the United Nations. Cyprus, unfortunately, still suffers
from suspicion and division. Mercifully, thanks to the presence of United Nations forces and to the restraint which
they encourage, the island at present is free from the strife
and conflict that engulfed it not so long ago. It is of paramount importance that utmost restraint should continue
to be exercised by all concerned, both in Cyprus and in
neighbouring countries, as well as in this chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 12 noon.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Chargb d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Secw
rity Council (S/16150);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/16151)

4. I would ask all representatives here to join in a sincere
effort to enhance the process of reconciliation and peace
and to do full justice to the positive potential of the Council in collectively helping to advance our common objective to bring lasting peace to the island, on the basis of
previous decisions of the Council, which has already enunciated the relevant considerations. No one would benefit
more from reconciliation in Cyprus than all the Cypriot
people and Cyprus’ immediate neighbours.
5. The Council is meeting today in response to requests
contained in letters addressed to the President of the Security Council dated 15 November 1983 from the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland [S/26147), the representative of Cyprus [S/16150]
and the representative of Greece [S/Z6151].

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Australia, Canada, Cyprus, Greece, India,
Romania, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Turkey and Yugoslavia,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, 1 propose, with the consent

6. Members of the Council have the following documents before them: S/16148, a letter dated 15 November
1

:
:.

from the representative of Turkey addressed to the
Secretary-General; and the following letters dated 16
November addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/16152, from the representative of Turkey;
S/16153, from the representative of France; and S/16155,
from the representative of Greece.
7. I now call on the Secretary-General,
make a statement.

purpose of clarifying the intentions of the two sides for a
federal solution and paving the way for a resumption of
the inter-communal talks on the existing agreed basis. I
promptly transmitted that suggestion to President Kyprianou and discussed it further with him on 6 October. For
my part, I made it clear to both leaders that I would be
happy to lend my good offices to arrange for a high-level
meeting, provided it was well prepared and provided both
sides would co-operate in ensuring its success. I felt that a
meeting of that kind could provide the opportunity for a
firm recommitment by both sides to a peaceful negotiated
solution of the Cyprus problem through the intercommunal talks on the existing agreed basis. I also felt that
such a recommitment should enable both sides to avoid
needless controversy and focus instead on making a
serious effort to achieve substantive progress towards a
settlement.

who wishes to

8. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have asked to
speak in order to provide Council members with information that they may find relevant to their consideration of
the item on the agenda. The matter before the Council
concerns the announcement in Nicosia, on 15 November,
of the proclamation of a Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus and the issuance of a declaration in which that
entity is described as an independent State. I was informed
about the announcement by a letter dated 15 November,
which Mr. Denktas, the leader of the Turkish Cypriot
community, handed on that day to my Special Representative, Mr. Gobbi, for transmission to me. The text of that
letter, with annexes, has been distributed as a document of
the Council [S/IdZ48. annex] at the request of the representative of Turkey.

11. Having received from my representative encouraging
reports on his preliminary contacts with both sides in Nicosia, I decided to initiate consultations on this subject with
the parties concerned. Mr. Gobbi arrived in Cyprus on 14
November with my instructions to commence this process
on my behalf by consulting both sides on the agenda. It
was my hope that arrangements for convening the highlevel meeting suggested by Mr. Denktas could be completed at an early date.

9. Upon receiving Mr. Denktas’s letter, I authorized the
United Nations spokesman to issue the following statement on my behalf:

12. Against this background, I must once again express
my deep disappointment at last Tuesday’s action. However, Mr. Denktas has informed me that his proposal for a
high-level meeting under my auspices remains valid and
that my good offices and the negotiations must continue.

“The Secretary-General deeply regrets the announcement of a ‘Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus’. He
considers that this move is contrary to the resolutions
of the Security Council on Cyprus and at variance with
the high-level agreements of 1977 [see S/12323, para. a
and 1979 [see S/13369, para. 511. It is bound to affect
adversely the situation in Cyprus and to complicate the
efforts of the Secretary-General to promote an agreed,
just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem under
the mission of good offices entrusted to him by the
Security Council. The announcement has been made at
the moment when the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has arrived in Cyprus to initiate consultations in preparation for the high-level meeting suggested by Mr. Denktq with the object of paving the
way for a resumption of serious intercommunal
negotiations.

13. I wish to emphasize my appeal for restraint. As the
members of the Council know, we are fortunate to have
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP)
stationed in the island. According to
UNFICYP
reports, access to the north was temporarily
stopped prior to the issuance of the Turkish Cypriot
announcement on 15 November. The Force Commander,
General Greindl, placed the Force on increased vigilance as
of 1300 hours. The Turkish checkpoints were reopened
shortly thereafter. The situation in the island and along the
cease-tire lines supervised by UNFICYP remains calm. By
its presence, UNFICYP
provides us with a measure of
assurance that the current problems will not be allowed to
disturb the calm that has prevailed in Cyprus for a number
of years.

“The Secretary-General is in consultation on this
serious development with all concerned, including the
President of the Security Council. In the mean time, he
appeals to all those involved to exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain from any action that may further
aggravate the situation.”

14. It is evident that the chances of successof our efforts
depend primarily on the co-operation of the parties and on
their willingness to engage in serious negotiations. Since
the beginning of the current crisis, I have been in constant
contact with all concerned and with my Special Representative in Nicosia.

10. I have little to add to that statement. As the members
of the Council are aware, I met in New York with President Kyprianou on 30 September and with Mr. DenktaS
on 1 October to discuss the soundings I had initiated in
August in order to give effect to my strengthened personal
involvement within the framework of the mission of good
offices entrusted to me by the Council. Mr. Denkta? at that
time suggested that I convene a high-level meeting for the

15. I am determined to pursue my efforts in order to
weather the present crisis and, if possible, induce the parties to return to the search for an agreed, just and lasting
settlement. With this end in view, I propose to utilize to the
2

utmost the presence here at the United Nations of highranking representatives of all concerned.

23. Furthermore, the principle of self-determination is
well established in the United Nations, and it certainly
cannot be interpreted in such a way as, inter aliu, to impair
the territorial integrity of any State. Would the Turkish
Government accept that different communities are entitled
to separate self-determination? Would they like us to
remind them of the situation in their own country and the
implication of such an application of the doctrine there?
As regards the “equality” claim, the Cyprus Government
believes in the equality of all Cypriots and in the total
absence of discrimination of any kind. We accept that each
citizen has equal rights and equal opportunities. But to
accept that 18 per cent of the population equals the 82 per
cent of the population would strike at the roots of democracy and the balance upon which a federal State is to be
based.

16. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker for this morning
is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, Mr. George
Iacovou. I welcome him and invite him to make his
statement.
17. Mr. IACOVOU
(Cyprus): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you and the members of the Security Council
for giving me the opportunity to report on an escalating
act of the continuing Turkish aggression against my country, the purported declaration of independence of that part
of Cyprus at present under Turkish occupation.
18. A few years ago, in February and March 1975, the
Council was urgently convened [2813th to 1820th meetings]
to condemn the unilateral Turkish decision of 13 February
1975, which declared that a part of the Republic of Cyprus,
the one occupied by the Turkish army, would become a
so-called “Federated Turkish State”. The Council adopted
resolution 367 (1975) condemning that action. It also
called upon all States to respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the
Republic of Cyprus and urgently requested them, as well
as the parties concerned, to refrain from any action which
might prejudice that sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and non-alignment, as well as from any attempt
at partition of the island.

24. Since the Turkish aggression against my country in
July and August 1974 and the continuing occupation of
part of its territory by the military forces of Turkey, the
Security Council and the General Assembly have repeatedly dealt with the Cyprus problem, and they have both
established, through numerous resolutions, the framework
for a just and viable solution.
25. These resolutions demand the immediate withdrawal
of all occupation forces from the Republic of Cyprus, considering this as an essential basis for a speedy and mutually
acceptable solution of the Cyprus problem. They demand
the immediate and effective implementation
of resolution
3212 (XXIX),
unanimously adopted by the General
Assembly on 1 November 1974 and endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December
1974, and of the subsequent Assembly and Council resolutions on Cyprus, which provide the valid and essential
basis for the solution of the problem of Cyprus.

19. The Council has convened today to consider condemnation, in the strongest terms, of this new Turkish
move tantamount to an attempt at the partition of Cyprus,
to declare that act null and void, and to call on all Member
States not to recognize this nullity.
20. The Turkish leadership, trying to stir up among Turkish Cypriots feelings of hatred and enmity towards their
Greek Cypriot compatriots, has not hesitated to repeat,
especially in recent months, its favorite but completely
unfounded allegations about usurpation of the rights of
Turkish Cypriots by the Greek Cypriots and about the
“Turkish Cypriots’ right to self-determination”,
trying to
create the atmosphere necessary .to justify a partitionist
policy through secession.

26. They deplore the fact that part of the territory of the
Republic of Cyprus is still occupied by foreign troops.
They deplore all unilateral actions that change the demographic structure of Cyprus by the implantation of settlers
from Turkey into the occupied areas or promote fair
accompli. They express full support for the sovereignty,
integrity,
unity and nonindependence, territorial
alignment of the Republic of Cyprus. They affirm the right
of the Republic of Cyprus and its people to full and effective sovereignty and control over the entire territory of
Cyprus and its natural and other resources. They call upon
all States to support and help the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus to exercise these rights and condemn
any act which tends to undermine their full and effective
exercise.

21. Ankara and its agents in Cyprus have been speaking
of the Turkish Cypriots’ right to self-determination. This
right, however, must be exercised by the population of a
country as a whole and not by each community separately,
for if what Ankara and Denktas are claiming is applied
internationally, many States in the world would be fragmented. Moreover, is it not a contradiction in terms when
Ankara and its agents speak of the exercise of this right in
the part of the country which is under the absolute control
of foreign occupation troops?

27. The resolutions deplore the lack of progress in the
intercommunal
talks and call for meaningful, resultoriented, constructive and substantive negotiations, under
the auspices of the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the high-level
agreements. They call for respect for the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all Cypriots, including the freedom of movement, the freedom of settlement and the right
to property, and the instituting of urgent measures for the
voluntary return of the refugees to their homes in safety.

22. Recent Turkish attempts to alter the agreed basis and
the nature of the intercommunal talks by introducing the
notions of “peoples” and “equality** were in essence not
referring to the dialogue itself but were, in fact, an attempt
to prepare the ground for their unilateral act of 15 November for the secession and for partition of Cyprus.
3

property, sell it, mortgage it and “distribute it to their
children*‘, as the Turkish Cypriot press ‘revealed.

28. They consider that the .de facto situation created by
the force of arms should not be allowed to influence or in
any way affect the solution of the problem, and they call
upon the parties to refrain from any unilateral action
which might adversely affect the prospects of a just and
lasting solution of the problem of Cyprus by peaceful
means or which violates or is designed to violate the independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus. The latest General Assembly resolution, 37/253 of 13 May’1983,‘welcomed
the intention of
the Secretary-General to pursue a renewed personal ini
volvement in the quest for a solution of the problem and
requested him to undertake such actions or initiatives as he
may consider appropriate within the framework of the
mission of good offtces entrusted to him by the Security
Council.

32. The same unacceptable attitude is unfortunately
demonstrated by the Turkish side in the purely humanitarian question of missing persons. This issue was discussed
at length in the Third Committee at the thirty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, and the Cyprus Government position there was thoroughly substantiated by irrefutable evidence. Nine years have elapsed, and we are still
trying to trace the fate of more’than 1,600 persons missing
since the invading forces set foot on Cyprus. In spite of
unflagging efforts, in spite of a number of resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly, no progress has been
made on this purely humanitarian issue.
33. Furthermore, the occupied areas of Cyprus have
been colonized by the importation from Turkey of alien
populations, in furtherance of Ankara’s plans to change
the demographic structure of Cyprus. These colonizers
even created a “political party” and its leader, a settler and
former Colonel of the Turkish Army, Mr. Ismail Tezer,
became a socalled minister in Denktas’s regime. In a press
conference on 22 December 1978 he openly declared that
.the aims of his “party” were to “achieve the partition of
Cyprus and its annexation to Turkey*‘. On 17 August 1981
he admitted .that the settlers came to Cyprus with the
approval of Turkey, that they were presented as an “agricultural .force”, that almost all of them became citizens of
the so-called Turkish Cypriot State and that “their purpose was to Stay forever in .Cyprus”.

29. Of all the provisions of the United Nations resolutions on Cyprus, Turkey has chosen to pay lip service only
to the one which refers to negotiations. For many years
now the Turkish side has claimed to place the emphasis for
the solution of the Cyprus problem on intercommunal
talks. Yet they have not given any explanation as to why
they refused to attend the talks at the end of May 1983, on
the day fixed by the’ United Nations for their resumption.
Similarly, they have given no reason why their various
proposals were so separatist and so devoid of substance as
to necessitate the intervention of the then SecretaryGeneral to save the talks from total collapse. And over the
whole period of intercommunal talks, in‘ contrast to the
attitude of the Greek Cypriot side, which was to negotiate
meaningfully and in good faith, the Turkish position has
been one of delaying tactics and meaningless proposals,
thus leading the talks to a virtual impasse, whilst preparing
the ground, through a series of unlawful measures, for
secession.

34. The objectives of these actions have been deplored by
the Turkish Cypriots themselves. The Turkish Cypriot
leader and former Vice-President of the Republic of
Cyprus, Mr. Fazil Kiictik, wrote in an article in his newspaper Halkin Sesi on 24 May 1978 that these settlers
“turned this paradise island into hell”..

30. We must not lose sight of the fact that the presence of
the occupation forces over the past nine years constitutes
an insurmountable obstacle in the free search for a solution of the Cyprus problem through constructive and
meaningful negotiations, as stipulated in the United
Nations resolutions and the high-level agreements of 12
February 1977 and 19 May 1979.
.

35. As regards Ankara’s sinister plans against Cyprus,
they are becoming more and more manifest every day. Its
plans are to wipe out any trace of Greek Cypriot rights in
the occupied part of Cyprus, to partition the island and to
annex, de facto, the occupied territories of Cyprus, thus
satisfying for the present its geopolitical objectives. All its
illegal and inhuman actions and tactics are motivated’by
this overall objective, and its deeds speak louder than its
words. We submit a few of the many provocative and.
secessionist statements made 20 years ago by Turkish off%
cials against Cyprus’ independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial
integrity. Mr. Kemal Satir, former VicePresident of Turkey, in a public statement‘in 1964, said,
“Cyprus will be divided into two sections, one of which
will join-Turkey.”
Hardly a few months later, in September 1964, the former Prime Minister ‘of Turkey, Ismet
Inonou, addressing the Turkish’National
Assembly, said,
with reference to the Geneva talks of that year, “Officially
we promote the federation concept rather than the partition thesis so as to remain within the provisions of the
Treaty.*’ This is another clear indication of the tactical
nature of the use of federation as an offtcial camouflage
for partition.

31. Every day that has passed, one further step has been
taken by Turkey to destroy the independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus and to convert the
occupied part into a province of Turkey. It was after the
visit of the Prime Minister of Turkey, Bulent Ulusu, to the
occupied areas of Cyprus in May 1982 that Ankara’s decision to establish a so-called Central Bank and a socalled
Development Bank in the occupied territory of the Republic was announced. It was after the visit of Denktas’s colleague, Mr. Cagatay, to Ankara ‘last year that Ankara’s
decision to abolish the Cyprus pound and to introduce the
Turkish Lira as “legal tender” in all transactions in the
area of the Republic occupied by the ‘Turkish forces was
also announced. Furthermore, they proceeded to issue socalled title deeds to the usurpers of the Greek Cypriot
properties, including to soldiers from the occupying forces
of Turkey and to settlers from Turkey. With these socalled certificates, the usurpers would be able to rent this
4

36. That the ulterior aim of partition is annexation transpires from the newspaper Halkin Sesi,-the mouthpiece of
Mr. Kilctik, then Vice-President of the Republic of
Cyprus-which
in its editorial of 9 August 1965 wrote:

properties in the south and the women are being prevented
from doing so’*. He added: “The reason why the people
insist on going to the south is that they have properties
there...; now they live in misery in the north”.
.
41. Let the world not be misled by false allegations by
the Turkish side that before the invasion the Turkish
Cypriots were suffering or that they were forced out of the
Government. The leader of the Turkish Cypriot Trade
Union, DEV-IS, Mr. Hasan.Sarica, refuted that allegation
when he stated that:

“Cyprus is nother Alexandretta in the history of Turkey. The power of Turkey will ensure an honourable
life for the Turkish Cypriots in the same way as it did in
Alexandretta by annexing it and bringing it, under Turkish domination. The road in this direction has been
opened by the Turkish fighters at Kokkina, who are
now lighting in every corner of Cyprus.”

“In the pm-1974 era, the Turkish Cypriots and the
Greek Cypriots worked together in a brotherly manner
and the economic position of the Turkish workers was
excellent.. . . After 1974 .the economic position of the
Turkish Cypriot workers substantially deteriorated.. . .
In pre-1974 Cyprus, the Turkish Cypriots and Greek
Cypriots worked together and shared the same economic profits. The conditions of life of the Turkish
Cypriots changed after 1974.”

37. Furthermore, in a recent long interview in the Turkish paper Tercuman of 30 July 1983, Mr. Melih Esenbel,
former Secretary-General of the Turkish Foreign Ministry,
former Turkish Foreign Minister and former Turkish
Ambassador to Washington, who played a role in the
Zurich and London Agreements,’ revealed Turkey’s real
intentions towards Cyprus, admitting that behind its partitionist designs on Cyprus were its own strategic
considerations.

That statement was published in the. newspaper of Denkta$s regime, Birlik, on 30 August 1980.

38. Mr. Fsenbel explained how Turkey, which had abandoned every claim on Cyprus in 1923, became party to the
Cyprus problem with enormous and patient work. He
further stated that Turkey accepted only those proposals
which were leaving the door open to separate selfdetermination and partition and subsequently rejected all
those proposals, including one by the then Governor of
Cyprus, Sir Hugh Foot, when they realized that “the road
leading to taqsim”- partition-was
closed. They accepted
Macmillan’s plan only when they were given assurances
that “the right to self-determination will be used” and thus
the road to taqsim too would be opened. .He also revealed
that Turkey’s Prime Minister Menderes gave them instructions in Zurich “to find a formula which will ensure the
possibilities of Turkey’s security’*, because “it is becoming
obvious that at this stage we will not bc able to achieve
taqsim”. Mr. Esenbel further stated that “according to the
defacto situation, it is clear on the territory itself and not on
paper as to how the Cyprus problem will be solved”.

42. It is not true that the Turkish Cypriots were “forced
out of the Government”. What is true is that the Turkish
Cypriot ministers refused from 1964 on to participate in
the Council of Ministers in order to show that, as the then
Vice-President, Mr. Kticiik, put it, “the Republic was
dead” and to promote partition. The agenda of the Council of Ministers continued to be sent to Turkish Cypriot
ministers at least one year after they chose not to participate, but they insisted in their refusal. The Turkish Cypriot
judges remained in their posts until 1966, but they were
then forced, under threats of imprisonment by the Turkish
leadership, to withdraw, and they acted accordingly. Many
Turkish Cypriots in the diplomatic service of the Republic
remained in their posts until 1974, just as many Turkish
Cypriots who served in the diplomatic missions chose to
remain in their positions.
’
43. Ample evidence of Ankara’s policies of segregation
and partition is provided by the regular biannual reports
of the late Secretary-General U Thant, which demolish the
allegations and irrefutably show the falseness of the accusation of mistreatment of the Turkish Cypriot community
by the Cyprus Government.

39. On 20 July 1980-the sixth anniversary of the invasion-Mr. Turan Giines, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey at the time of the invasion, openly declared that
“Cyprus is valuable as a right arm for a country interested in
its defence or for its expansionist aims”. Mr. Gtlnes took it a
step further and admitted that “many States to a certain
extent, because it suits their interests, want to seethe Cyprus
problem as our desire to protect the Turkish community on
the island, whereas the actual problem is the security of the
45 million Turks in the motherland”.

44. As regards the so-called population exchange agreement, which the Turkish side presents as a reason for not
complying.with the agreements of 12 February 1977 and
19 May 1979 and for the declaration of their “independence”, it would be ironic indeed for anyone to allege that
the 200,000 Greek Cypriot refugees came to the free areas
of the Republic voluntarily. It was the threat of massacre,
rape and torture; .it was the cruelty of the Turkish forces of
invasion; and it was fear of the Turkish tanks and the
Turkish bayonets that forced one third of the Cyprus pop
ulation to abandon their ancestral homes and properties
and run to the free areas of the Republic of save their lives.

40. The Turkish Cypriot population, which is also suffering under the Turkish military occupation, has many times
voiced its concern over the separatist and partitionist attitude of the Turkish side. Indicative of that concern is a
recent statement made by Mr. Orhan Kahya, leader of the
Turkish Cypriots who crossed to the occupied areas of
Cyprus in 1975, as published in the Turkish Cypriot magazine, Olay, on 8 March 1982. He said: “Presently even the
Turkish Cypriot women are exerting efforts to go to their

45. How .could the agreement of 2 August 1975 [see
S/11789, annex] be described as a “population exchange
agreement”, when in paragraph 2 it was stated:
5

“Mr. Denktag reaffirmed, and it is agreed, that the
Greek Cypriots at present in the north of the.island are
free to stay and that they will be given every help to lead
a normal life, including facilities for education and for
the practice of their religion, as well as medical care by
their own doctors and freedom of movement in the
north”?
How could that agreement be defined as a “population
exchange agreement” when, in paragraph 5, it was
stipulated:
“In connexion with the implementation of the above
agreement, priority will be given to the reunification of
families, which may also involve the transfer of a
number of Greek Cypriots, at present in the south, to
the north”?
In paragraph 4, it also provided that “The United Nations
will have free and normal access to Greek Cypriot villages
and habitations in the north”.
46. What was the outcome of that agreement? The Turkish side immediately violated each and every one of its
provisions. A mere look at the periodic reports of the
Secretary-General on the question of Cyprus will convince
everyone of how the Turkish leadership honours its signature. The Greek Cypriots enclaved in the occupied area
were forced to leave their homes to join the other Greek
Cypriot refugees in the free areas of the Republic. Instead
of their being given help to lead a normal life, their situation became miserable. Their education was hampered and
so was the practice of their religion; no medical care by
their own doctors was allowed and their freedom of movement was hindered.
47. As regards the freedom of movement of UNFICYP in
the occupied areas, for nine years now there appears in
every biannual report of the Secretary-General a special
paragraph devoted to that restriction by the Turkish army.
Furthermore, what can we say about paragraph 5 of that
agreement, which speaks about the reunification of families
of Greek Cypriots and returning them to their ancestral
homes in the occupied areas? Not even one such person has
been allowed to return. What can we say to Ankara or to its
obedient instruments in the occupied area who dare to say:
“to speak about the return of refugees to their homes is
nothing but a ploy by the Greek Cypriots, meaning that
they do not want an agreement”? That arrogant statement
came from the mouth of Mr. Atakol, a colleague of Mr.
DenktaS, and I present it to the Council as it appeared in the
newspaper of Mr. Denktag, Birlik, on 9 October 1982.

:
..

-.
‘_

48. As regards the so-called economic embargo propaganda of the Turkish side, it is clear that the economic
hardships experienced by the Turkish Cypriots are the
direct result of the invasion and the occupation and not the
legal actions and the obligation of the Cyprus Government
to protect, through legal means, the rights of its citizens,
whose properties were usurped by the invaders and the
settlers transported from Anatolia. The *‘embargo” allegation is so misleading that even in the minds of the Turkish
Cypriots themsefves it cannot be substantiated. In the Turkish Cypriot newspaper Kurtufus of 7 November 1980 it

was published that the arguments put forward by Mr.
Denktas “attributing this misery to the.. . alleged Greek
Cypriot embargo are not true’*. The Turkish Cypriot
leader, Mr. Veziroglu, said, and this was published in the
Turkish Cypriot newspaper, Once:
“The Denktag-National Unity Party regime has tried to
‘load the blame for all their mistakes, exploitations and
lack of successonto the Greeks.. , On important issues
there is no Greek embargo which affects us.”
A most recent article on that allegation appeared in the
Turkish Cypriot newspaper, Yeniduzen, of 21 September
1982:
“To tell the truth no one can convince us that the
embargo is the reason for the economic bottlenecks in
our area. Most of the economic troubles spring from
the type of relations existing between the TFSC”-the
socalled Turkish Federated State of Cyprus-“and
Turkey.. . . As long as this regime does not act within
the framework of the summit agreements in Cyprus, the
situation will not change”.
49. Turkey continues to exercise actual and exclusive
authority over the occupied areas of Cyprus seized during
the invasion by Turkish troops in July and August 1974. It
keeps the occupied area under its control through the
maintenance of a large force of about 35,000 troops, with
about 150 tanks and 80 armoured vehicles. The Turkish
troops in the ‘occupied area consist of two regular divisions
with all auxiliary units, plus special parachute, commando,
air and naval units. They are spread throughout the area in
military camps. Columns of Turkish troops constantly
patrol the occupied territory and maintain checkpoints on
main lines of communication in the same area. The Turkish army is not under the jurisdiction of the so-called
TFSC, not even under the jurisdiction of the so-called
courts of the TFSC.
50. It is worth mentioning that the Turkish army directly
intervenes in matters in the occupied areas, as it did, for
example, in strike-breaking and in the seizure, without any
prior consultation with the Turkish Cypriot leadership, of
32 Maronite houses in the villages of Asomatos, Karpasia
and Kormakiti for Turkish army oflicers’ families in July
1982. The Turkish army has also displaced Turkish Cypriots from their properties in the north. That is stated in the
Press Digest from the North, quoting Birlik of 18 January
1983.
51. The occupied area is so saturated by Turkish troops
that the proportion is one soldier for every four members
of the population, including women and children. If one
takes into account also the 35,000 settlers from Turkey,
then the proportion is two Turks from Turkey for every
four members of the Turkish Cypriot community. It is
thus impossible for any independent action to be taken by
the Turkish Cypriot leadership. That leadership in fact
expresses the will and policy of Turkey.
52. The Turkish Government, via General Evren, has
told Turkish Cypriot political leaders that it claims the

right to intervene directly in Cyprus, it being the responsibility of the Turkish armed forces “to protect the interests
and rights of the Turkish nation and that the Turkish
armed forces have the right to use this authority everywhere they serve, including Cyprus”. That is quoted from
Oiay of 23 August 1982.

should reside in Ankara’*. Although Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot leadership are usually careful not openly to
acknowledge Turkey’s responsibility in the occupied areas
of Cyprus, there are politicians who among themselves
sometimes pierce the veil and reveal the reality of Turkish
control. Evidence in the form of Turkish and Turkish
Cypriot newspaper reports shows this reality. Particularly
illuminating are articles showing Turkish awareness of the
need to obscure Turkish control-see MdJiyet of 16, June
1982 and Gunaydin of 2 November 1982.

53. Furthermore, the so-called Turkish Cypriot Cabinet
meetings are attended by a representative of the Turkish
occupation force in Cyprus, who gives the final shape to
any decision taken by that illegal body. It is worth mentioning that the European Commission of Human Rights
has held that sole control over the Turkish occupying forces is vested in the Government of Turkey and that their
presence in the occupied area engages Turkey’s international responsibility in respect of all persons or property
over which they exercise control. That is stated in the
report of the Commission in the case of Cyprus v. Turkey,
10 July 1976, page 32; in the decision of 10 July 1978 on
the admissibility of Application No. 8007/77; and in the
report on Application No. 8007/77, paragraphs 21 and 22.

57. The maior administrative mechanism for Turkish
control of the occupied area of Cyprus is by way of the
Cyprus Co-ordination
Council, previously the Cyprus
Affairs Co-ordination Council, now composed of the Turkish Prime Minister, two Deputy Prime Ministers, the Foreign Minister of Turkey, the National Forces Minister of
Turkey, the Finance Minister of Turkey, the Industry and
Technology Minister of Turkey, the Trade Minister of Turkey, the Construction Minister of Turkey, the Communications Minister of Turkey and the Agriculture and
National Resources Minister of Turkey. In addition, each
Turkish ministry has a Cyprus Affairs Bureau, while there
is a Cyprus Affairs Secretariat in the office of the Turkish
Prime Minister, chaired by Mr. Guneri, formerly the Turkish General Officer commanding the Turkish army in
Cyprus.

54. The so-called Turkish Cypriot Security Forces are
under the authority and subject to the orders of the General
Staff of the Turkish Army, and all expenses for these “Security Forces” are provided by Turkey. Furthermore, the
so-called Turkish Cypriot Administration
and “Turkish
Cypriot Federated State” are subject to the authority and
directions of the Turkish Government. They are the products of Turkey’s military occupation. They exist only by
virtue of the presence of the Turkish forces, which prevent
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus from reasserting
the Republic’s jurisdiction. Any alleged authority exercised
by that illegal body is in actual fact derived from the
strength of the Turkish Army, to which it is subordinate.

58. There are in the occupied areas large numbers of
Turkish civil servants who implement the Cyprus Coordination Council’s decisions for those areas. The Council takes all economic and social decisions for the occupied
part of Cyprus and implements them. This information is
derived from Turkish and Turkish Cypriot newspapers
such as Cumhuriyet of 25 October 1981, Birlik of 25
November 1981 and Hurriyet of 1 December 1981.

55. That it is Turkey which will take decisions on the
solution of the problem and on what concessions will be
made in any settlement has been repeatedly stated by Turkish Prime Ministers, such as Mr. Demirel and Mr. Ecevit.
Particularly clear examples of statements showing this
come from speeches in 1977 by the Deputy Prime Minister
of Turkey, Mr. Erbakan, who, for example, said in April
1977:

59. Decisions for the so-called Turkish Federated State
of Cyprus are taken in Ankara by the Cyprus Coordination Council and are then sent to the “TFSC” for
final approval, and are thereafter ultimately approved,
again by the Cyprus Co-ordination Council in Ankara,
and put into effect by that Council. That information was
obtained from Kibris Postasi of 13 November 1982.

“Cyprus belongs to Turkey and the Greek Cypriots
must be content with what Turkish generosity has
allowed . . . there is no chance of ceding an inch in
Cyprus . . . there can be no question of return of Greek
Cypriots to their homes . . . Famagusta and Varosha
belong to us. We do not concede an inch, not even one
window of a house. Morphou and the surrounding villages belong to us, we do not give back [anything].”

60. The so-called Turkish Ambassador to Cyprus .also
exercises direct authority in Cyprus, intervening in the
decisions of the so-called Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus-see Cumhuriyet of 22 December 1982; interview
with Denktas as to the “Turkish
Ambassador’s*’
intervention.
61. Mr. Denktas has openly admitted that Turkey has
control over the affairs of the occupied areas-in the magazine Olay of 19 July 1982 and in the newspaper Cumhuriyet of 20 December 1982-a view supported by the
Turkish Cypriot opposition leaders who have disclosed
Turkey’s pressures and interference and its disregard for
the so-called TFSC Constitution.

56. Another glaring example is the statement made by
Mr. Denktas himself, published in the Turkish Cypriot
newspaper Yeniduzen on 5 October 1982, in which he
stated: “Whether I believe it or not, whether I consider it
right or not, I do whatever Turkey says”. Furthermore,
another Turkish Cypriot leader, Mr. Veziroglu, in a statement published in Halkin Sesi of 6 November 1983,
accused Denktas, saying that “a leader who acts like the
public servant of Turkey cannot reside in Nicosia but

62. As regards Turkey’s complete financial and political
control over the occupied area of Cyprus, this is evidenced
by the following. It approves the “TFSC” budget in
7

Ankara and determines the salaries of the so-called TFSC
civil servants. President Evren forced Turkish Cypriot pohticians to vote for the “TFSC” budget. As they revealed,
having been warned by President Evren, they did not wish
to give cause for intervention by the Turkish army. Turkey
provides two thirds of the budget of the occupied area.
Turkey set up a joint working group under General
Guneri, Turkish Chairman of the Cyprus Affairs Secretariat, to prepare an action plan to give direction to the
economy of the ‘occupied part of Cyprus, which.package
was presented to the Turkish Cypriot so-called Cabinet.by
the Turkish Prime Minister, Mr. Ulusu. Turkey controls
the currency of the so-called Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus, the Turkish lira being the currency in circulation
after the abolition of the Cyprus pound as legal tender,
and the State-controlled Agricultural Bank of Turkey acts
as the Central Bank for the socalled Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus.

67. It is evident from the foregoing that, in view of the
massive presence of the Turkish army and the total
dependence of the occupied area on Turkey, the so-called
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus is in reality a puppet
wholly controlled by,Turkey, and the declaration of the
so-called North Cyprus Turkish Republic was adopted
with the full knowledge, encouragement and support of
Turkey. The recognition of that non-existent State,
extended on the same date by the Turkish Government, is
indicative of Turkey’s involvement and complicity.
. ..,I
68. One of the arguments put forward by the Turkish
side was that the intemationalization
of the Cyprus problem was harming the climate of the intercommunal talks
and that that was the main reason for the lack of progress.
The Cyprus Government, although it had reservations,
decided to put that argument to the test. For three consecutive years it avoided any recourse to the United Nations
on the problem of Cyprus, thus demonstrating once again
its good will and genuine desire that there be some progress in the intercommunal dialogue. Unfortunately, not
only did .the deadlock remain but also, through its organs
in the occupied area, Ankara took advantage of the time
gained to consolidate the de facto situation there and to
apply new secessionist measures.

63. The Turkish Tourist Minister has stated, “We do not
see the TFSC as a separate country. As part of my duty I
visited Cyprus at least 50 times.” He also said he thought
Turkey’s proposed Tourism Encouragement Law would
also be enacted to cover the occupied areas.
64. Enver Emin, Secretary-General of Mr. Denktas’s
National Unity Party, warned that “TFSC politicians
could annihilate us within 24 hours” and that “the TFSC
economy stands on its feet only with the assistance provided by Turkey”.

69. What is currently one of the main issues, and what
this body is legitimately entitled to be informed about, is
the Turkish attitude regarding the personal involvement
and initiative of the Secretary-General, approved and supported by the overwhelming majority of the Members of
the United Nations, as expressed in General Assembly
resolution 37/253 of 13 May 1983 on Cyprus.

65. The formation and composition of the so-called
Government of the “TFSC” is in effect shaped by Turkey.
Coalition-making
over the last two years, as described in
the Turkish press, has occurred in accordance with Turkey’s dictates. Furthermore decision-making in the occupied areas is under Turkish surveillance and control, and
this is evident from the mere fact that three officials from
Turkey attend the “TFSC Cabinet” meetings, including
the Turkish Ambassador and the head of the security
forces.

70. Beginning from. their meeting at New Delhi in February this year, the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr.
Spyros Kyprianou, expressed to the Secretary-General his
grave concern and disappointment at the lack of progress
in the intercommunal talks and encouraged the SecretaryGeneral to proceed with a new approach, through a personal involvement
in the quest for a just and viable
solution. President Kyprianou and the Secretary-General
met again in Paris a few months later and an exchange of
views took place.

66. As regards the declaration of a so-called Turkish
Cypriot State and Turkey’s responsibilities in and absolute
control over the entire occupied territory of Cyprus, most
revealing is Mr. Denktas’s recent complaint that recognition of and independence for the so-called TFSC can be
sought only “with the approval of Turkey or when Turkey
too feels this is necessary”. I quote from Birlik of 12 February 1983. Mr. Denktas, commenting on Turkey’s control
of any such decision, said recently:

71. As the Council well knows, the Secretary-General
submitted to the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot sides
an informal document containing soundings, as part of his
personal initiative, and President Kyprianou and Mr.
Denktag were invited to New York for separate consultations with him. President Kyprianou met the SecretaryGeneral on 14 September, and our response was submitted
on 30 September, as requested by him. During that meeting we offtcially informed him that his personal involvement was welcomed and accepted and that the
methodology he proposed was also accepted. We furthermore submitted our response to his soundings in a most
constructive manner, and we are very pleased that he himself has, both publicly and privately, described our
response “as a positive and constructive step”.

-*‘In the past, even before I pronounced the word [independence], the Turkish Government would choke the
word in my mouth. At least this time I am thankful that
no such thing was done”.
I am quoting from Milliyer of 29 May 1983. The leading
Turkish newspaper, Chhuriyet,
on 18 June 1983 stated
that the resolution of self-determination was passed only
after Turkish consent.

72. The Turkish attitude. was from the beginning negative. The,Turkish Cypriot leader, Mr. Denkta$, postponed
8

and to destroy the territorial integrity.and unity of Cyprus,
a State Member of the United Nations.

his meeting with the Secretary-General from 16 September
to several other days in September, and finally to 28 Sep
tember. Eventually the meeting took place on 1 Octoberone day past the time limit. That was the manner chosen
by Mr. Denktag to show the Secretary-General that the
meeting was outside the framework of his initiative. Mr.
Denktq rejected the initiative outright, stating to the
Secretary-General that he disagreed in toro with the methodology and that consequently there was no reason for him
to submit any comments on the soundings. Continuing his
repeated practice of engaging in what could be described
as diversionary tactics, as a way of deflecting attention
from the main issue, which is the Secretary-General’s initiative, and with the aim apparently of neutral&g
it, Mr.
Denktas-to,
I believe, everybody’s surprise, including the
Secretary-General&-made
a spectacular proposal to meet
with President Kyprianou. It is regrettable that the Turkish
Cypriot leader proceeded to connect threats and ultimatums to his proposal. Arriving in Strasbourg from New
York, where he met the press, Mr. Denktq set a threeweek time limit for the convening of the meeting with
President Kyprianou; otherwise, he threatened to declare a
“separate State”.

78. The situation purportedly created is the direct result
of the massive use of force by Turkey in 1974 and the
consequent military occupation of 37 per cent of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus. The actions of Turkey in
1974 and since then, to this very day, have been contrary to
the fundamental principles of the prohibition of the use of
force and the sovereign equality and the territorial integrity of States. Situations resulting from invasion and occupation should not and could not be recognized by States,
as this would be in breach of the principle prohibiting
recognition of situations brought about by the illegal
threat or use of force.
79. In sum, all the Turkish actions fall squarely within
the definition of aggression adopted by the General
Assembly in 1974. As the Government of the Republic
firmly declared, such illegal activities are also contrary to
the numerous Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, to the Charter of the United Nations to the
international treaties registered with the United Nations
and to the peremptory norms of international law.

73. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus reacted
very firmly in the diplomatic field in all directions to those
unacceptable secessionist actions and declared that even a
so-called change of name of Mr. Denktas’s fictitious State
to “North Cyprus Republic” would be considered by the
Cyprus Government as a move equivalent to secession and
that we were ready to react appropriately.

80. Mr. Denkta$s socalled “Government” and “State”
are merely a puppet regime and a puppet entity enjoying
whatever degree of effectiveness they possess by virtue of
the facts of Turkey’s military support and massive financial assistance. In reality Denktas regime is both maintained and controlled by Turkey and is similar to
Manchukuo
and to Slovakia and Croatia during the
Second World War. Any entity created as a consequence
of Turkey’s aggression and its fomenting of secession is a
nullity. For Turkey to support the Denktas regime or to
tolerate a purported secession is a gross violation of the
Final Act of Helsinki. The fruits of aggression and Turkey’s breaches of treaties and international law cannot be
recognized. Principle IV of the Final Act of Helsinki
expressly provides: “No such occupation or acquisition
will be recognized as legal.”

74. After Mr. Denkta$s proposal, the Secretary-General
held consultations with President Kyprianou. It was understood that Mr. Perez de Cut$llar was thinking of convening
such a meeting only under the usual requirements for the
convening of meetings of this kind. These requirements are
basic elements for the preparation of such meetings. In the
case of Cyprus they were crucial; owing to the fact that a
possible failure would have undesirable reprecussions. The
requirements are: an agenda to be agreed by the two parties, proper preparation of the meeting and good chances
for a successful outcome.

81. The area of the purported entity continues to be an
integral part of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus,
although it is currently under the belligerent occupation of
Turkey, which is in breach of its obligations under article
II of the Treaty of Guarantee* of 1960, whereby Turkey
undertook to guarantee the “territorial integrity. . . of the
Republic” and “the state of affairs established by the Basic
Articles of its Constitution**, in particular of Article 185,
which provides that “the territory of the Republic is one
and indivisible and excludes separate independence”. Turkey is also in breach of that part of the same article which
prohibits “‘any activity aimed at promoting, directly or
indirectly.. . partition of the Island”.

75. Having received the relevant assurances from the
Secretary-General, the Cyprus Government agreed to the
commencement of consultations for the possible convening of such a meeting.
76. At a time when our side accepted the initiative of the
Secretary-General, at a time when the Turkish side blatantly rejected it and at a time when consultations were in
progress regarding Mr. Denkta$s own .proposal to meet
with President Kyprianou, an unwarranted and arbitrary
secessionist act was taking place in the occupied areas of
the Republic of Cyprus.

82. The Turkish Government immediately announced
that it recognized the socalled Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. By supporting the continuance of the Denktas
regime and the purported secession, Turkey, as I have said,
is contravening the Treaty concerning the Establishment
of the Republic of Cyprus’ and the Tready of Guarantee.

77. On 15 November 1983 the so-called “Assembly of
the Turkish Federated State of Kibris” purported to
declare an independent “Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus” in the territory of the Republic occupied by the
military forces of Turkey, thereby attempting to secede
9

83. As the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr.
Kyprianou, has declared, the purported proclamation of
independence and secession of the so-called Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus involves international
aggression, direct and indirect, attacks on the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and unity of the Republic of Cyprus,
a violation of frontiers and interference in its domestic
jurisdiction. The action constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security and creates a most explosive
situation in the whole of the eastern Mediterranean area.

90. Accordingly, Turkey is responsible for the breaches
of the Treaty of Guarantee and the Treaty concerning the
Establishment of the Republic resulting from these latest
threats to, infer diu, the territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus, which has been dealt another serious blow.
Thus, Turkey is under the obligation to reverse this situation and to restore the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus.
91. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Greece, Mr. Yannis Haralambopou10s. 1 invite him to make his statement.

84. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus is seeking the assistance of the international community in helping the Republic of Cyprus, both in the United Nations
and in all other forums, to demand of the Government of
Turkey that it take all required measures for the reversal of
the unilateral act and that it rescind its recognition of the
purported regime.

92. Mr. HARALAMBOPOULOS
(Greece): Since this is
the first time I am addressing the Council during your
presidency, Sir, I should like to express my confidence that
under your experienced guidance the Council will discuss
the matter on its agenda in a manner which will help peace
and justice.

85. This arbitrary and provocative behaviour and the
contemptuous disregard shown by Turkey should be a
source of serious concern to the Council, because the situation in Cyprus and its implications, extending beyond the
confines of our country and beyond the suffering of its
people, endanger international peace and security and at
the same time constitute a serious challenge to the effectiveness of the United Nations.

93. Once again, as it has been doing for the past eight
years, the Turkish side has flagrantly violated international
treaties and has trampled upon fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. I am referring to the
criminal act of the purported declaration of independence
of the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
94. In 1974, in violation of all norms of international
law, the Turkish army invaded the Republic of Cyprus.
Since then Turkey has continued to impose its military
occupation on a great part of the territory of the Republic,
in spite of repeated resolutions of the United Nations calling, in the words of the most recent one, for the immediate
withdrawal of all occupation forces from the Republic of
Cyprus. For all practical purposes, the northern part of the
Republic of Cyprus is totally controlled by Turkey
through its army of occupation.

86. My Government, therefore, appeals to tbe Security
Council urgently to discharge its responsibilities under the
Charter and to adopt such effective measures as are warranted by the situation, measures which will reverse the
unacceptable situation created in the occupied part of
Cyprus. We trust furthermore that the Council will give
serious consideration to the taking of effective and urgent
measures for the implementation
of its own mandatory
resolutions, in accordance with the Charter and with the
Council’s own responsibilities and self-respect.

95. It now appears that the already unacceptable state of
affairs was not enough for Turkey. Continuing his policies
of disregard for international law and morality, Turkey’s
puppet, Mr. DenktaS, has proceeded to the purported declaration of independence of a so-called Turkish Republic
of Northern Cyprus on the territory of the Republic of
Cyprus occupied by Turkey. Mr. Denktas chose to do this
at the very moment when the representative of the
Secretary-General was in Cyprus in order to deliver to him
the latest proposal of Mr. Perez de Cutllar aimed at furthering the personal involvement of the Secretary-General
with a view to achieving a negotiated solution to the problem of Cyprus.

87. I wish to conclude my statement with the following
declaration.
88. On 15 November 1983, the leader of the Turkish
Cypriot community in the Republic of Cyprus made a
statement by which he purported to declare the independence of an entity described as the “Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus”. The Government of the Republic of
Cyprus regards that declaration as a nullity. All States are
under the duty and have the obligation not to recognize
any Cypriot State other than the Republic of Cyprus. Turkey is solely responsible for the purported declaration of
independence, which would have been impossible had Turkey not been in occupation of that part of the territory of
the Republic.

96. The decision which purports to declare the independence of a so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
falls within the context of the continued violation of the
sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus by Turkey. More
particularly, it is in itself an undeniable breach of the
Treaty of Guarantee* signed by Turkey along with Greece
and the United Kingdom in 1960, whereby Turkey undertook to guarantee the territorial integrity and security of
the Republic of Cyprus and the state of affairs established
by the Basic Articles of its Constitution. Article 185 of that

89. Given the political and military control which Turkey exercises in the occupied part of Cyprus-which
obviously, in the circumstances, is not independent of
Turkey-one
arrives at the inescapable conclusion that
political, legal and moral responsibility for events in the
occupied part of Cyprus lies with the Government of Turkey and will do so until such time as the authority of the
Republic is restored in the whole of Cyprus.
10

Constitution expressly excludes separatist independence
and provides that the territory of the Republic is one and
indivisible.
97. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus has just
presented the Security Council with a clear and detailed
analysis of the recent developments in the Republic of
Cyprus. I do not wish to impose on the time of the Council’s members by touching again on the history of the question or its legal aspects. Besides, representatives in the
Council and their Governments know perfectly -well that
Turkey has been violating international law continuously
in Cyprus, and they know equally well that the socalled
declaration of independence of the pseudo-Turkish
Cypriot State is just another act in the interminable drama
of the occupation of part of the Republic of Cyprus by the
Turkish army. It should not be forgotten that the brutal
activities of Turkey in the island have only been made
possible by its military power. This brutal fact should be
borne in mind by the Council and particularly by the countries who help maintain Turkey’s military apparatus.
98. Greece, because it is linked to Cyprus by special relations and is one of the guarantors of its sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity, will spare no efforts in order to see
the end of Turkey’s illegal acts against the Republic of
Cyprus, as well as the restoration of the Republic’s unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations.
99. We call upon all Members of the Organization not
only to refrain from affording any form of recognition to
this artificial product of illegality and brute force which
calls itself the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, but

also to join in unequivocal condemnation of this illegal act.
Moreover, we call upon Turkey, whose invasion and continued military occupation of the northern part of the
island have created the conditions for such a declaration,
immediately to withdraw its army from the Republic of
Cyprus. Turkey has the sole responsibility for whatever
happens in the northern part of Cyprus because its army of
occupation, for all practical purposes, is the sole source of
authority in the occupied area.
100. It should be stressed that the continued presence of
the Turkish forces in Cyprus reenforcing Turkey’s expansionist aims and illegal actions, compounded by the recent
developments which we are here to discuss, run the great
risk of creating a highly explosive situation in an area in
which international conflicts already abound, thus posing
once more a grave threat to international peace and
security.
101. Greece declares its intention not to recognize, in the
present or in the future, this arbitrary and provocative
Turkish act. Greece will continue to pursue its efforts for
the re+stablishment of freedom and legality in the sovereign Republic of Cyprus with all the means at its disposal.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
NOTES
’ Conference on Cyprus: Documents signed and initialled at Lancaster
House on 19 February 1959, Cmnd. 679 (London,
Her Majesty’s
Stationery
Office,
1959).
z United
Nations,
Treaty

’ Ibid.., No. 5476.

Series, vol. 382, No. 5415.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente darts les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous ir : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Genbve.
KAK I-IOJIYYZlTb

M3&iHkiFI

OPI-AHH3ALttiI4

.OFbEDIHEHHbIX

HAUMn

M3AaHuXOpr~u3auriRO6~eAuHeHHblX
HaqnR MOXWO KYlltiTbB
KHBXUIbIX
MaTa3HHaX
HareHTCTBaXBOBCeXpa~OHaXmpa.khBOAHTecnpaBKSi
06 H3AaHBXXBBaIueMKHA~KHOM
Mara3HHe
umi nritunre no anpecy: Opraris3auer 06aenmfemrbtx Hauutt. Cexusa no
nponaxe u3natiuB, Hbio-Wopx
HJIH >1Cenena.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estarr en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

90-60205-August

1992-2.050

1
