S/2017/435

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 May 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the political agreement of 31 December 2016 in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report covers developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since 27 March 2017 and is submitted pursuant to resolution 2348 (2017), in
which the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to update it in writing
every 45 days on political and technical progress and obstacles to the
implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016.

II. Key political developments relating to the implementation
of the agreement
2.
Continued divisions between political factions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have threatened to undermine the broad consensus achieved with the
signing of the political agreement of 31 December. On 27 March, the Epis copal
Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo ended its mediation efforts,
citing what it referred to as a continued lack of consensus among political leaders
over the special arrangements for the implementation of the political agreement.
Negotiations reached an impasse over the appointment of a new Prime Minister and
the selection of the Chair of the National Council for Oversight of the Agreement
and the Electoral Process. On 28 March, the Episcopal Conference reported to the
President, Joseph Kabila, on its efforts to exercise its good offices and
recommended that he carry out consultations with political actors with a view to
breaking the deadlock. On 3 and 4 April, the President held consultations with
stakeholders from across the political spectrum, including dissident members, led by
Joseph Olenga Nkoy, of the opposition platform the Rassemblement des forces
politiques et sociales de la République démocratique du Congo acquises au
changement (Rassemblement), with a view to overcoming the impasse. The leader
of the Rassemblement, Félix Tshisekedi, declined the President’s invitation in
protest over the participation of the dissident wing of the Rassemblement in the
consultations. The Rassemblement called for countrywide mobilization, includin g a
stay-at-home day on 3 April, which was largely observed in Kinshasa and partially
in Mbuji-Mayi, Kasai Oriental. The Rassemblement also expressed support for the
general strike called by civil servants, which was observed to some extent on
5 April in Kinshasa and provincial capitals. Demonstrations called for by the
Rassemblement from 10 to 24 April were largely unsuccessful owing to the limited

17-08004 (E)

220517

*1708004*

S/2017/435

capacity of the opposition to mobilize popular support, the preventive deployment
of security forces and the official ban on public demonstrations because of security
concerns.
3.
On 5 April, in his State of the Nation address before Congress, the President
invited members of the Rassemblement to harmonize their views and propose a list
of candidates for the position of Prime Minister. He stated that he intended to
announce the appointment of a new Prime Minister within 48 hours; the nomination
of a Chair of the National Council for Oversight of the Agreement and the Electoral
Process, following the adoption of a law on its functioning; the establishment of a
transitional government, in line with the provisions of the political agreement; and
the holding of elections in accordance with a calendar to be published by the
Independent National Electoral Commission. The President also warned against
foreign interference in the electoral process. Reacting to the address, the opposition,
mainly the Rassemblement, expressed concern about further delays in the electoral
process and denounced attempts by the Majorité préside ntielle to fragment the
Rassemblement.
4.
On 6 April, the Prime Minister, Samy Badibanga, presented his resignation to
the Head of State. On 7 April, the President appointed Bruno Tshibala as Prime
Minister. Mr. Tshibala had been Deputy Secretary-General of the Union pour la
démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS) until he was excluded from the party on
5 March and is a member of the dissident wing of the Rassemblement. On the one
hand, a number of national actors, including the Episcopal Conference and the
Rassemblement, as well as international partners, including Belgium, France, the
United States of America and the European Union, stated publicly that the
appointment of the Prime Minister was not in line with the provisions of the
political agreement. On the other hand, the dissident wing of the Rassemblement,
the Majorité présidentielle and several regional organizations, including the
Economic Community of Central African States and the Southern African
Development Community, welcomed the appointment of the new Prime Minister
and the steps taken by the Government to advance the implementation of the
political agreement. Between 24 and 26 April, a group of seven large religious
denominations, the opposition party Union pour la nation congolaise (UNC), led by
Vital Kamerhe, the dissident wing of the Rassemblement and the Majorité
présidentielle rejected the statement issued by the Episcopal Conference on 21 April
that the appointment of the new Prime Minister was not in line with the political
agreement.
5.
On 27 April, at a session chaired by the Speaker of the National Assembly,
Aubin Minaku, and the President of the Senate, Léon Kengo wa Dondo, five of the
seven main groups that had signed the agreement of 31 December also signed the
special arrangements for its implementation. The five groups included the Majorité
présidentielle; Opposition républicaine, led by Kengo wa Dondo; opposition groups
led by Vital Kamerhe; civil society representatives who had signed the political
agreement of 18 October 2016; and the dissident wing of the Rassemblement. On
28 April, the coalition Front pour le respect de la Constitution, led by the
Mouvement pour la libération du Congo (MLC), also signed the agreement,
following consultations with the leader of MLC, Jean-Pierre Bemba.
6.
The special arrangements stipulate that the Prime Minister should be selected
from the Rassemblement and that the 28 members of the National Council for
Oversight of the Agreement and the Electoral Process should propose a consensus
candidate for the position of Chair of the Council, who is to be assisted by three
Vice-Chairs, representing the Majorité présidentielle, the Front pour le respect de la
Constitution and the opposition groups that signed the agreement of 18 October
2016. The Rassemblement, led by Félix Tshisekedi, refused to sign the special
2/6

17-08004

S/2017/435

arrangements, arguing that they were no longer in consonance with the terms
initially negotiated under the auspices of the Episcopal Conference and that they
were therefore no longer in line with the agreement of 31 December, which
stipulates that the Government is to be led by a Prime Minister presented by the
opposition groups that did not sign the agreement of 18 October, that is, the
Rassemblement and nominated by the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in line with article 78 of the Constitution. Under the agreement, the Council
is to be presided over by the Chair of the Wise Persons Council of the
Rassemblement.
7.
Since the signing of the special arrangements, the Episcopal Confe rence has
stated its readiness to participate in the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December as an observer. Meanwhile, UDPS and the Rassemblement are
advocating direct talks between the opposition and the ruling majority, including
engagement with the President, to harmonize views on contentious issues relating to
the implementation of the agreement. The Majorité présidentielle maintains that the
Episcopal Conference has failed to maintain its status as a neutral broker and is
firmly opposed to the possibility of a “third dialogue”.
8.
On 8 May, the President issued a decree appointing a new transitional
government comprising 59 members, including the Prime Minister. The
Government, which is dominated by the Majorité présidentielle, include s opposition
members who signed the agreement of 18 October 2016 and representatives of the
dissident wing of the Rassemblement. The Rassemblement wing led by Félix
Tshisekedi said that the Government was illegitimate.

III. Key electoral developments relating to the implementation
of the agreement
9.
The voter registration process has advanced owing mainly to popular support
and high rates of enrolment, despite security challenges and funding constraints.
The Independent National Electoral Commission maintains 31 July as the official
deadline for the completion of the voter registration process. However, an extension
of the deadline may be necessary in some areas in view of security, techn ical and
logistical challenges.
10. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Development
Programme continued to provide support to the voter registration process. On
19 April, MONUSCO completed the air delivery of some 4,000 tons of registration
materials to hubs and antennae of the Independent National Electoral Commission
throughout the country. On 27 April, according to the Commission, more than
22.3 million potential voters had been registered in 13 of the 26 provinces, which
represents 54 per cent of the estimated electorate nationwide.
11. On 30 April, the Commission launched the update of the voter register in 4 of
the 10 targeted provinces (Bas-Uélé, Kongo Central, Kwilu and Kwango). On the
same day, the Commission also launched the process in the capital cities of Kasai
Oriental, Lomami and Sankuru, while temporarily postponing registration in
Kinshasa, Kasai Central and the Kasai provinces. The Commission expects to
include the Congolese diaspora in the update of the voter r egister. On 5 May, the
Chair of the Commission, Corneille Nangaa, indicated that registration in Kasai and
Kasai Central might not proceed as scheduled because of the fragile security
situation resulting from clashes between the national security forces an d the
Kamwina Nsapu militia, which had hampered voter registration activities in several
areas in the Kasai region. My Special Representative continues to engage with
17-08004

3/6

S/2017/435

political and influential actors hailing from the Kasai provinces to play an active
role in advancing the registration process. He has also engaged with the
Government on the need to strengthen security in the region as a prerequisite for
peaceful elections. MONUSCO is further exploring how to utilize its strengthened
presence in the Kasai region in support of the voter registration process.

IV. Restrictions on political space and violence relating to the
implementation of the political agreement and in the
electoral context
12. The situation with regard to democratic space remained somewh at restricted
during the reporting period. On 3 April, in Kindu, Maniema province, seven
members of the Rassemblement were arbitrarily arrested by the national police
during a stay-at-home day and later released, even though a caravan organized by
the ruling Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie on 1 April, in the
same town, had been allowed to proceed. On 10 April, during protests led by the
Rassemblement against the appointment of Bruno Tshibala, security forces were
preventively deployed in the main cities, including Beni, Bukavu, Bunia, Kindu,
Kinshasa, Kisangani, Lubumbashi, Matadi and Mbandaka. MONUSCO documented
human rights violations perpetrated mainly by the police, as well as by the military,
throughout the country on 10 April. At least five people were wounded in Matadi
(Kongo Central) and Kongolo (Tanganyika) by national police officers, as well as in
Kinshasa by the military police, and at least 140 arrests were documented
throughout the country, mainly in Kinshasa and Lubumbashi (Haut-Katanga). Most
of those arrested were subsequently released. On 24 April, in Lubumbashi, the
residence of parliamentarian and provincial Coordinator of the Rassemblement,
Gabriel Kyungu, was surrounded by the police in an attempt to prevent the
organization of a political meeting to commemorate the introduction of the
multiparty system in the country in the early 1990s.

V. Confidence-building measures
13. There has been no significant progress towards the implementation of the
confidence-building measures in the political agreement. At least 132 political
prisoners remain in detention. On 3 May, the local and international media reported
that, on 29 March, the ad hoc commission of the Episcopal Conference established
to look into high-profile cases of political leaders facing judicial proceedings had
submitted a confidential report to the President pointing to political interference in
the judiciary and recommending the immediate release of the leader of the
opposition party Solidarité congolaise pour la démocratie, Jean-Claude Muyambo,
and the immediate withdrawal of the arrest warrant against an opposition leader,
Moïse Katumbi. The following day, the Speaker of the National Assembly accused
the Episcopal Conference of breaching the confidentia lity of the work of the ad hoc
commission by leaking the report and argued that the recommendations put forward
by the Conference contained contradictions that undermined the independent
functioning of the judiciary. On 5 May, the Conference released a statement
rejecting the accusation and asserting that it had submitted the report to the
President only and had shared it with Moïse Katumbi at the request of the Pr esident.

4/6

17-08004

S/2017/435

VI. Good offices for the implementation of the agreement
14. In line with his good offices mandate, my Special Representative met the
various signatories of the political agreement of 31 December in order to reconcile
their positions and facilitate the full implementation of the transitional
arrangements. Discussions with the Majorité présidentielle, the Rassemblement and
UDPS, among others, have revealed differences stemming from diverging
interpretations of the provisions of the agreement, in particular those relating to the
appointment of the new Prime Minister and the Chair of Na tional Council for
Oversight of the Agreement and the Electoral Process. At the same time, the
negotiations on the special arrangements have been marked by a constant shifting of
alliances within the Rassemblement, which has contributed to its fragmentatio n. The
lack of cohesion within the ranks of the opposition is also evident in the apparent
rapprochement between some mainstream Rassemblement members and the new
Prime Minister. Some mainstream Rassemblement leaders voiced their intention not
to participate in the transitional government, while those hoping for ministerial
portfolios were expelled by the leadership of the platform.
15. My Special Representative also engaged with the Episcopal Conference, the
Independent National Electoral Commission and counterparts in the diplomatic
corps to promote a coherent approach among national and international actors in
support of the political and electoral processes. My Special Representative is
working closely with my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, to
mobilize regional support for the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December. On 26 April, my Special Envoy met the President of the Congo, Denis
Sassou Nguesso, who advocated greater engagement by the United Nations and the
African Union and expressed his readiness to work closely with the United Nations,
the African Union and other regional organizations to support the implementation of
the political agreement and the holding of timely elections. My Special Envoy also
met senior government officials from Angola and the acting Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and engaged with t he President
of Guinea and Chairperson of the African Union, Alpha Condé, and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union, as well as with
members of the International Contact Group for the Great Lakes Region.

VII. Observations
16. The full implementation, in good faith, of the political agreement of
31 December, as stipulated in resolution 2348 (2017), remains the only viable path
towards the creation of a peaceful political climate and the holding of credible
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Certain factors could, however,
have a negative impact on the electoral process. Political uncertainty, coupled with
diminishing political space, intensified violence in the Ka sai region, the fragile
security situation in some areas of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and rapidly deteriorating socioeconomic conditions risk compounding an already
difficult situation. In the present context, spontaneous, popular protes ts could
escalate as a result of the socioeconomic situation and the growing disconnect
between decision makers and their political constituencies.
17. The signing of the special arrangements was deliberately held under the
auspices of the Presidents of the two chambers of Parliament to reiterate the
primacy of the Constitution over political processes. The signing of the special
arrangements and the formation of the transitional government de facto conclude the
national dialogue, theoretically paving the way for the appointment of the Chair of
the National Council for Oversight of the Agreement and the Electoral Process and
17-08004

5/6

S/2017/435

the establishment of other transitional arrangements. However, disagreement
persists among political leaders over the functioning of ke y transitional institutions.
The process for the appointment of the Chair of the Council should be as inclusive
and credible as possible to contribute to the swift and effective implementat ion of
the political agreement.
18. The political process continues to be hampered by inflexibility and
grandstanding, rather than being facilitated by the good faith and spirit of
compromise required of all parties. If this continues, political tensions could
reignite and the electoral process could experience further de lays. The Government
should pursue the confidence-building measures envisaged in the agreement as a
gesture of goodwill and ensure respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution. The opposition should exercise restrain t
and engage constructively in the political process.
19. Continued reports of violations of civil and political rights perpetrated by
national security forces, as well as national and local authorities, are of concern.
The Government should take the steps necessary to bring the perpetrators to justice
and create conditions conducive to the holding of peaceful, credible and inclusive
elections, including by ceasing restrictions on public freedoms.
20. It is critical that every effort be made to ensure the completion of the voter
registration process throughout the country, including in the Kasai provinces, within
the time frame established by the Independent National Electoral Commission, in
order to enable the holding of credible elections in line with the agreement. With an
estimated 6 million to 8 million voters living in the Kasai provinces (20 per cent of
estimated voters nationwide), the region represents a challenge for the inclusivity
and credibility of the update of the voter register and the subsequ ent elections. The
Commission should ensure an inclusive voter registration process, pursue
awareness-raising to ensure a high turnout throughout the country and publish the
electoral calendar without delay.
21. MONUSCO will continue to support the creation of an environment conducive
to peaceful, credible, inclusive and timely elections. To that end, the Mission will
continue to provide support for the implementation of the agreement, in accordance
with its mandate, with a view to maintaining momentum towa rds the holding of
elections. In addition, the Mission will continue its robust advocacy for the respect
of human rights and democratic space, exercise good offices and provide technical
and logistical support for the timely completion of the revision of t he voter register
and the smooth roll-out of the electoral process.
22. My Special Representative and my Special Envoy will pursue coordinated
good offices with other relevant regional and international stakeholders to ensure
the provision of concerted support for the full implementation of the agreement with
a view to enabling the timely organization of elections.

6/6

17-08004
