126

General Asscmhl)-Thirt~ -fourth Scssion

tions 1978/60 of 3 August 1978 and 1979/48 of
31 July 1979,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Lima
Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation,' '·, adopted at the Second General Conferencc of the United Nations Industrial
Dcvclopment Organization, hcld at Lima from 12 to 26
March 1975, which, ínter alía, rccognized the importance of ensuring an adequatc role for the public sector
in the expansion of thc industrial development of developing countrics,
Noting thc relevant prov1s1ons of the Economic
Declaration adoptcd by the Sixth Conferencc of Heads
of State or Governmcnt of Non-Aligned Countries, hcld
at Havana from 3 to 9 Scptcmber 1979,' 'º
Emphasiz.ing the nccd for an expandcd exchange of
cxpe1 ience regarding thc role of the public sector,
espccially among thc dcvcloping countries, through a
more dctailed examination of its different aspects,
Recalling thc pcrtincnt provisions of the abovementioned resolutions, which reaffirmed the right of
every State to cxcrcise full and permancnt sovereignty
over its natural resourccs and economic activities for the
benefit of its peoplc,
Bearing in mind that every Statc has the sovereign
and inalienable right to choose its economic and social
systcm in accordance with thc will of its pcople, without
outside intcrferencc,
1. Takes note of the rcport of the Secretary-General
on thc role of the public sector in promoting the economic development of developing countries; 117
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/48;
3. Invites the United Nations Dcvelopment Programme and other competcnt organizations, within the
context of national development systems and priorities,
where appropriate, to give due consideration to technical
co-operation projects for strengthening the role of the
public sector and improving the performance of public
enterprises;
4. Invites the regional commissions to examine in
detail the role of the public sector in promoting the economic developinent of the developing countries of their
respective regions, giving particular attention to the
aspects noted in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 32/179;
5. Invites the Secrctary-General to continue his detailed study of the role of the public sector and to submit,
through the Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive report to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session, paying special attention, inter alia, to the
following aspects:
(a) Role of the public sector in the mobilization of
national resources for social and economic development;
(b) Role of public enterprises as the main instruments of the public sector and ways of increasing their
efficacy;
(e) Ways and means, where appropriate, of strengthening the public sector, including its institutional and
managerial capabilities, as a possible basis for developing appropriate national and international measures;
(á) Role of the public sector as a lever for introducing national development plans and establishing social
and economic development priorities;
m See A/ 10112, chap. IV.
116 See A/34/542, annex, sect. IV.
117 B/1979/66.

(e) Ways and meaos of facilitating the practical exchangc of experience and information among developing
countrics on the role of thc public sector, for example,
the possibility of holding seminars and publishing handbooks on the experience of different countries in developing the public sector;
(f) Role of the public sector in relation to other
sectors of economic activity;
6. Rea[firms Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/60 in which the Council, inter afia, invited
regional commissions and other relevant organizations
of the United Nations system to continue to assist the
Secrctary-Gencral in preparing further studies on the
role of the public sector in promoting the economic
development of dcveloping countries.
104th plenary meeting
J4 Decemher J 979

34 / 183.

Marine pollution

The General Asscmbly,
Mindf ul of the grave dangers posed to the marine
environment by the shipping of oil and other dangerous
substances,
Mindful a/so of the effects of land-based pollution and
the dumping of waste on marine pollution,
Recalling that the Intcr-Govcrnmental Maritime Consultative Organization has adopted a number of comprehensive international conventions, recommendations,
traffic separation schemes and codes of practice specifically for the purpose of enhancing maritime safety, ensuring efficiency of navigation and protecting the marine
environment,
Recalling further the adoption during 1978 by the
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization
of additional international instruments providing for
comprehensive standards dealing with tanker safety and
pollution prevention and also with training, certification
and watch-keeping for seafarers,
T aking into account the significant progress achieved
at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea with regard to the protection and preservation of
the marine environment,
Bearing in mind also the work done for many years
by the International Labour Organisation and by the
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization concerning training and certification for seafarers,
notably the International Labour Organisation Convention conceming Minimum Standards in Merchant Ships,
1976,118
Regretting that the various measures to ensure the
safety of navigation by the observance of the existing
international regulations are not applied stringently by
all States parties to those instruments,
Considering that the conservation of the marine environment represents a basic objective for mankind,
1. Urges the competent internationa1 institutions
and organizations, in particular the Inter-Govemmental
Maritime Consultative Organization, to expedite and
intensify their activities relating to the prevention of
pollution and the determination of responsibilities in
this matter in accordance with the work already done on
these questions by the Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea;
118 Intemational Labour Office, Offecial Bulletin, vol. LX,
1977, series A, No. 1, Convention No. 147.

V. Resolutlons adopted oa the reporfll of tbe Secoad Commlttee

2. Calls upon States parties to the lntemational
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea
by Oil, 1954110 to discharge fully their obligations under
the Convention and, in particular, those contained in
article VI of that Convention;
3. Urges all States which have not already done so
to examine the possibility of ratifying at the earliest opportunity the intemational conventions and protocols
designed to ensure better protection of the marine environment, to improve the safety of navigation and to
guarantee the training and competence of crews;
4. Urges all States to co-operate in order to implement material measures for the effective combating of
marine pollution, without prejudice to the results of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea
with regard to marine pollution;
5. Requests the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization and the Goveming Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme to continue to
consider the problems relating to marine pollution and
to report thereon, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.
107th plenary meeting
¡ 8 December ¡ 979
34/184.

Plan of Action to Combat Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 172 of 19 December
1977 and 33/89 of 15 December 1978, concerning,
respectively, the report of the United Nations Conference on Desertification12 º and the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification,121
Taking note of the relevant parts of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the work of its seventh session and its
decision on measures to combat desertification, 122
T aking note a/so of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on additional measures and means of financing
for the irnplementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification, 123
Stressing the urgency of irnplernenting the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification in view of the acute
seriousness of the problem in many countries, párticularly developing countries, and of the limited resources
which it has thus far been possible to rnobilize to cornbat
desertification,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the opening by the
Secretary-General on 15 March 1979 of the Special
Account for financing the implementation of the Plan of
Action to Cornbat Desertification, bearing in mind the
voluntary nature of that account;
2. Notes with concern the lack of adequate financia!
resources for the irnplementation of the Plan of Action
to Combat Desertification and the slow progress achieved
thus far;
3. Also notes with concern that no contribution to
the Special Account has been made thus far;
4. Calls upon donar Govemrnents and financing organizations to contribute generously to the Special AcUnited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 327, No. 4714, p. 4.
A/CONF.74/36.
lbid., chap. l.
See Of!icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfourth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/34/25).
128 A/34/575.
110

120

121
122

127

count, with a view to accelerating the implementation of
the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Environment Programme for its work in co-operation
with Govemments and interested organizations of the
United Nations system within the framework of its responsibilities as co-ordinator for the implementation of
the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
6. Calls upon donar countries and interested organizations to participate actively in the work of the
Consultative Group for Desertification Control and to
support the projects submitted to them through the Consultative Group;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Goveming Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report, on the basis of
a study to be prepared by a group of high-level specialists in intemational financing to be convened by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, which will deal with:
(a) A complete inventory of relevant ideas and proposals put forward in the United Nations system of
possible new ways and means to finance programmes of
multilateral organizations at the world level, additional
to regular assessed budgets and conventional extrabudgetary resources;
(b) A financia! plan and analysis outlining the components and costs of a programme to stop further
desertification and identifying what is already being
financed and what additional resources may be needed
to meet the mínimum objectives of stopping the spread
of desertification;
(e) Methods for the mobilization of domestic resources;
(d) The practicality of obtaining loans from Govemments and world capital markets on a concessionary basis;
(e) The feasibility of the creation of a public international corporation which would attract investments
from countries as well as institutions and would provide
financing for suitable anti-desertification projects with
non-commercial rates of retum;
(f) The means for encouraging the active participation of foundations in the financing of anti-desertificatlon
training and research programmes.
107th plenary meeting
18 December 1979

34/18S.

Restoration and bnprovement of the FoutaDjallon masslf

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the co-operation between the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations in general
and the United Nations Environrnent Programme in
particular,
Considering section II of Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/37 of 21 July 1978, in which the
Council emphasized the need for United Nations organizations, other intemational bodies and intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations to assist
efforts to combat desertification,
Noting the resolution adopted by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its
thirty-third ordinary session, beld at Monrovia from 6 to
