Resolutions adopted on the _reports of the Third Committee

Z'7

The General Assembly,
Noting that the right of peoples and nations to selfdetermination as affirmed in the two draft Covenants

completed by the Commission on Human Rights10 includes "permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth
and resources",
Believing it necessary to have full information at its
disposal regarding the actual extent and character of
this sovereignty,
1. Decides to establish a Commission composed of
Afghanistan, Chile, Guatemala, the Netherlands, the
Philippines, Sweden, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Arab Republic and the United States
of America to conduct a full survey of the status of this
basic constituent of the right to self-determination, with
recommendations, where necessary, for its strengthening, and further decides that, in the conduct of the full
survey of the status of the permanent sovereignty of
peoples and nations over their natural wealth and resources, due regard shall be paid to the rights and duties
of States under international law and to the importance
of encouraging international co-operation in the economic development of under-developed countries;
2. Invites the regional economic commissions and the
specialized agencies to co-operate with the Commission
in its task;
3. Requests the Commission to report to the Economic and Social Council at its twenty-ninth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Commission with the necessary staff and facilities.
788th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

• Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Session,
Annexes, agenda item 29, document A/ AC.42/7, annex.

10
0fficial Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 7 (E/2573), annex I.

Desirous however of formulating promptly a widely
acceptable final text of the draft Convention with a view
to opening it for signature as soon as possible,
Decides:
1. To proceed, at its fourteenth session, to a discussion of the text of the draft Cmivention as formulated
by the Committee on the Draft Convention on Freedom
of Information, 9 established by the General Assembly
in its resolution 426 (V) of 14 December 1950, giving
special consideration to any new proposals that may be
made;
2. To request the Secretary-General, in the light of
the discussion in the Third Committee on this matter,
to invite the Governments of States with which he communicated pursuant to General Assembly resolution
1189 A (XII) to transmit to him any comments, observations, suggestions, proposals or amendments concerning the text of the draft Convention on Freedom of
Information and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session.
788.t-h plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.
1314 (Xill). Recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples and
nations to self-determination

•

•

•

Other decisions taken by the General Assembly
on the recommendation of the Third Committee
Draft International Covenants on Human Rights ( item 32)

At its 788th plenary meeting on 12 December 1958, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Third Committee11 that the Assembly, at its
fourteenth session, should give priority to the consideration of the draft International Covenants on Human Rights.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 32,
document A/4045, para. 92.
