United Nations

S/PV.4072 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fourth Year

4072nd Meeting
Tuesday, 30 November 1999, 11.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Türk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Slovenia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Petrella
Mr. Buallay
Mr. Fonseca
Mr. Fowler
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Essonghe
Mr. Jagne
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Gatilov
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
Role of the Security Council in the prevention of armed conflicts

99-86581 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The meeting was resumed at 11.20 a.m., Tuesday, 30
November 1999.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It gives
me great pleasure at the outset to convey to you, Mr.
President, my appreciation for giving the States nonmembers of the Council the opportunity to discuss directly
with the Council the issues under consideration.
The issue of the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of conflicts, which the President of the Council
has chosen to consider in an open debate, is without any
doubt one of the most important issues under consideration
in the international arena. This question acquires a greater
dimension by virtue of the nature of the subjects it raises.
It is thus worthwhile to pause and consider this matter and
give it the attention it deserves.
Article 1 of the United Nations Charter charges us
with preventing conflicts, as this is one of the purposes of
the United Nations. The authors of the Charter realized that
the prevention of crises was a better and more costeffective alternative to dealing with conflicts than
confronting them after they have taken place. This is
particularly true with regard to issues affecting the peace
and security of peoples. The authors therefore wisely and
appropriately incorporated this principle into the edifice
established by the Charter without deviating from it.
In this way, the Charter requires the involvement of all
major bodies of the United Nations, and not of the Security
Council alone. In fact, the Charter details the role of the
major bodies and conveys upon each its own competence
to combat and remove the causes that threaten peace and to
cooperate to solve the economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian problems that are usually considered to be the
causes of armed conflict.
For example, poverty and ignorance are usually
considered to be two of the major causes of conflicts.
Nevertheless, we find that dealing with these two issues and
remedying them fall within the exclusive competence of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
If we consider the specificity of the tools available to the
Security Council and the nature of its role, then we find
that these two issues are far from its competence. The
Council should therefore deal with these issues in the
context of full respect for the delicate system of checks and

2

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
balances between the major organs of the United Nations
as established in the Charter, particularly the General
Assembly, in addition to the other bodies within and
outside the United Nations.
In accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter, the
Security Council may consider any conflict or situation
that may lead to international friction or that may give
rise to disputes, in order to determine whether the
continuation of the conflict or the situation will jeopardize
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
implementing this provision, the Council has a mandate
to take measures to prevent such disputes and situations.
Yet, its means to do so are voluntary and fall within the
framework of the peaceful resolution of conflicts. This
requires absolute respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and non-intervention in their internal
affairs by attempting to obtain their approval before
adopting or implementing such measures. International
practice stresses this interpretation of the Charter.
Chapter VII also enables the Council to assume a
preventive role by calling on the parties to a conflict to
take interim measures until the dispute is settled
peacefully. Problems arise when the Council is either
called upon or acts on its own to intervene and deal with
situations within its mandate under Chapter VI by using
the means provided by Chapter VII. Those Chapter VII
provisions pertain to coercive and punitive measures and
range from interim measures to the use of force.
However, this transcends the authority of the legal system
that outlines the elements under which action may be
taken and the tools that may be used as established by the
Charter in Chapters VI and VII. The structure of the
edifice set up by the Charter is based on a careful and
clear respect for the dividing line between those two
Chapters.
It is therefore absolutely important that the Council’s
preventive intervention not cause collateral damage to the
parties directly involved or to third parties whose interests
are linked to one of the parties to the dispute. The
Council must give the parties directly involved an
opportunity to present their points of view to it before it
makes recommendations or implements specific measures.
We also call upon the Council to permit States that are
not members of the Council and that may believe that
their interests may be harmed by the Council’s action to
discuss the measures under consideration, in accordance
with Article 31 of the Charter.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
If for whatever reason the Council fails to fulfil its
functions, then the only option is to resort to the General
Assembly on the basis of the resolution “Uniting for
peace”. With regard to this resolution and the role of the
General Assembly, we are astonished by the approach that
has often been followed by some countries in avoiding
using this resolution or in ignoring the role of the
Assembly, especially since these same countries have
occasionally resorted to this approach when their own
interests and visions coincided or agreed with the
framework of the resolution “Uniting for peace”.
The Security Council’s endeavours to develop its role
in the prevention of conflicts so that it may change its
approach from responding to crises to establishing a culture
of preventive policies to deal with disputes and defuse them
before they become full-fledged conflicts forces all of us
here to scrutinize the issue. The Council should work in
this context in accordance with the rules accepted by the
international community and by all members of the United
Nations, and on the basis of commonly agreed principles.
We believe that in its work the Council must not take up
concepts that do not enjoy full acceptance by Member
States, particularly those which remain controversial.
Concepts such as humanitarian intervention and
humanitarian security could prove to be more harmful than
useful. I do not believe that many of us have a specific
definition for these and other similar concepts.
On the other hand, the Council should only adopt
measures when it determines that a threat to peace exists or
that an internal conflict may threaten international peace
and security. It should do this in accordance with the
provisions of Article 39 and with a full awareness of the
serious implications of its actions if it decides to intervene
by using force.
The importance of the Council's abiding by this
becomes more urgent in the light of the developments that
have taken place in the international arena after the end of
the cold war, since many of the ongoing armed conflicts are
civil wars — intra-State rather than inter-State conflicts.
This in turn raises the question of the United Nations
ability to intervene to settle such conflicts. If a decision to
intervene is taken, whether at the regional level through
regional organizations or at the State level through the
United Nations, we must then abide by certain basic
elements, prominent among which are the following:
First, there should be no distinction between one
region and another, or one country and another. That is to

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
say, all must be treated equally and be accorded the same
importance. Currently, this is implemented only after
much hardship and pressure.
Secondly, there must be a determination to carry out
the task in the face of any obstacles or challenges.
Casualties, however large their number and despite their
sensitive nature, should not lead to an impasse in
peacekeeping operations or in controlling the situation in
a specific location and in preventing further deterioration.
Hence, no operation should be terminated because there
have been casualties, or halted because of certain risks.
Thirdly, the behaviour and commitment of the
personnel of peacekeeping forces should not be limited
exclusively to upholding the directives and concepts
contained in the Secretary-General's bulletin, issued at the
beginning of August last, setting guidelines to the rules of
international humanitarian law as it relates to
peacekeeping operations, on which my delegation had
certain reservations. However, this matter falls outside the
scope of our discussion today.
The peacekeeping force, or its personnel, should feel
that the international community is not just backing them
but is also monitoring their performance. Hence any
military actions undertaken against them or any threat of
action against them will have its consequences. There is
no doubt that the tragedy of Srebrenica is one of the
elements that compels me to mention this point.
Fourthly, intervention in accordance with Chapter VI
or VII of the Charter should not and must not negatively
affect the territorial integrity or sovereignty of the State
concerned under any circumstances. Many of the practices
of the current decade involve many issues that require us
to consider, inquire into and analyse their implications.
Fifthly, it is important that the Council not rush to
deal with a specific situation from a specific
predetermined conception that could eventually lead to
serious consequences. Let us take the events that occurred
in Bosnia and Herzegovina as an example of what should
not be repeated. The Council adopted a resolution under
the pretext of halting the confrontation and restricting the
ability of the combatants to continue the armed conflict.
The resolution prohibited the supply of arms to the two
parties despite the fact that one of the two parties — and
the Council and its members were fully aware of that —
had an overwhelming military superiority, which led to
terrible massacres. This eventually forced the Council,

3

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
after a period of inaction and flimsy pretexts, to actually
intervene on an international level.
The claim that we should let conflicts run their course
and be finally resolved in the interest of one party or the
other, as some have repeatedly said, should not be the
approach adopted by the Council.
We fully understand that what pushed the issue of the
prevention of conflicts to the top of our agenda is the
Council's desire to deal with the cases that have
accompanied international changes. When the situation
requires the intervention of the Council and the Council
uses the appropriate tools within the proper constitutional
and legal framework, the Council will have succeeded in
fulfilling its role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I refer here to the success of the Council in
dealing with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
What is alarming, however, is when the Council fails
to act in matters that require its intervention, as witnessed
in the events that took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Kosovo and others. Yet we must not forget that the Council
itself was the real cause of this failure. Many of the
obstacles that prevent the United Nations from taking up its
role in the maintenance of international peace and security
are due to shortcomings in the Council's methods of work.
This is manifested in particular in the abuse of the right of
the veto, or in the threat of using it, thereby impeding the
work of the Council and precluding it from shouldering its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter.
Other problems are double standards, selectivity, lack
of transparency and giving priority to the political
considerations of Council members, particularly the
permanent members, over the collective joint considerations
of the members of the Council and of the United Nations
as a whole. All this has led the Council to use force outside
the legal framework of the Charter of the United Nations,
which underlines the pressing need to reform the Council's
methods of work.
Expanding the role of the Council under the pretext
that the Charter is a flexible document that can always be
adapted to deal with what some consider to be urgent needs
related to developing situations faces some reservations on
our part, and is a matter that should be handled with
extreme care.
If a specific international concept is agreed upon, then
amending the Charter must become one of the direct
priorities of international action, and the issue should not be

4

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
abandoned because of the difficulty of achieving it.
Acting outside the Charter, whatever the considerations
that are presented as a justification, will not necessarily
lead to preventing the problems and risks that the
international community faces today. In fact, it could lead
to their exacerbation.
The way to achieve this is to deal not only with the
problems of poverty and the need for the economic
development of societies but also, and to a great extent,
to reform directly the working methods of the Council
that prevent it from taking effective action.
We have consistently called for regulating the use of
the veto in order to ultimately limit its use to extreme
cases and in accordance with objective provisions to be
agreed upon.
In brief, the Council must respond to the many
voices calling upon it to reform its methods of work. The
Council should respond to the recommendations of the
General Assembly contained in resolution 51/193, as the
Council, with its 15 members, represents the will of the
full membership of the United Nations in safeguarding
peace and maintaining security in the world, and should
bring the necessary transparency to its work, particularly
its informal consultations, which occupy most of the time
and the debate of the Council.
I would like to refer briefly to the important and
effective role played by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. We encourage him to play his role,
whatever difficulties may arise, since it stems directly
from the Charter. Furthermore, that role should be based
on and guided by the Charter. The role of the SecretaryGeneral has become of such great importance — perhaps
it has always been so — that we must ensure that he is
free from pressure. It is only logical, therefore, within the
framework of reforming the United Nations and
safeguarding its effectiveness, to consider limiting the
Secretary-General to one term of office, although such a
term might last for 10 years. In that way he — or she, as
the case may be — could undertake his or her
responsibilities free from pressure.
In brief, the issue before us should be included in
the agendas of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, so that more detailed and
comprehensive discussions in those forums can
complement the beneficial initiative of the Council. The
responsibilities and mandate of the Council stem from the
Charter, and the implementation of the ambitious project

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
formulated by the Secretary-General will require
cooperation between the United Nations and the
humanitarian protection organizations, because it exceeds
the capabilities of the United Nations and the Security
Council working alone.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt for
the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Liechtenstein.
I invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to make
her statement.
Mrs. Fritsche (Liechtenstein): We wish to thank and
commend you, Mr. President, for your timely initiative to
hold an open debate on the role of the Security Council in
the prevention of armed conflicts. We fully welcome this
debate as a first step in a continuing process which we
hope will contribute to the enhancement of the capacities of
the Council to fulfil its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. It is clear that prevention
must be a key element in the work of the Council. Indeed,
Article 1, paragraph 1 of the Charter mandates that
“effective collective measures for the prevention ... of
threats to the peace” be taken in order to achieve the goal
of maintaining international peace and security.
Prevention has thus been given a key position in the
conceptual framework of the maintenance of international
peace and security by the founders of our Organization. At
the same time, it needs to be said that in the practical work
of the Council, as well as of other organs of the United
Nations, it has so far played only a minor role. The past
few years have brought about an increased awareness that
addressing root causes must be a crucial consideration in
areas such as human rights violations, refugee protection,
natural disasters and others. A brutal wake-up call in
connection with the importance of prevention was the
genocide in Rwanda, where prevention was feasible, but
inaction led to the horrific events of 1994. One impetus —
maybe the decisive one — to launch the ongoing debate
was given by the Secretary-General in his thoughtprovoking and ground-breaking report on the work of the
Organization. We would like to thank the Secretary-General
once again for his courage and commitment and to recall
the far-reaching role that he is given under Article 99 of the
Charter.
The ideas offered by the Secretary-General make it
clear that prevention is important with regard not only to
armed conflicts but to a wide variety of other areas; hence
the call for a culture of prevention. It is of course

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
appropriate that our debate today is focused on the
prevention of armed conflicts, given the role of the
Council in the area of peace and security. The context
within which this debate is taking place, however, is a
larger one. Prevention means acting in a timely manner in
order to avoid disasters such as armed conflicts
altogether, or to minimize their adverse consequences. It
requires certain tools, such as effective and reliable early
warning mechanisms. But first and foremost it requires
political will and the readiness and willingness to realize
that prevention is often the best way — sometimes even
the only way — to tackle a problem. If it is carried out at
an early stage and based on relevant expertise, prevention
can be achieved with discretion, efficiency and at low
cost. Furthermore, the disastrous consequences of armed
conflicts can often be irreversible, and preventing their
occurrence is thus the only way to provide effective
protection to potential victims.
In the cases where the Council has taken preventive
action in the past, it has been quite successful. The United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force is a brilliant
example of the effectiveness of preventive action and is
usually hailed as the first preventive United Nations
mission ever. There are, however, some other small
missions mandated by the United Nations which have
been operational for a long time and have had a
considerable preventive effect. Prevention has also been
one rationale behind the establishment of the ad hoc
Tribunals by the Security Council. The most important
goal of the fight against impunity is always the avoidance
of the commission of further violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. International law
must have an important function in the area of conflict
prevention, and the Council has made a significant
contribution to this end, not least by helping pave the way
for the establishment of an International Criminal Court.
Once operational, the International Criminal Court will
have a major preventive effect worldwide. Preventive
action taken by the Security Council has been selective in
the past, but the success connected with these efforts
should encourage the Council to expand its activities
based on a preventive approach.
We would like to offer several thoughts on how to
further enhance the capabilities of the United Nations in
the area of the prevention of armed conflicts. The need
for enhanced cooperation and coordination with regional
organizations, stated many times in the past in various
contexts, becomes particularly obvious in connection with
the prevention of armed conflicts. It is clear that regional
organizations can and should play a major role through

5

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
preventive activities if their capabilities in this area are
developed accordingly. Avoiding competition between their
activities and those carried out by the United Nations, and
adapting a pragmatic approach, must be key elements in the
joint efforts in this respect.
An enhanced role of the Secretary-General seems to us
a further key element of successful United Nations action
in the area of prevention. Article 99 of the Charter, which
I have already mentioned, gives a legally and politically
sound basis for such an enhanced role. The Secretariat
should be able to provide the Council with relevant earlywarning information collected from various sources,
including regional organizations, and with independent
assessments on regions and areas where conflicts are
emerging. In many cases, most of the relevant information
is already available within the United Nations system, but
needs to be presented in a compact and meaningful manner
and in the right context.
As a final element, we believe that more work needs
to be done to provide effective tools to address the root
causes of such conflicts. The past few years have been
marked by a sharp increase in internal armed conflicts, and
tensions among communities and between communities and
central governments have time and again proven to be the
reasons for these conflicts. We think therefore that it is very
timely and necessary for the international community to
develop, and indeed to offer, tools by means of which
situations of this kind can in the future be addressed more
effectively and at an early stage. Liechtenstein presented
ideas on the effective and flexible application of the right
of self-determination quite some time ago. Those ideas are
designed specifically to address such situations in a
preventive and pragmatic manner; they are based on
existing international law and on dialogue between the
parties concerned, and can be carried out, if desirable and
requested, with international involvement. This could
obviously be done in a very flexible manner and within the
framework not only of the United Nations, but also of other
intergovernmental organizations which are seized of issues
of peace and security. We very much see our ideas in this
regard as an element of the ongoing process of enhancing
the role of the Organization in the area of prevention.
Creating a culture of prevention is a process requiring
a concerted effort by the United Nations membership as a
whole, and indeed a change in our collective mindset,
which is so deeply immersed in a responsive approach to
crisis management. To this end, we should adopt a flexible
notion of the term “prevention” comprising activities as
diverse as early warning, disarmament measures and post-

6

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
conflict peace-building. More often than not, prevention
will be most successful if it goes almost unnoticed and is
carried out with discretion and efficiency. On the one
hand, this lack of limelight and headlines connected with
effective prevention is probably one of the psychological
obstacles which must be overcome. On the other hand, it
also constitutes a major strength in that the discretion that
comes with it should help overcome the reluctance of
those who perceive prevention as intrusive. Collective
responsibility for, and thus action on, the consequences of
disasters through burden-sharing is, after all, one of the
foundations upon which the United Nations is built.
Prevention simply means the logical expansion of this
collective responsibility to the causes of such disasters, in
full accordance with the spirit and the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. It seems to us that we can no
longer afford not to address the causes of conflicts, and
it is our hope that this debate will constitute one of the
early stages in a new era of United Nations activities.
The President: I thank the representative of
Liechtenstein for the kind words she addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): My delegation is pleased to
address the Security Council on this important subject: the
role of the Security Council in the prevention of armed
conflicts. Under Article 24 of the Charter, the Security
Council is mandated with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
debate serves to enhance collective commitment to the
pursuit of peace, stability and cooperation among nations.
The African continent has continued to provide one
of the greatest challenges for the Security Council insofar
as the prevalence of armed conflicts is concerned.
Regrettably, this will continue to be so in the foreseeable
future if the international community fails effectively to
assist Africa to address the causes of armed conflict on
the continent.
As many speakers indicated yesterday, in order to
address conflict prevention more effectively the Security
Council needs to include in its strategy early warning
mechanisms, preventive diplomacy and, where possible,
preventive deployment and appropriate preventive
disarmament. However, as with any other exercise, the
timing of those measures is critical to the success of the
whole process. The experience in our part of the world,

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
however, is that, despite effective regional efforts with
respect to early warning mechanisms and preventive
diplomacy, Security Council action either has come too late
or has been inadequate. The example of the events prior to
the genocide in Rwanda in 1994 is testimony to this.
I wish now to turn to the matter of conflict situations
on the African continent. The proliferation of small arms
and light weapons has contributed to and prolonged many
of the conflicts in Africa. My Government is concerned
about the current high level of proliferation of and
trafficking in small arms and light weapons in Africa.
According to recent statistics released by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, conflicts
in Africa have generated more than 8 million of the roughly
22 million refugees in the world. The situation is worse
when one takes into account the additional millions who are
internally displaced. This stark reality indicates that armed
conflicts on the African continent deserve the urgent
attention of the international community.
There are clear roles for the Security Council in
stopping the flow of the small arms that fuel armed conflict
not only in Africa but in many other parts of the world.
First, the Security Council, through the creation of
appropriate mechanisms, should publicly identify private
arms merchants and the zones of conflict that form the
markets for their illicit arms. Exposure would constitute
international condemnation and censure of these merchants
of death and thereby help to stop the trade in this category
of weapons. In his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa (S/1998/318), the Secretary-General was unequivocal
in urging the Security Council to address this issue of the
identification of international arms merchants as a matter of
urgent priority. The Security Council would do well to heed
the Secretary-General’s advice.
The second role is that of strengthening sanctions
regimes. In this respect my delegation would like once
again to congratulate Ambassador Fowler, the Chairman of
the Security Council sanctions Committee relative to
UNITA, for breathing new life into the international
sanctions against that illegal organization, which has caused
so much suffering to the Angolan people and which has
contributed to the destabilization of that region of Africa.
Another area that holds a distinct role for the Security
Council in the prevention of armed conflict is that of
peacekeeping. In this area, the Security Council should as
a matter of principle give equal treatment to all conflict
situations regardless of the geographical location of the

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
conflict. The Council should be seen to be fair and evenhanded as it executes its responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Last
month the Security Council adopted resolutions
establishing two peacekeeping missions, one in Sierra
Leone and another in East Timor. For Sierra Leone, with
an area of 71,740 square kilometres, the Security Council
decided that the military component should comprise a
maximum of only 6,000 military personnel, including 260
military observers. And yet in the case of East Timor,
with an area of less than 5,000 square kilometres, the
Council authorized a military contingent of up to 8,950
troops and up to 200 military observers. It is difficult for
the Security Council to escape the perception of a double
standard in the treatment of conflicts in Africa as opposed
to those in other regions of the world.
In this area of preventing and halting conflict,
African leaders have shown willingness to take risks for
peace. They have taken initiatives to deal with threats to
peace and stability on the continent. Through its
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, and along with two subregional groupings —
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) — the Organization of African Unity has
succeeded in concluding ceasefire agreements in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Sierra Leone.
These initiatives, without doubt, are an indication of the
determination of African leaders to search for lasting
solutions to the continent’s problems.
These efforts, however, are complementary and are
not meant to absolve the Security Council of its
responsibility for maintaining peace and security in the
world, Africa included.
Having authorized a peace Mission for Sierra Leone,
the Security Council now has a great opportunity to
prevent the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from developing into a wider conflagration in
Central Africa. As already noted, a Ceasefire Agreement
is already in place and the Joint Military Commission
(JMC) has begun to lay the basic infrastructure in the
implementation of that Agreement. While on the subject,
my delegation expresses gratitude to all those countries
that have extended financial support to the Joint Military
Commission. The JMC will need continued support from
the international community for it to effectively carry out
its responsibilities under the Lusaka Agreement.

7

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The successful implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement offers the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its neighbours a chance to enjoy genuine
peace and stability. We cannot afford to miss this
opportunity. The continued support of the Security Council
is therefore not only expected but imperative.
My delegation welcomes the positive steps already
taken by the Council relative to United Nations deployment
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am referring to
the Security Council’s approval of the deployment of up to
90 military liaison officers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and, as required, to the belligerent and other
neighbouring States. Zambia is, however, gravely concerned
that the Security Council is not moving quickly enough to
authorize the second stage of the deployment of 500
military observers. We believe very strongly that the delay
is sending the wrong message to all the parties involved in
the conflict. There is a real danger now that the peace
process, so delicately nurtured, could unravel.
We call upon the Council to take action on the second
stage of the peace process. Indeed, the third stage,
involving the creation of a peacekeeping force, is itself
unnecessarily being held hostage to preoccupations with
demands for security guarantees. The situation on the
ground demands quick action by the Security Council in
order to prevent the development of a vacuum that could
easily be filled by forces working against peace in the
region.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has the largest
land mass area in Africa. The nature of the conflict is also
complex. Africa expects that the envisaged peacekeeping
force to be deployed will be of an appropriate size with a
clear mandate. Such a force must be deployed under
Chapter VII of the Charter, as envisaged in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. Indeed, such a peacekeeping force
must be several times larger than that mandated for East
Timor. We call upon the Council to summon the necessary
political will to also commit the financial resources that will
enable such a force to carry out its mandate.
Failure to have a clear mandate for the peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, failure
to have a force strong enough to carry out the mandate and
failure to deploy the force under Chapter VII will only
serve to reinforce the perception that conflict in Africa does
not command the same priority as that attached to hot spots
elsewhere in the world.

8

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
I would like to conclude my contribution by
referring once again to the Secretary-General’s report on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. The observations
and recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
that report continue to be relevant. They provide ready
options for the Security Council in its role of enhancing
peace and security by preventing armed conflicts.
The President: I thank the representative of Zambia
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Nigeria. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Apata (Nigeria): I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the able manner in which you have
presided over the affairs of the Council in the month of
November.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the end of
the cold war, a landmark event that brought relief from
the tension which characterized the international political
system in that era. In spite of the benefit of that epochal
event, the decade has regrettably been marred by the
proliferation and intensification of intra-State conflicts.
These conflicts, although regional in character, have often
threatened international peace and security. The wanton
destruction of life, the acute refugee crises, the plight of
displaced persons and, above all, the destabilization of
regional peace and stability should compel all members of
the international community to seek appropriate tools to
respond adequately to these conflicts.
Nigeria regrets that Africa has a disproportionate
share of these conflicts. Yet the region’s capacity to
effectively resolve these conflicts continues to be
undermined by lack of resources and inadequate support
from the international community.
The best efforts of the United Nations, which finds
itself challenged by the necessity to resolve these
conflicts, are usually hindered by lack of financial
resources and limited knowledge and familiarity with
local situations. The relative weaknesses of the United
Nations on this score should be an added reason for
enhanced cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of West
African States and the Organization of African Unity.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Ideally, the concept of conflict prevention would be
the most efficacious approach for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In our increasingly
interdependent world and in the wake of the proliferation of
armed conflicts, it has become more necessary for the
Council to retool existing mechanisms and design
innovative early warning systems to nip in the bud
situations that would lead to a breach of international peace
and security. Experience has shown that the surest and
certainly the most cost-effective means of maintaining
international peace and security is through the vehicle of
preventive diplomacy. However, for the Security Council to
enhance its role in the prevention of armed conflicts, it is
imperative for the parties to a dispute to demonstrate the
necessary political will and for the Council to provide
adequate resources to enable the United Nations to respond
in a timely fashion with preventive action.
With the benefit of hindsight, we have learned,
regrettably, that when preventive action is not taken or is
delayed, a dispute leads to the outbreak of armed hostilities,
as in the cases of Rwanda, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Kosovo. In this way the credibility of the United Nations is
dented, at a time when more is demanded and expected of
it.
Even from the point of view of relative human and
material cost, prevention proves to be the prudent strategy.
According to a recent estimate, the cost to the international
community of the seven major conflicts in this decade, the
decade of the 1990s, excluding Kosovo and East Timor,
was $199 billion, in addition to the unacceptable scale of
human casualties. From this example alone, the dividend
from preventive diplomacy is self-evident, as it ensures
fewer conflicts and lesser humanitarian catastrophes.
Conflict prevention as a major component of the
maintenance of peace and security should be accorded the
highest priority in the light of the monumental costs of
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building. This reality
further underscores the imperative necessity of developing
and fine-tuning common indicators for early warning and
joint training of staff in the field of conflict prevention.
In this light, the Nigerian delegation proposes that the
United Nations should establish a conflict prevention and
peace-building budget, similar to the peacekeeping budget.
Such a standby financial facility would ensure availability
of financial resources to promptly kick-start preventive and
peace-making activities.

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
This would be an improvement on the current
situation, in which an appeal for donations has to be made
before any significant progress can be recorded in the
implementation of peacemaking and peace-building
efforts. The current situation in Sierra Leone — where the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration has to wait for a special appeal fund, which
was launched in Geneva on 23 November 1999 — is a
clear example. The amount so far contributed to the
special appeal fund, which is expected to provide the
necessary resources for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, has not been very impressive.
If there were a budget in place for conflict prevention and
peacemaking, there would most likely be funds available
in that budget to enable the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process to get under way.
In conclusion, while Member States of the United
Nations must demonstrate greater political will in the area
of conflict prevention, the Security Council has a vital
role to play in giving preventive action the priority it
deserves as the Council discharges its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security.
The President: I thank the representative of Nigeria
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of New
Zealand. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I would like first of all
to congratulate you, Sir, for arranging this open debate.
The topic is a vitally important one. The question of how
the international community, through collective action,
can effectively prevent armed conflict has been much
studied and discussed over the past decade.
We remember that at the end of January 1992 the
Security Council, meeting for the first time at the level of
heads of State or Government, asked the then SecretaryGeneral to prepare recommendations on strengthening the
United Nations capacity for preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking and peacekeeping. The result was “An
Agenda for Peace”, whose precepts were to be sorely
tested in peacekeeping operations in Bosnia, Rwanda and
Somalia. Other contributors on the subject included the
then Foreign Minister of Australia, Senator Gareth Evans,
who put forward the idea of “cooperative security”. A
further substantial contribution was made in 1997 by the
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict.

9

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Among other things the Commission identified some of the
chief impediments to preventive action. These included on
the one hand a reluctance of countries closest to a conflict
to want preventive assistance at the time when it could be
most effective and, on the other hand, a certain
“intervention fatigue” on the part of those States most
capable of offering assistance.
Most recently we have to hand the valuable action
plan offered by the Swedish Government in the pamphlet
“Preventing violent conflict”, written against the
background of the human catastrophe in Kosovo. At the
regional level, the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Regional Forum is doing important work on the
concepts and principles of preventive diplomacy. This
renewed focus and discussion, including today's open
debate, is most timely, given the events of this year now
almost passed and the considerable resurgence in United
Nations peacekeeping.
The United Nations Charter clearly envisages a strong
conflict-prevention role for this Organization. Article 1,
paragraph 1, speaks of “effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of
the peace”. The second part of this paragraph also
envisages the “adjustment or settlement” by peaceful means
of “disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of
the peace”.
The Security Council is given primary — but not
exclusive — responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It exercises this
responsibility on behalf of the wider membership. In Article
33 an impressive bag of tools is provided within the
Charter for the peaceful settlement of disputes. These
include “negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements”, and so forth. The Security Council is also
empowered, under Article 34, to investigate any dispute or
situation which might give rise to a dispute that might
endanger international peace and security.
The provisions of Chapter VII give the Security
Council enormous powers to deal with threats to the peace
or acts of aggression, and they impose serious obligations
on the wider membership to assist the Council. Finally, the
Secretary-General is given a particular role under Article
99, a role that would seem quite relevant to the idea of
“early warning” so often mentioned in discussions of
preventive diplomacy. He is able to bring any matter that

10

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
in his opinion may threaten international peace and
security to the attention of the Council.
The Charter, although more than half a century old,
therefore contains a comprehensive, relevant and entirely
practical set of options for conflict prevention, in the
Articles I have referred to and elsewhere. And it
empowers the Council, primarily, to use them. If the
Security Council has failed to carry out its responsibilities
effectively in the past, it would not seem to be a failure
of system design but a consequence of other factors.
Two key factors of course are political will and
resources. Member States look to the Council members to
show leadership, given their special responsibilities. This
includes, at the very least, timely, complete and
unconditional payment of assessed contributions. It also
includes a willingness on the part of Council members to
ensure that the United Nations will have the wherewithal
to do the job that has been mandated, whether it is
sufficient troops to defend a “safe area” or money to pay
for the restoration of public services in post-conflict
peace-building under the Council's mandate.
There is also a view that the Council's effectiveness
in conflict prevention is hindered by its working methods.
The Council does so much of its work these days,
perhaps 90 per cent, through informal consultations. Nonmembers do not have access. We are aware that among
some Security Council members there is concern that this
practice denies the Council the opportunity to invite
representatives of States directly affected by a matter
which the Council is considering to participate in
substantive discussion of it. We can also envisage that
there might be occasions when the chance for Council
members to deliver a strong, collective and private view
directly to the parties to a dispute could be a very useful
step towards resolving it.
Finally there is that old incubus, the veto. As so
many speakers observed during the general debate of the
General Assembly, this instrument wreaked havoc on the
Council's conflict-prevention capacity in 1999. It started
with the untimely termination of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), a successful
preventive-deployment mission in a highly sensitive area.
It exerted its unwelcome influence when the Council was
by-passed in the decision by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) to bomb Yugoslavia. And it dogs
the Council's efforts to arrive at a new weaponsinspection regime to replace the United Nations Special

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Commission (UNSCOM), which departed Iraq before
Operation Desert Fox almost a year ago.
Against these persistent negative features, which we
hope can be resolved in the future, I am pleased to say that
from my delegation's perspective there have also been some
very positive developments in the Council's recent handling
of its conflict-prevention responsibilities. Perhaps the
highlight was the rapid dispatch of a mission of the
Security Council to Indonesia and to East Timor in
response to the violence following the popular consultation.
The mission was a crucial step in helping to end the
bloodshed. And we acknowledge as we have before the
distinguished leadership of the Permanent Representative of
Namibia. The authorization of the multinational
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) — and,
subsequently, of the Transitional Administration and
peacekeeping force within it — were also done by the
Council as quickly as the extraordinary requirements of one
member's legislature would allow.
New Zealand will remain a significant contributor to
INTERFET and to the peacekeeping operation that will
succeed it, we hope very soon. While we are speaking on
the subject of East Timor we would like to take the
opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Holbrooke on his
very recent personal contribution to efforts to ease the
plight of East Timorese refugees in Indonesia. And,
regarding a completely different theatre, we also wish to
acknowledge the efforts of Ambassador Fowler, as chair of
the Angola sanctions Committee, to investigate the illegal
trade in diamonds and arms that has brought so much
misery to that region.
While the Council has primary responsibility for
international peace and security, there are other important
actors within the system. There is a strong link between
international peace and security, on the one hand, and
disarmament and development on the other. If, as we
believe the Charter intends, “international peace and
security” is to mean more than the absence of war or even
an absence of the threat of war, the contributions of the
other organs of the United Nations, including the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, are of
obvious importance in laying the foundations which are
necessary.
Finally, there is the role of the Secretary-General's
special political missions. These are typically small-scale
but effective interventions, such as the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), Papua New
Guinea. UNPOB and the regionally provided Peace

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
Monitoring Group play a critical confidence-building and
indeed conflict-prevention role as the parties to the
dispute engage on the political issues concerned.
The Carnegie Commission, in its 1997 Final Report
on preventing deadly conflict, wrote of the need to create
a culture of prevention. This included such measures as
preventive diplomacy and early warning to deal with
imminent violence, and other measures, such as the
promotion of well-being and justice, to deal with the root
causes of violence. There can be no institution better
placed than the United Nations to take on this
multifaceted task. We look forward to the Security
Council's continuing to carry out its key leadership role
on behalf of Member States as part of this endeavour.
The President: I thank the representative of New
Zealand for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): There has been
express need for holding open discussions on the role of
the Council in the prevention of armed conflicts. Several
considerations have made this expedient. We appreciate
the initiative taken in this regard by Slovenia and the wise
leadership provided by you, Mr. President.
We thank the Secretary-General for the very
important statement he made yesterday as we commenced
this debate. His statement contains a number of specific
suggestions which should receive the Council's attention,
in particular the one relating to the expert working group
on early warning.
The political, humanitarian and economic
imperatives of conflict prevention do not require
elaboration in this forum. I shall limit my observations to
a few suggestions and some interrogations.
First, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is also mandated to ensure prompt and
effective action. There is considerable international public
opinion behind the demand that the Council be proactive
and play an avant-garde role in matters of international
peace and security. It is expected that the Council's role
should be visible before a situation develops into a crisis;
before hostile campaigns degenerate into armed conflicts;
before a carnage has taken place; before a war has broken

11

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999

out. It should be there in the true realization of its
responsibility.

should be reached on the evolving concepts and
mechanisms to address these complex situations.

The role of the regional organizations is recognized in
the Charter. In recent years, these organizations have played
a critically important role in preventing or containing armed
conflicts. But then, the Council has been criticized for
subcontracting its peace and security mission. We believe
that such a perception requires our serious attention in the
context of our debate today. We must examine the benefits
of formulating appropriate mechanisms and elaborate policy
guidelines for the involvement and intervention of the
regional organizations. They must, of course, be specific to
a given situation.

Thirdly, on the question of uniformity and
consistency in practice, the protection of the Security
Council should be available equally to all. To be credible,
the Council must be guided by a consistent approach in
addressing all conflicts. To be effective, it should work on
both current and potential threats to peace. To be true to
its purposes and functions, it should use all the power and
authority conferred upon it by the Member States.

In this context, we encourage the initiatives of the
Secretary-General in pursuing preventive action. While such
traditional instruments as good offices, mediation and
conciliation may be tried as the case may be, we would
support more vigorous actions by the Secretary-General.
Secondly, the question of sovereignty is one with
which the Council will be increasingly confronted. For us,
the question would be how to balance between the
principles of political independence, sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of States and the humanitarian and legal
imperatives of maintaining international peace and security.
The two imperatives are not necessarily contradictory. The
Charter, in my reading, tends to treat them as
complementary. The task before us would be to find out the
parameters of this complementarity.
There is a difference of opinion on how to address
intrastate conflict which the Charter does not seem to have
envisaged. What should the United Nations do with a State
in civil war, a country plunged into intractable ethnic strife,
a failed State? The preventive measures prescribed in
Chapter VI are subject to the consent of the parties
involved. What happens when the parties remain
determined to fight out their claims or control? What
happens when the leaders in a given State fail their people?
When they violate the provisions of humanitarian law?
When they disregard the recommendations of the Council?
In this context, I wonder if we should not rethink the
way the question of peace and security is addressed. The
responsibility of actors within States has to be determined
and necessary redress should be available. The United
Nations cannot keep a peace that does not exist, as the
Secretary-General said. The international community cannot
be expected to pay for wars of attrition fought in total
disregard for law and civilized norms. A global consensus

12

Fourthly, on the question of delayed action, the
Secretary-General's exasperation in quoting from Hamlet
is understandable. The Council has been discredited in
world public opinion in this regard. The United Nations
rapid-deployment capacity should be enhanced. The
Council should employ all the instruments and measures
available and adopt newer and innovative strategies within
the purview of the Charter provisions. The credibility of
the Council must not be further compromised by its
failure to act promptly, effectively and consistently. The
impediments to the proper functioning of the Council
should be identified, analysed and debated.
Fifthly, the Secretary-General has proposed the
institution of a culture of prevention. A comprehensive
approach to the prevention of conflicts may be taken
through the implementation of the Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace. Success will depend on the United
Nations system-wide integration of the Programme of
Action and national implementation, as well as on the
active participation of civil society and the media.
Bangladesh believes that international peace and security
can best be strengthened not by the actions of States
alone, but through the inculcation of a culture of peace
and non-violence in every human being and in every
sphere of our activity. We regard the culture of peace as
an effective expedient to minimize and prevent violence
and conflict in the present-day world. My delegation
strongly recommends that the culture of peace be given
due consideration in the context of conflict prevention.
Finally, with respect to the role of the Council in
relation to those of other major organs, it is often said
that the United Nations success is more pronounced in the
economic and social areas than in the field of peace and
security. The Council's primary responsibility
notwithstanding, its role should be seen within the broad
framework of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, in which specific roles are assigned to each of
the principal organs. Their contribution should converge

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
on the goal of the common progress of mankind in a world
of peace.
The multiplicity of crises and conflicts across the
world in the past decades reveals a different reality. We are
far from achieving our objective of building the foundation
of sustainable peace. The role of the Council in conflict
prevention in the medium- and long-term perspective should
also be seen in this broad framework.
The human and the material price of wars should
serve as pointers in our policy decisions. In today’s world
the narrow national-interest-centric approach to crises and
conflicts is certainly anachronistic. We cannot adopt the
policies of the nineteenth century in today’s globalized and
interdependent world.
In conclusion, I would say that giving priority to
dispute resolution and conflict prevention goes to the heart
of equipping the United Nations for taking its rightful place
as the pre-eminent cooperative security institution in the
post-cold-war era.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bangladesh for his kind words addressed to me and my
delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): As this is the
first time I have addressed the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir, I should like first to congratulate you on
your assumption of your important post, and repeat my
delegation’s commendation of your personal commitment
and the commitment of your country, Slovenia, to the
attainment of the noble objectives of the United Nations
Charter.
Your welcome and timely initiative to include on the
Council’s agenda the item we are discussing today stems
from that commitment. By organizing this discussion you
have sought not merely to stimulate discussion about the
activity and the role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security, of which
prevention is an essential part, but also to create a climate
conducive to improving transparency in the work of the
Council, something rightly sought by many countries that
are not members of the Council.

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
This debate arises from one of the relevant issues
raised by the Secretary-General in his report (S/1998/318)
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa, which was
that since the establishment of the United Nations conflict
prevention has been, as it remains, a source of major
concern, even if circumstances have considerably changed
its nature. When the idea of preventive diplomacy was
introduced by a former Secretary-General, Dag
Hammarskjöld, it was closely linked to the threat of a
nuclear escalation between the two super-Powers. Today
we must recognize that this idea of preventive diplomacy
is no longer, mutatis mutandis, the monopoly of
professional diplomats and military experts alone.
Over the years its scope has expanded considerably,
following the proliferation of inter-State and domestic
conflicts, which are in many respects the main causes of
the destabilization of States and the causes of
humanitarian disasters. Therefore, the United Nations —
particularly the Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security — has sought to improve considerably its
methods and strategies for conflict prevention.
The push towards joint coordinated action, which
emerged at the end of the cold war, is gaining ground and
strength at all levels: international, regional and
subregional. The need to act is becoming increasingly
imperative as the list of the new generation of intranational conflicts, particularly in Africa, is growing with
the ever-lengthening procession of civilian victims,
refugees and displaced persons.
The painful and tragic events of Rwanda, and to a
lesser extent in Somalia, have also helped make the
international community more aware of the urgent need
to consolidate domestic peace and to prevent the risk of
violent conflict breaking out again.
In view of the emergence of new intra-State and
inter-State conflicts, and given the re-emergence of old
conflicts, with their aftermath of displaced persons, and
the need to preserve political stability and ensure the
economic development of the African continent, nothing,
we feel, is more important than to focus on the prevention
of conflicts in order to create the conditions for lasting
peace in Africa.
However, this awareness of the need to prevent the
outbreak or worsening of violent conflicts led African
leaders to organize flexible mechanisms for the prevention

13

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
and management of conflicts at the continental and
subregional levels. African leaders increasingly believe that
the international community must give substantial support
to their laudable efforts to prevent African crises and that
it has no choice but to react to existing crises. It is in this
context that we welcome the initiative taken by Japan,
which organized in January 1998, in Tokyo, a conference
on preventive strategy, whose recommendations need to be
revisited, pursued and amplified.
In the ongoing search for a solution to what appears
to be a global threat, because peace and security are a
concern and a challenge for both the South and the North,
the recurrent question is whether it is possible to think
today of an effective conflict-prevention policy to prevent
conflicts without directly tackling other important questions
intrinsically linked with it.
In his report of 13 April 1998 on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, the Secretary-General rightly
recognized that the prevention of conflict was not an end in
itself and that it must take into account and incorporate the
various functions of peace-building and political and
humanitarian activities designed to root out the underlying
causes of conflict: economic destitution, social injustice and
political oppression.
In this context, I wish to make the following
comments.
Today we all recognize the close correlation between
the need for peace and the objectives of sustainable
harmonious economic development. We agree that
development can only be effectively attained in an
environment of peace, security and stability. Likewise, the
results obtained in the development process may easily be
jeopardized by instability or lack of peace. Poverty, disease,
famine and oppression are still ravaging the world, as
evidenced by the millions of refugees and displaced
persons. These problems are both the source and the
consequences of armed conflict. The attention given to
them by the Security Council must not slacken, and efforts
devoted to them must remain an absolute priority.
The thorny question of illicit trafficking in and
increasing circulation of small arms is a challenge to us all,
and we need to move beyond sterile debates about the
misleading question of whether these arms are the cause or
the consequence of conflicts.

14

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999
In this respect, it is undeniable that today everyone
agrees that the flow of weapons feeds and increases
insecurity and leads to the outbreak of conflict. The
increasingly systematic use of weapons causes the
militarization of part of the civilian population, which
ultimately creates a new equation of force between the
various groups and takes them, de facto, away from the
framework of negotiation. These new armed civilian
actors often weaken existing institutions and pose a longterm threat to peace and stability in the regions where
they operate.
Controlling, restricting and limiting the illicit
trafficking in weapons is therefore a priority within the
context of conflict prevention, and the international
community must give special attention to this problem.
Obviously the ideal approach would be to develop within
the framework of the United Nations an international
treaty limiting conventional arms transfers. That is why
my country, Senegal, strongly supports the convening in
the year 2001 of an international conference on all aspects
of illicit trafficking in and proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.
It is useful to recall here that in his “Agenda for
Peace”, published in January 1995, Mr. Boutros BoutrosGhali, Secretary-General at that time, proposed the
establishment of “micro-disarmament”, based on the
collection and subsequent destruction of stockpiles to
prevent their reuse. In November 1998, the member
countries of the Economic Community of West African
States, aware of the magnitude of this scourge, decided on
a moratorium on the import and export of small arms.
The third comment I would like to make is based on
a logical approach. In order to prevent armed conflict,
should we not establish a special fund with the sole
purpose of supporting strategies of preventive diplomacy?
Such a fund would finance prevention mechanisms that
are already operational in various subregions of the world,
rather than spending vast sums on peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building operations.
Conflict prevention has become an absolute priority
for the African continent, which is paying a high price for
its armed conflicts. That is why in 1993 the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) established its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, which
also has a Peace Fund designed precisely to finance
African capacity-building for conflict prevention and
settlement.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999

I wish to pay tribute here to the many donor countries
that have lent assistance to the OAU in pursuit of this goal.
I should also like to thank the Governments of the United
States of America, the United Kingdom and France for their
commitment to African countries, under the tripartite
initiative known as RECAMP, designed for swift, effective
intervention in peacemaking and peacekeeping operations,
as well as in emergency humanitarian relief operations.
Other such initiatives will always be welcome if they
remain open to any African State that wishes to participate
in them.

more attention and direct far more resources to resolving
the many conflicts hampering development, creating
human suffering and burdening the response capacity of
developing nations, not least in Africa.

Conflict prevention is a very complex field. It requires
both the mobilization of various actors and the combination
of various political, economic and social factors. It requires
a comprehensive, concerted and resolute approach and the
participation of the various United Nations bodies, each
operating in its area of competence.

I would therefore like to express Norway’s
appreciation, Mr. President, for your timely initiative and
for the opportunity to participate in this important debate
on the role of the Security Council in the prevention of
armed conflicts. Norway welcomes the measure of
transparency and openness involved in allowing nonCouncil members to present their views and to inspire
fresh ideas in open thematic debates like this one. We
encourage the Council to further expand the practice of
meeting in open formats rather than behind closed doors.

One of the major challenges to be faced in the next
century and one of the key sectors where Member States
must pool their ideas in order to strengthen the credibility
of the Organization in the twenty-first century definitely
relates to the capacity of our Organization to establish a
flexible, open mechanism, responsible on a permanent basis
for alerting the international community to potential crisis
situations in the world and for recommending appropriate
emergency measures.
At the end of this twentieth century, we must
recognize ultimately that our culture of reaction to crises
that shake the world must be replaced by another type of
culture, one of crisis prevention. Today’s discussion must
help us delineate the contours of this important
matter, which in our view must remain on the agenda of the
Security Council.
The President: I thank the representative of Senegal
for his kind words addressed to me and to my delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

We are convinced that preventing conflicts clearly
contributes to lasting and sustainable development, just as
poverty alleviation and social progress may reduce the
risk of war and conflicts. It goes without saying that the
United Nations and the Security Council have a pivotal
role to play in this regard.

There can be no doubt about Norway’s commitment
to upholding the primary role and responsibility of the
Security Council in the maintenance and promotion of
international peace and security. The Security Council,
acting on behalf of the universal membership of the
United Nations, has been given the pre-eminent position
and obligation to take effective and collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to peace, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter.
Early consideration and preventive action by the
Security Council in disputes or potential conflict
situations should thus remain the primary instrument of
the international community’s conflict prevention efforts
as we enter a new century. The higher the readiness of
the Council for preventive action, the more likely it is that
disputes can be settled peacefully, in accordance with
Article 33 of the Charter.

Mr. Kolby (Norway): According to one estimate, 5.5
million people have died in war during the 1990s. Many
more have had their lives ruined. The vast majority of these
conflicts occur in the developing world, where many
countries also have taken on a heavy burden by accepting
refugees from conflicts in neighbouring nations, often
without receiving due credit for their efforts. Norway has
no doubt that the international community needs to pay far

15

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999

The role of the Secretary-General is vital in this
regard. The Secretary-General, being provided the
possibility, in Article 99 of the Charter, to bring to the
attention of the Council any matter which in his opinion
may threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security, has a crucial early warning function in crisis
situations. Norway shares the view that the preventive
capacity of the Secretary-General should be strengthened
further, including through the allocation of human and
financial resources. To assist in this regard, Norway has
contributed to the Trust Fund for Preventive Action, with
a total of $4 million since 1996. In addition, in the same
period, Norway has also contributed some $4 million to
other trust funds and activities of the United Nations
Secretariat related to conflict prevention worldwide.

develop further cooperation with the United Nations.
Close and cooperative relations between the United
Nations and regional organizations in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter is of paramount importance
to successful conflict prevention internationally.

Preventive diplomacy and peacemaking are highly
cost-effective activities for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The financing of this activity should no
longer be dependent on exchange rate gains, vacancy rate
management and trust funds. Norway therefore welcomes
the inclusion in the Programme Budget for 2000 and 2001
of funds for special political missions, which Norway
considers to be of great importance.

Increasingly, we have realized the need for an
integrated approach to our peace and development efforts.
Conflict prevention, humanitarian aid and development
assistance must go hand in hand. We must deal with the
root causes of conflict, not just the symptoms. Effective
crisis management and long-term conflict prevention must
include assistance in promoting lasting and sustainable
development, combating poverty and relieving poor
countries of their unsustainable debt burden, as well as
efforts to promote democratic and economic reforms,
good governance and human rights.

Preventive deployment and preventive disarmament are
other strategies that have proved successful in later years.
Norway participated from the beginning with peacekeeping
troops in the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in Macedonia, the first preventive United
Nations deployment mission ever. Norway supports efforts
to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms and the
various initiatives to curtail this lethal trade that are
currently being pursued within the United Nations and
elsewhere.

Norway has a long tradition of assisting efforts at
development and poverty alleviation in developing
countries, both bilaterally and through the United Nations.
Furthermore, we are actively involved in efforts to
provide humanitarian relief and assistance in solidarity
with the victims of natural disasters, wars, and other
violent conflicts. And we have been engaged in various
peace and reconciliation processes in conflict areas around
the world.

Norway has adopted a national strategy combining
humanitarian assistance, including demining, with conflict
prevention, peace and reconciliation, and development.
We will be proactive in the further development of
coordinated efforts. We must involve bilateral donors,
multilateral organizations like the United Nations and its
agencies, regional organizations, and national
Governments in constructive partnerships.

Norway believes in continued efforts to counter the
culture of impunity for serious violations of humanitarian
law. The International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia represent important new building
blocks in international jurisprudence with regard to the
prosecution of the most serious international crimes. The
experience obtained is also a stepping stone towards the
establishment of the International Criminal Court, in
accordance with the Rome Statute. Norway urges all States
to ratify the Rome Statute in order to ensure early
establishment of the Court. The existence of a permanent,
global institution of this kind will significantly enhance
deterrence against the most heinous international crimes.

Unless we can devise approaches to prevent conflicts
and foster reconciliation, our development efforts will be
undermined or even reversed. Building a culture of
prevention is not easy. But the approach taken by the
Secretary-General, notably in his report on Africa, is
without doubt a most constructive way forward. Poverty,
underdevelopment and violent conflicts are closely linked.
We cannot address one without addressing the
System Name: W:\WP51DOC\FINAL\9986581E
System Filetype: WP5.1
Document Name: 9986581e
Document Type:

As current Chairman-in-office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, Norway has worked to

Creation Date: 11-30-99 08:12p
Revision Date: 11-30-99 11:22p

16

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4072nd meeting (Resumption 1)
30 November 1999

Author: ed (F)
Typist:
Subject: S/PV.4072 (Resumption 1)
Account: 28 pp.
Keywords:
Abstract:
C:\WP51\WP}WP{DS.000581EH-‘

17
