S/PRST/2009/35

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6250th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 December 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes ongoing efforts aimed at national
reconciliation in the Central African Republic based on the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2008 and the commitments contained in
the Sirte Agreement of February 2007 and the Birao Agreement of April 2007.
The Security Council encourages the Government of the Central African
Republic to continue to ensure that the recommendations of the inclusive
political dialogue are expeditiously and fully implemented.
“It reiterates its call on the Government of the Central African Republic
to strengthen and accelerate efforts to reform security sector institutions,
which is a crucial element for the peacebuilding process in the Central African
Republic and for addressing widespread impunity and increasing respect for
human rights. It also reiterates its call on the Government to carry out without
delay a transparent and accountable disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. and ensure the completion of disarmament and
demobilization before the 2010 elections. In these efforts, transparent funding
and coordination of reintegration programs is critical to the program’s longterm success. The Security Council encourages the international community,
including BINUCA, to provide timely and adequate support to the process.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the ongoing attacks by the
LRA in the Central African Republic and calls for the countries of the region
and the United Nations missions to coordinate and enhance informationsharing regarding the threat posed by the LRA to the population.
“The Security Council demands that the Government of the Central
African Republic and all political stakeholders ensure free, fair, transparent
and credible preparation and conduct of the 2010 elections, and that the
elections take place within the timeframe set by the Constitution. The Security
Council calls on the Government, the United Nations and other stakeholders to
support timely election preparation with adequate resources.
“The Security Council welcomes the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) on

09-66145 (E) 211209

*0966145*

S/PRST/2009/35

1 January 2010 for the period of one year. The Security Council urges the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps so
that BINUCA will be fully operational as soon as possible after 1 January
2010, in accordance with its mandate as set out in the Statement of its
President of 7 April 2009 (S/PRST/2009/5). The Security Council confirms its
full support to the efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mrs. Sahle-Work Zewde, in this regard. The support of the BINUCA,
together with the United Nations Country Team, to national and local efforts to
consolidate peace, enhance governance and complete DDR process is crucial
and needed.
“The Security Council also requests the Secretary-General to propose in
his next report a set of clear and measurable benchmarks to guide the progress
of the mission and enable BINUCA to evaluate its progress against its
mandate.
“The Security Council welcomes the support provided by the
Peacebuilding Commission to the Central African Republic, and reiterates its
call on the donor community to enhance their support to sectors identified as
critical for sustainable peace and development in the Central African Republic,
as set out in the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding developed by the
Peacebuilding Commission.”

2

09-66145
