A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/201
2 March 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 98 (e)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/629/Add.5)]
52/201.

Convention on Biological Diversity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/182 of 16 December 1996 on the Convention on Biological Diversity and
other relevant resolutions relating to the Convention,
Recalling also the provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity,1
Recalling further Agenda 21,2 particularly its chapter 15 on the conservation of biological diversity and
related chapters,
Recalling the recommendations made at the third session of the Commission on Sustainable Development
on the review of chapter 15 of Agenda 21 on the conservation of biological diversity,3
Deeply concerned by the continued loss of the world's biological diversity, and, on the basis of the
provisions of the Convention, reaffirming the commitment to the conservation of biological diversity, the
sustainable use of its components, and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization
of genetic resources,

1

See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity (Environmental Law and
Institution Programme Activity Centre), June 1992.
2

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995, Supplement No. 12 (E/1995/32), chap. I,
para. 230 (i).
98-76999

/...

A/RES/52/201
Page 2

Emphasizing that the Convention is an important instrument for achieving sustainable development,
taking into account its three objectives, and for promoting the ecosystem approach embodied in the
Convention and the decisions of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention,
Encouraged by the work carried out to date under the Convention,
Noting with satisfaction that most States and one regional economic integration organization have ratified
or acceded to the Convention,
Taking note with appreciation of the generous offer of the Government of Slovakia to host the fourth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at Bratislava from 4 to 15 May 1998,
Recalling its invitation to the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological Diversity to report
to the General Assembly on the results of future meetings of the Conference of the Parties,
1. Welcomes the results of the third meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, held at Buenos Aires from 4 to 15 November 1996, as reflected in the report of the
meeting,4 submitted in accordance with resolution 51/182, and in that context reaffirms the need to take
concrete action to fulfil the three objectives of the Convention;
2. Takes note of the decision of the Conference of the Parties on the conservation and sustainable use
of agricultural biological diversity and the programme of work contained therein,5 and the development of
a focused work programme for forest biological diversity;6
3. Also takes note of the ongoing work and the international cooperation to date towards fulfilling the
objectives of the Convention, the decision of the Conference of the Parties and, inter alia, the initiative taken
on holding workshops, including the workshop on traditional knowledge and biological diversity,7 and the
important work being carried out by the subsidiary bodies of the Convention;
4. Further takes note of the work carried out at the third meeting of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working
Group on Biosafety, held at the seat of the secretariat of the Convention at Montreal, Canada, from 13 to 17
October 1997, and reaffirms the importance of those negotiations for the development of a protocol on
biosafety;
5.

Encourages those States that have not yet ratified the Convention to do so as soon as possible;

6. Recognizes that States parties to the Convention have agreed to provide additional financial
resources for the implementation of the Convention in accordance with article 20 of the Convention, and
urges all funding institutions, including bilateral and multilateral donors as well as regional funding
institutions and non-governmental organizations, to cooperate with the secretariat of the Convention in
implementing the decision of the Conference of the Parties;8

4

See A/52/441.

5

Ibid., annex II, decision III/11.

6

Ibid., decision III/12.

7

Ibid., decision III/14.

8

Ibid., decision III/6.
/...

A/RES/52/201
Page 3

7. Renews its appreciation for the important work being carried out under the Convention towards
enhancing cooperation with the Commission on Sustainable Development and biodiversity-related
conventions;
8. Recognizes the importance of the implementation of the Convention at all levels, including through
the preparation and the implementation of national strategies, plans and programmes;
9. Notes that the first national reports by States parties to the Convention, as required under article
26 of the Convention, are due to be submitted to the secretariat of the Convention no later than 1 January
19989 in accordance with the decision taken at the second meeting of the Conference of the Parties,10 calls
upon Member States that are parties to the Convention to meet that requirement as soon as possible, and in
that context invites the international community to assist developing countries in fulfilling that commitment;
10. Also notes the clarification of the administrative arrangements regarding the respective roles of the
United Nations Environment Programme and the secretariat of the Convention in respect of personnel and
financial matters, as detailed in the Administrative Arrangements between the United Nations Environment
Programme and the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity signed on 30 June 1997;
11. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to settle urgently any arrears and to pay their
contributions in full and in a timely manner, in accordance with the decision of the Conference of the Parties
regarding the contributions required for the Trust Fund for the Convention on Biological Diversity,11 so as
to ensure continuity in the cash flow required to finance the ongoing work of the Conference of the Parties,
the subsidiary bodies and the Convention secretariat;
12. Invites the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological Diversity to report to the General
Assembly on the results of future meetings of the Conference of the Parties;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the sub-item entitled
"Convention on Biological Diversity".
77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997

9

Ibid., decision III/9.

10

See A/51/312, annex II, decision II/17.

11

See A/52/441, annex II, decision III/24.
