VII.

Resolution~ adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committe,·

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution:
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December 198 7

42/78.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 41/16 of-~ 1 October 1986 on the
question of Western Sahara,
Recalling resolution AHG/Res.104 (XIX) on Western
Sahara, 26 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
nineteenth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 6
to 12 June 1983,
Taking note with appreciation of the part concerning
Western Sahara27 of the final communique adopted by the
Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of
Delegation of the Non-Aligned Countries to the fortysecond session of the General Assembly, held in New
York from 5 to 7 October 1987,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 28
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on
the question of Western Sahara, 29
Noting with appreciation the contmuation of the joint
good offices process initiated in New York on 9 April 1986
by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
with a view to implementing resolution AHG/
Res.104 (XIX) and General Assembly resolutions 40/50
of 2 December 1985 and 41/ 16 of :q October 1986,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the question of Western Sahara:
2. Reaffirms that the question of Western Sahara is a
question of decolonization which remains to be completed
on the basis of the exercise by the people of Western
Sahara of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
3. Reaffirms also that the solution of the question of
Western Sahara lies in the implementation of resolution
AHG/Res.104 (XIX) of the Assembly of Heads of State

26 For the text.

see resolution .18/40. par.i
para,. 50 and , I

I

27 A/42/681, annex,
28

See Official Record.\(?/ the <iencral ·1\\t'111l1/1 Fr1r11
Supplement No. 23 (A/4212.1). chap IX
2q A/42/601

245

and Government of the Organization of African Unity, in
which ways and means were established for a just and
definitive political solution to the Western Sahara conflict;
4. Again requests, to that end, the two parties to the
conflict, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular
para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, to
undertake direct negotiations, in the shortest possible
time, with a view to bringing about a cease-fire to create
the necessary conditions for a peaceful and fair referendum for self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara, a referendum without any administrative or military constraints, under the auspices of the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations;
5. Welcomes the efforts of the current Chairman of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity and the Secretary-General of
the lJ nited Nations to promote a just and definitive solution of the question of Western Sahara, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 40/50;
6. fakes note of the joint decision of the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the Organization of African Unity and the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to send a technical mission
to Western Sahara in order to collect the relevant technical information to assist them in discharging the mandate
entrusted to them under General Assembly resolutions
40/50 and 41/16 and the present resolution;
7. Invites the current Chairman of the Assembly of
Head~ ,if State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to continue to exert every effort to persuade the
two parties to the conflict, the Kingdom of Morocco and
the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia e)-Hamra
y de Rio de Oro, to negotiate, in the shortest possible time
and in conformity with resolution AHG/Res.104 (XIX),
General Assembly resolution 40/50 and the present resolution, the terms of a cease-fire and the modalities for organizing the said referendum;
8. Appeals to the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente
Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia e)-Hamra y de Rio
de Oro to display the political will necessary to implement
resolution AHG/Res.104 (XIX), General Assembly resolutions 40/50 and 41/16 and the present resolution;
9 Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity
with a view to implementing the relevant decisions of
that Organization, in particular resolution AHG/
Res.104 (XIX);
10. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
People~ to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session;
11. Invites the Secretary-General of the Organization
of Afncan Unity to keep the Secretary-General of the
United Nations informed of the progress achieved in the
implementation of the decisions of the Organization of
African Unity relating to Western Sahara;
l 2 Invites the Secretary-General to follow the situation 111 Western Sahara closely with a view to the implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session.

,,'c,')nd .\'n,wn.

92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987
