S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6100th meeting
Wednesday, 25 March 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dabbashi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Huang Hongjiang
Mr. Guillermet
Ms. Čačić
Ms. Lecoq
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Heller
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Dizdar
Mr. Kamahungye
Mr. Bentall
Ms. Germain
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-28062 (E)

*0928062*

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to remind
all speakers, as indicated this morning, to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Moreno Fernández (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to address the Security
Council on behalf of the 118 members of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). In compliance with
your request, Mr. President, I shall deliver an abridged
version of the statement prepared by the Movement,
which will be circulated in its entirety in the Council
Chamber.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel’s
continuing occupation of Palestinian territory in breach
of international law and United Nations resolutions. In
that regard, the Movement condemns in the strongest
terms the recent Israeli military aggression against the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza, which resulted
in the death of more than 1,400 Palestinians, including
hundreds of children and women, the injury of more
than 5,500 Palestinians and widespread displacement,
making thousands of Palestinian families homeless and
deepening the suffering and fear that overwhelm the
population.
The Non-Aligned Movement also condemns
Israel’s wanton destruction of thousands of Palestinian
homes and businesses, vital civilian infrastructure and
United Nations facilities, including several schools
where frightened Palestinian families had sought refuge
but were nonetheless attacked by the Israeli occupying
forces. The Movement calls upon Israel to immediately
cease its military aggression against the Palestinian
people and stresses the importance of attaining a
permanent and lasting ceasefire, beginning in the Gaza
Strip and extending to the West Bank. The Movement
also expresses its support for Egypt’s efforts in that
regard.
We reiterate our condemnation of Israel’s
inhumane and unlawful closure and blockade of the
Gaza Strip, which has resulted in the virtual
imprisonment of the entire Palestinian civilian
population. The Movement expresses its serious

2

concern about the grave deterioration of socioeconomic conditions and the deepening humanitarian
crisis as a result of the blockade, which has caused
increased and widespread privation, poverty and
hardship, in addition to the vast trauma and suffering
inflicted by the military aggression.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
cease such illegal practices against the Palestinian
people and put a permanent end to its illegal blockade
of the Gaza Strip by allowing the immediate and
sustained opening of all Gaza border crossings needed
to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and to meet the
urgent reconstruction and economic recovery needs of
the Palestinian people.
The Movement reminds the international
community, including the Security Council, of its
responsibility to guarantee an in-depth investigation of
all the crimes and violations committed by Israel in the
Gaza Strip and to ensure that serious follow-up efforts
are made to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes
answer for them. Israel’s impunity and its blatant
disregard for and defiance of the law must come to an
end. We await the report of the Board of Inquiry
dispatched to Gaza by the Secretary-General. We call
for immediate action to follow up the findings of the
Board’s investigation and for the immediate dispatch of
the fact-finding mission called for by the Human
Rights Council as recently called for in Geneva by the
non-aligned countries.
The Movement reiterates its strong condemnation
of Israel’s continuing intensive campaign of building
settlements throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories, in particular in and around occupied East
Jerusalem. Such Israeli policies and measures constitute
grave breaches of international law and flagrant
defiance of United Nations resolutions and the 9 July
2004 advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. We stress the incompatibility of negotiations on
the peace process with such unlawful colonization
activities, which are clearly aimed at the illegal
acquisition and de facto annexation of more Palestinian
land and at forcibly imposing a unilateral solution. The
Movement emphasizes that the illegal Israeli
colonization campaign in its entirety is gravely
undermining the contiguity, integrity, viability and
unity of the occupied Palestinian territory and
jeopardizing the prospects for physically achieving the
solution of two States living in peace.

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

The Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
immediately cease all of its colonization activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and reaffirms that those unlawful measures
cannot alter the terms of reference of the peace process
nor negate the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. The Movement also demands that the
international community take urgent action to compel
the occupying Power to abide by all of its obligations
under international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, United Nations resolutions, the advisory
opinion and its obligations under the road map.
The Government of Lebanon has continuously
endeavoured to stabilize the situation in its territory
following Israel’s brutal aggression and serious
violations of its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its satisfaction
with the steps taken by the Lebanese Government to
implement resolution 1701 (2006), including the
deployment of its armed forces along the northern and
eastern borders of Lebanon to ensure security and
stability on the borders.
The Movement remains deeply concerned about
Israel’s ongoing air and land violations of the Blue
Line in breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly
urge Israel to end the occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar village, north of the Blue Line, and refrain from
any violation of Lebanese sovereignty and of
resolution 1701 (2006), as well as any provocation of
the Lebanese armed forces or the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
The Movement also calls for the prompt
settlement of the question of the Shaba’a farms, in full
respect for Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated
in resolution 1701 (2006). We urge all parties to
cooperate in protecting Lebanon’s sovereign rights in
that area and we note the important efforts made by the
Secretary-General in that regard.
The Movement is fully aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon as a result of the 1.2 million
cluster bombs launched by Israel during its aerial
attack on the country. The Movement once again
condemns the use of such weapons by Israel and
deplores the resulting death toll. The Non-Aligned
Movement strongly urges Israel to provide the exact
location of explosives planted on Lebanese territory, as
well as maps of the location of the landmines planted
during its occupation of southern Lebanon.

09-28062

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all
measures taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, that purport to alter the legal, physical or
demographic character or institutional structure of the
occupied Syrian Golan, including efforts to impose its
jurisdiction and administration there, are null, void and
have no legal effect. We also reaffirm that all of those
measures, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements and the United Nations
Charter and its resolutions, including Security Council
resolution 497 (1981), as well as the Fourth Geneva
Convention. They are also in defiance of the
international community. The Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
completely from the Occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967.
At this critical period in the Middle East,
particularly with regard to the long and tragic question
of Palestine, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its
intention to continue to lend its support and actively
contribute in every possible way to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
based on all relevant United Nations resolutions, the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to express my
delegation’s pleasure at seeing you, Sir, personally
presiding over the Security Council this month. We are
confident that having the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
this prominent position will help promote the agenda
and efforts of the international community to reach
viable solutions to the problems of today, in particular
with regard to the Middle East and Africa. We also
express our great appreciation for the efforts of the
Permanent Representative of Japan and the members of
his delegation throughout the previous month. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing earlier.
The United Nations can no longer address the
Arab-Israeli conflict and the question of Palestine as if
it were business as usual. The inability of the Security
Council to carry out its basic duties cannot be allowed

3

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

to produce disastrous results for our region and its
peoples, namely, aggression, colonization, continued
Israeli occupation and suffering. The United Nations in
general and the Security Council in particular are
therefore called upon to rise to the level of the
purposes and principles of the Charter by trying to
implement at least some of the hundreds of resolutions
and decisions adopted in this international
Organization since its inception to put an end to the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, stop its violations
of human rights there and halt its practices that
contravene international humanitarian law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. That is the most
important thing as we discuss the agenda item on the
situation in the Middle East in the Security Council.
That is at the heart of the matter. We should not be
sidetracked by the representative of Israel as we
discuss an issue that has been before the Council for
decades.
Arab States endeavoured to establish peace at the
Beirut Summit of 2002 and at the recently held 2008
summit in Damascus. They have also reiterated the
need to establish a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East based on the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy, the principle of land for
peace, the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Meanwhile, instead of reaching out to the Arab
hand outstretched in peace, Israel responded by
attacking the West Bank and carrying out the Jenin and
Nablus massacres, enforcing a blockade on the
defenceless Palestinian people, and by specializing in
killing women and children, desecrating places of
worship, changing the character of Jerusalem and
Judaizing it, carrying out a scorched-earth policy and
collective punishment and mass arrests and building
settlements and constructing the racist separation wall
on occupied Palestinian lands. That is Israel’s record
with regard to the item now under consideration, which
is the situation in the Middle East.
Not satisfied with these cumulative, provocative
violations, Israel carried out its brutal aggression
against Lebanon in the summer of 2006 and another
aggression against Gaza recently. This entailed war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which, as the
Council knows, outraged international public opinion.
International opinion now demands with unprecedented
insistence that the Israeli perpetrators of these crimes
be put on trial.

4

Recently, 16 prominent international personalities,
including senior judges and human rights advocates, such
as Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Ms. Mary Robinson and
Justice Richard Goldstone, sent a letter to the SecretaryGeneral in which they called for an immediate,
independent international inquiry into Israel’s violations
of international law during its recent aggression against
the Palestinian people in Gaza. Richard Falk, the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,
described this aggression as a war crime. In this context,
our delegation will follow the situation carefully, as the
Secretary-General carries out his commitment to forward
to the Security Council the findings of the Board of
Inquiry dispatched to Gaza, headed by Ian Martin, as
soon as possible.
We must not overlook the article that The
Guardian published setting out the first-hand testimony
of Israeli soldiers and officers who participated in the
aggression against Gaza, soldiers and officers who
targeted Palestinian ambulances and medical relief
workers, and who killed 47 among them.
Nor must we overlook the testimony of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. She spoke of a young Palestinian boy, not
even 12 years old, who was used by the Israeli army in
Gaza as a human shield. They placed him in front of an
Israeli tank to protect the tank from Palestinians who
were trying to defend themselves. The outcome was
that the Israelis themselves shot 70 bullets into the
body of this young Palestinian boy.
Israel’s continued disregard for the Security
Council and its continued waste of the Council’s time
would astonish even forerunners of the theatre of the
absurd, such as Kafka and Kierkegaard, for those who
are interested in such matters. It is now time for this
Council to put an end to Israel’s absurdist acts before
this esteemed Council. The question that remains is
this: If the Arab hand outstretched in peace does not
meet a hand outstretched from the other side, what
reason is there to keep this Arab hand outstretched in
peace? Would it please the international community to
see the peace process collapse and its foundations
falter?
The continued occupation of Arab land in
Palestine, the intensified settlement and colonization
activities in the Syrian Golan and in Palestine and

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

Israel’s persistence in occupying Lebanese territories
and in refusing to abide by legitimate international
resolutions in order to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East have all led to
an escalation of tensions, an absence of stability and
security in the region and a situation that is
deteriorating in all its aspects. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, is called
upon to hold Israel’s leaders accountable for their
repeated crimes, which are legally defined as war
crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of
genocide. What Israel is doing to Palestinians is the
true holocaust.
Despite Israel’s desperate attempts to justify its
aggression against Gaza, what it is doing now in the
West Bank and Jerusalem reveals its true intentions
towards the Palestinian people. Israel is not content
with its racist policies and its practices of coercion. It
has escalated its brutal attacks against the residents of
Jerusalem who live close to the Al-Aqsa mosque,
demolishing their homes and displacing them in an
attempt to breach the sanctity and diminish the
significance of the Al-Aqsa mosque and to Judaize the
city of Jerusalem. Israel’s decision to demolish
88 homes in the village of Silwan near the Al-Aqsa
mosque and its continued excavations under the
mosque are nothing but an attempt to carry out a
preconceived plan to take control of the mosque and
demolish it. They are deceiving themselves when they
think in such a manner.
An even more repugnant and surreal
manifestation of the conduct of the Israeli occupation
authorities is the fact that these authorities impose a
fine of $20,000 on any Palestinian whose home these
authorities demolish. Their justification is that this
money is to cover the expenses of the demolition. What
does the Council think of that? Israel is thus asking the
Palestinians to pay the price of the bullets it will use to
shoot them. How surreal, how sadistic this is.
It is also strange that the Israeli Government has
issued a decision preventing any Palestinian cultural
activity in Jerusalem, which by an Arab decision was
declared the Arab cultural capital. In parallel, Israel
continues its settlement activities in the occupied Arab
territories and the construction of the racist separation
wall in blatant violation of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Today is also the sixth
anniversary of the assassination of American peace
activist Rachel Corrie, who was run over by an Israeli

09-28062

bulldozer because she opposed the demolition of
Palestinian homes to build the separation wall.
Most of the world’s countries and every United
Nations body have adopted clear positions condemning
Israeli settlement activities, which impede the
establishment of peace, are in contradiction to the
pledges made at Annapolis, constitute a genuine
obstacle to peace and lead to an escalation of tensions
in the region.
Syria reaffirms its steadfast and continuous
support for the rights of the Palestinian people to
regain their occupied land and establish their own
independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital. We
also reiterate the need for an immediate end to the
oppressive blockade against the Palestinian people in
Gaza, for the reopening of all crossings, for the
reconstruction of Gaza and for international guarantees
to prevent Israel from demolishing again the facilities
and infrastructure that are to be rebuilt.
In order to demonstrate its solidarity with the
Palestinian people, Syria took part in the Sharm elSheikh conference and has participated in the
international efforts to rebuild Gaza. Syria reaffirms
the need to restore Palestinian national unity through a
national dialogue so as to strengthen the Palestinian
negotiating position and the resolve of its people. As
Chair of the Arab summit, Syria is striving to achieve
that unity.
Israel continues to refuse to return occupied
Golan to Syria, and to abide by legitimate international
resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981). Israeli
actions in the occupied Syrian Golan have exceeded
every legal and moral boundary. It has pursued its
policy of terrorizing and suppressing Syrian citizens of
the Golan, arresting them and placing them in
detention centres in conditions that jeopardize their
lives. In that connection, I would like in particular to
mention our national Bashir Al-Muqt. My Government
has appealed to the Secretary-General and the Red
Cross to save his life. In that regard, we appeal to the
United Nations and the Security Council to pressure
Israel to release Syrian captives, including journalist
Atta Farhat, who was arrested by Israel because of his
nationalist journalistic work, given a show trial and
sentenced to three years in prison.
Israeli occupying authorities continue to
expropriate land and to expand their illegitimate and
illegal settlements in the Syrian Golan. With the

5

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

approval of the occupation Government, the so-called
Golan Regional Council on settlements decided to
begin the construction of new housing on 40 dunums of
land near the Israeli settlement of Aniam, which was
established on the ruins of the Syrian village of
Al-Tibah. Representatives from Israeli parties in the
settlement of Qatzrin, which was built on the ruins of
the Syrian village of Kasreen, signed a joint
cooperation agreement to coordinate their efforts to
oppose any Israeli withdrawal from the Golan. The
Israeli army has also recently carried out massive
military exercises in the occupied Golan, employing all
sorts of land, naval and air weaponry.
I would like to remind the Council that the
number of victims of Israeli landmines in the occupied
Syrian Golan stands at 531, including 202 fatalities,
most of whom were children. That is in addition to the
329 injured persons with permanent multiple
disabilities.
Israel continues to refuse to allow the resumption
of family visits by Syrian citizens in the occupied
Golan through the Quneitra crossing point. My country
has sent letters in that regard to the Secretary-General,
the Presidents of the Security Council and the General
Assembly and governmental and non-governmental
organizations, calling for their intervention to
immediately resolve this urgent humanitarian issue. We
have yet to see any success in the efforts of those
parties to support international humanitarian law and
human rights law.
In conclusion, Syria has made the strategic choice
of a just and comprehensive peace on the basis of the
well-known terms of reference for peace, including
resolutions of international legitimacy. By definition,
that entails the return of all occupied Arab territories,
including occupied Syrian Golan, a return to the lines
of 4 June 1967 and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital. The
continuation of the occupation is a contradiction of
peace. By definition, too, that requires mobilizing all
possible means to put an end to it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential

6

candidates of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia align themselves
with this statement.
The European Union welcomed the cessation of
hostilities in the Gaza Strip. Since then, it has been
using every opportunity to call on all parties to make
the current ceasefire permanent through the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Noting the
full withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza, the issues
which should be addressed without any delay include a
sustained halt to rocket launches towards Israel, the
urgent opening of the Gaza crossings on a regular and
predictable basis, and an effective mechanism to
prevent arms and ammunition smuggling into the Gaza
Strip.
The European Union deeply deplores the loss of
life during this conflict, particularly the civilian
casualties. We continue to remind all parties to the
conflict to fully respect human rights and comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The European Union will closely follow investigations
into alleged violations of international humanitarian
law.
The European Union is gravely concerned by the
humanitarian situation on the ground and calls for the
unimpeded provision and distribution of humanitarian
assistance to the people of Gaza. Only the immediate
and unconditional reopening of all crossings for the
passage of humanitarian aid will reverse the current
humanitarian deterioration.
The European Union has on several occasions
declared its readiness not only to step up its already
substantial emergency aid contribution, but also to
work towards the rehabilitation, reconstruction,
sustainable economic recovery and future economic
development of the Gaza Strip. The European Union
welcomed the Palestinian Authority’s plan for the
recovery and reconstruction of Gaza. We believe that
the recent conference in Sharm el-Sheikh was a
success, both in raising the necessary funds for
reconstruction and economic development and —
maybe even more importantly — in sending a clear
signal in support of the Palestinian National Authority.
The European Union is the largest donor. The
European Commission provided €554 million in 2009,
in addition to the bilateral contributions of EU member
States. The EU is determined to play a substantial role,

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

alongside the United States and Arab countries, in
alleviating the dire situation in Gaza. The European
Union will continue to support the Palestinian
economy as a whole. While focusing our attention on
Gaza, we must not forget to address the needs in the
West Bank, since both territories constitute the pillars
of a future Palestinian State that is viable, contiguous
and democratic, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security.
Unhindered passage of humanitarian aid, people
and commercial goods must be allowed in order to
ensure recovery and reconstruction and provide hope
for a better future. The European Union has constantly
pushed for the sustained reopening of Gaza’s borders
on the basis of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access and is prepared to reactivate, and possibly
extend, its assistance in the management of Gaza’s
borders. Another essential prerequisite for the
sustainable recovery and development of Palestinian
society, both in Gaza and in the West Bank, is intraPalestinian reconciliation. The European Union
welcomes the reconciliation process launched at the
meeting of all Palestinian factions, held in Cairo on
26 February, and strongly encourages reconciliation
behind President Mahmoud Abbas. In this respect, we
commend Egypt and the Arab League partners for their
mediation efforts.
We are in a transition period waiting for new
Israeli and interim Palestinian Governments to be
formed. But no matter what their composition, the
European Union clearly expects their representatives to
honour obligations entered into by their predecessors.
The European Union reiterates its condemnation
of the continuing firing of rockets into southern Israel.
The European Union also condemns Israel’s planned
settlement activities. The European Union urgently
calls on Israel to reconsider the planned construction of
settlements, which would be in violation of
international law and would run counter to the Road
Map and commitments made by Israel to the
Palestinians and the international community in
Annapolis in November 2007.
The European Union has consistently made clear
that there can be no sustainable peace in the Middle
East without the creation of a viable Palestinian State.
Continued settlement activity severely damages that
prospect. The European Union is also deeply concerned
by the issuing of eviction notices in East Jerusalem,

09-28062

which, combined with the increase in settlement
activities, further threatens the chances of peace. We
call on Israel to suspend these eviction notices
immediately.
The European Union strongly supports a twoState solution as the only realistic option to meet the
expectations of both peoples to live in peace and
security alongside each other. This perspective was
also reaffirmed at the first meeting of the Middle East
Quartet with the participation of the new United States
Administration on the margins of the Sharm el-Sheikh
conference.
However, there is no solidified truce around Gaza
at this stage. We continue to support Egyptian efforts
towards this goal and encourage all parties to come to
an agreement as soon as possible. The European Union
is convinced that there is no military solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in Gaza or elsewhere.
Peace in the Middle East requires a comprehensive
solution through a lasting and just settlement of the
conflict on all its tracks, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Road Map and previous
agreements reached between the parties. We consider
the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 to be a solid and
appropriate basis for achieving stability, peace and
security in the region. The European Union stands
ready to actively work towards that goal.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the
convening of this timely debate, an initiative that
speaks to Libya’s commitment to the efforts by the
United Nations to bring peace to the Middle East. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing.
A little more than two months after the conflict in
Gaza and a few weeks after the donor conference in
Sharm el-Sheikh, this debate should reinforce the
resolve of the international community not only to
speed up reconstruction of the war-torn Gaza Strip, but
also to advance the peace process as a whole. It is
necessary to take stock of the situation and to devise a
common strategy that allows the establishment of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State at
a very early date, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel within internationally recognized
borders.

7

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

This goal requires the resumption of negotiations
between the parties in good faith. Brazil welcomes the
Palestinian political forces’ willingness to form a
reconciliation government. We recognize the role of
Egypt in bringing about those developments. The
expansion of settlements by Israel and the frequent use
of violence — serious obstacles to the two-State
solution — should be immediately stopped. More than
ever, persuasion from the international community is
an essential ingredient of the achievement of peace.
Brazil firmly believes that all actors in the region
that are prepared to act constructively should be given
a chance to participate in the peace process. By the
same token, bringing developing countries from
outside the region to the discussions would also add
fresh ideas to the talks. Brazil attended the Annapolis
Conference and encourages the holding of a follow-up
conference as a matter of urgency.
We expect that the new government being formed
in Israel will not only fulfil the international
commitments already in place, but also engage fully in
the peace process.
At this juncture, it is very important to support
the Palestinian Authority and to help it strengthen its
institutions and its ability to make a difference in the
everyday lives of the Palestinian population.
With respect to Gaza, all parties must fully
implement Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
without preconditions.
The reality on the ground calls for immediate
action. That includes the permanent reopening of all
crossings into Gaza, so that the flow of humanitarian
aid and of regular trade can be normalized. On the
Palestinian side, violence against Israeli civilians,
including the launching of rockets, must cease.
In the recent times of heightened tension, Brazil
has continued and even increased its cooperation
efforts with the Palestinian Authority. We emphasize
the need to bring a clear and consistent improvement to
the daily lives of the people of Palestine. During his
visit to the region during the conflict, Foreign
Minister Celso Amorim delivered, on behalf of the
Brazilian Government and people, 14 tons of food and
medicine to alleviate the humanitarian situation in
Gaza.
That was not an isolated event. In the donor
conferences held in Stockholm and Paris, Brazil

8

donated a total of $10.5 million. Our contribution in
Paris was the largest Brazil has ever made and one of
the highest among non-Islamic developing countries.
These resources are now being employed in a wide
range of projects on the ground that are meant to have
a direct positive impact on the local population: the
construction of schools, the establishment of fish farms
and the management of communal lands, to mention
just a few. Together with our partners India and South
Africa in the framework of the IBSA Fund, we pledged
an additional $3 million over three years and are now
pursuing the construction of a sports centre in
Ramallah scheduled to start in April.
In Sharm el-Sheikh, Foreign Minister Amorim
announced the donation of a further $10 million for the
reconstruction of Gaza. On that occasion, IBSA also
announced its cooperation for the reconstruction of
Gaza. Next April, a high-level Brazilian delegation will
visit the West Bank to hold talks with the Palestinian
authorities on cooperation in the area of public policy.
In cooperation with the Department of Public
Information, Brazil will host the 2009 International
Media Seminar on Peace in the Middle East in Rio de
Janeiro next July. We hope that the event can make a
contribution to the peace process through dialogue
between the parties, including their civil societies.
Let me say a few words about Lebanon, a country
with which Brazil also has strong ties. The steady
implementation of the Doha agreement and the
scheduling of legislative elections for next June are
encouraging developments. The Lebanese people will
once again be able to solve problems in a democratic
and peaceful way. We note with appreciation the calm
situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, but we appeal to all
parties to implement in full resolution 1701 (2006).
By the end of March, the second South AmericaArab Countries Summit will take place in Qatar. We
are confident that it will help to further identify
opportunities to enhance relations and cooperation
between the two regions.
In concluding, I would say that, in recent months
there have been tragic setbacks in the Middle East. The
situation in Gaza remains intolerable. The Council and
the international community as a whole must live up to
their responsibilities. It is no longer the time for a
peace process; it is high time for peace in the Middle
East.

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to express my great pleasure at
seeing the brother country of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya at the helm of the Security Council as the
Council is addressing the situation in the Middle
East — something that has been on the agenda of the
Organization since its creation. I must commend the
professionalism and effectiveness displayed by the
Japanese presidency last month. I also wish to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing and report on
developments in the Palestinian situation.
After the Israeli aggression against Gaza, the
entire world has been able to see the atrocities
committed against Palestinians and their property.
Palestinians have been orphaned and dispersed and
their homes destroyed. That has happened in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, as stated recently by the
Special Rapporteur for human rights in the Palestinian
territories. The aggression has halted, but the
Palestinian people are still awaiting the opening of
border crossings, the lifting of the siege,
reconstruction, and a return to normal life with all its
components.
In solidarity with the Palestinian people in these
trials, His Majesty the King of Morocco, during the
first week of aggression, ordered that food and medical
supplies be provided and medical teams sent to lend
support to Palestinians in hospitals. Contributions for
reconstruction have also been made by the Moroccan
people, including for the reconstruction of Gaza and a
wing of the Al-Quds Hospital. Fifteen million dollars
has been committed by His Majesty for the
reconstruction effort.
The statements made by Israel on returning to
negotiations do not absolve it of its crimes and its
collective punishment, its intensified settlement
activities, and its occupation of the Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The policy of
demographic change and the Judaization of East
Jerusalem is contrary to resolutions of international
legitimacy, the Road Map and the principle of land for
peace. The destruction of a historic cemetery, with a
museum to be built in its place, is a violation of
Palestinian rights and a desecration of holy places as

09-28062

defined by UNESCO. His Majesty the King, as
Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee, has addressed a
letter to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and to the permanent members of the Security Council,
in which he condemned the intentions of the Israeli
authorities against the inhabitants of al-Bustan
neighbourhood near Silway, near Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which was built before the Israeli occupation of East
Jerusalem. His Majesty the King urged that those
practices be abandoned and that the pursuit of peace
and the rule of international law prevail.
Morocco supports a return to the negotiating table
and wishes to encourage an environment conducive to
that and to reunifying Palestinian factions on the basis
of intra-Palestinian dialogue and reconciliation,
including the consolidation of the Arab and Palestinian
positions in all international forums. We also urge that
all good offices continue to be deployed, in particular
the good offices of our Egyptian brothers, in order to
achieve that goal.
My country states that it is important that an
international process fostering the Arab Peace Initiative
commence. The Arab Peace Initiative is indeed an
essential and realistic basis for resolving the ArabIsraeli conflict. The Initiative is based on the Arab
strategic choice of peace, the principle of land for
peace, the creation of a Palestinian State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, and respect by Israel of its
international and regional agreements.
Lastly, on behalf of Morocco, I wish to state once
again our full and continued support for the Palestinian
people’s right to an independent viable State of their
own, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and also our
support for the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict so
that there might be peace and stability for all the
peoples of the region, to make cooperation and
recovery possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call next on
the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar): Allow me at the outset to
salute you, Mr. President, and congratulate you on your
appointment as Permanent Representative of the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations in New York. I wish to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to commend you for all
your efforts and endeavours on this item: the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I

9

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

would also like to thank Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
on behalf of the Secretary-General.
This is the first time that the Security Council is
holding an open debate since the end of what the
Israeli occupation forces dubbed "Operation Cast
Lead" in the occupied Gaza Strip. It is needless to
remind the Council of the deaths, destruction and
tragedies that resulted from that three-week military
campaign launched by the Israeli authorities on a
people that are suffering the worst humanitarian
situation in the world. Nor do I think that I need to
repeat what the Council has been hearing frequently
over many months about the serious consequences of
the Israeli blockade and siege imposed on Gaza Strip
and the grave humanitarian situation resulting
therefrom.
While the worst forms of aggression have
stopped, the aggression is still continuing today.
Indeed, it has been going on for years, for the siege,
the blockade, the starvation imposed on the people of
Gaza are a form of aggression. Consequently, the
cessation of hostilities in itself is not enough. It is
necessary now to lift the siege on Gaza, to open the
crossings and to ensure the freedom of movement of
persons, goods, materials and of the equipment
necessary for reconstruction. In general, we must put
an end to this policy of collective punishment and
ensure the protection of Palestinian people.
The end of military aggression does not
necessarily mean that we forget about the terrible
atrocities that have been committed by the Israeli war
machine against the unarmed civilians in the stricken
Palestinian territory. The Israeli aggression on Gaza
has been marked by many war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Worse yet, the entire war constituted
a war crime, because it included violations of
international law, international treaties, relevant
international humanitarian law and even the norms of
warfare. The military operation was not balanced, but
rather a unilateral massacre, as described by Dr. Kevin
Cahill, Chief Adviser for Humanitarian Affairs of the
President of the General Assembly. Therefore, we must
investigate those violations and bring their perpetrators
to justice in order to do justice for the victims and
prevent such criminal acts from ever being committed
again.

10

Many serious human rights violations were
clearly evident, including the use of prohibited
chemical weapons such as white phosphorous and the
targeting of densely populated buildings and even
houses of worship, hospitals and schools. The human
conscience demands that we uncover the facts
concerning all the human rights violations committed
during that armed aggression and that we deny
impunity to the perpetrators of those crimes.
Targeting a school with an artillery shell is a
heinous crime. Nothing could be worse than the
targeting of a school used as a shelter for defenceless
civilians fleeing the shelling of their homes. What
makes it even more heinous is the fact that the targeted
building was clearly marked as a United Nations
facility. Worst of all, the attacks were repeated. The
repetition of those war crimes underscores the fact that
they were premeditated and coordinated acts.
Her Highness Sheikha Mozah bint Nasser
Abdullah Al-Misnad, Consort of His Highness the
Emir of Qatar and UNESCO Special Envoy for Basic
and Higher Education, promptly condemned the
destruction of educational institutions in the Gaza
Strip, calling on the Security Council to develop
without delay a plan to identify those schools and
educational institutions and to mark them in a
conspicuous manner so that they might serve as safe
havens for students and their parents. She also stressed
the importance of allowing humanitarian aid and basic
materials to enter those schools and institutions and of
allowing the sick and injured to be transported out of
them. Prior to that, Her Highness addressed a letter
(S/2009/12) to the Security Council calling on it to
shoulder its responsibilities and investigate the crimes
committed by the Israeli occupation forces against
Palestinian civilians, including women and children.
We are now hearing calls from several quarters
urging that the perpetrators of war crimes and other
violations that occurred in Gaza be brought to justice.
Mr. Richard Falk, Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, recently reported that there was sufficient
reason to conclude that the Israeli military operations
in Gaza constitute crimes against humanity. The same
conclusion has been reached by a number of
non-governmental organizations active in the human
rights field, including Amnesty International, which
indicates that the devastation caused by the recent
Israeli invasion of Gaza constitutes a war crime.

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

Likewise, the organization Physicians for Human
Rights believes that the Israeli army violated the rules
of ethics and international law by targeting paramedics
and by preventing injured people from receiving
treatment. Well-known persons such as Archbishop
Desmond Tutu and Ms. Mary Robinson have called for
the establishment of a board of inquiry to shed light on
the war in Gaza, to conduct an accurate,
comprehensive and fair investigation into all
accusations related to the commission of serious
violations of international humanitarian law by all
parties to the conflict and to make recommendations
regarding appropriate measures to ensure the
prosecution of the perpetrators of those violations.
In particular, there is a need to investigate the
Israeli army’s direct attacks on schools of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in Gaza in order to
determine who was responsible for those crimes and to
bring the perpetrators to justice. Given the seriousness
of targeting United Nations facilities and staff and the
need to ensure their safety, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s establishment of a Board of Inquiry and look
forward to its findings.
The dire humanitarian situation facing the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory
requires that international donors meet Palestinians’
basic needs and finance the reconstruction of what was
destroyed by the Israeli war machine. The State of
Qatar played a leading role in the international efforts
that brought about an end to the Israeli aggression
against Gaza — efforts culminating in the adoption of
resolution 1860 (2009) on 8 January 2009. Similarly,
the State of Qatar has been among the leading
supporters of the Palestinian people, both bilaterally
and through the decisions of the Council of the League
of Arab States. His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of Qatar, took the initiative of
convening an emergency Arab summit in Doha to
support the Palestinian people, at which he announced
the establishment of a fund for Gaza’s reconstruction,
to which he donated $250 million. In addition, the
State of Qatar has sent in-kind assistance to the
Palestinians by sea and air and has provided support
through the United Nations, the Emir having
contributed $40 million to United Nations
humanitarian agencies and programmes providing
emergency assistance to civilians in Gaza. In addition,
long before that, the leadership of the State of Qatar

09-28062

launched the Fakhurah campaign, named for the school
shelled by the Israeli army, which raised $110 million
through a telethon.
The situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territories highlights once again the
importance of achieving peace in the Middle East
through the peace process, which requires the utmost
efforts of the international community. The Security
Council must put an end to the double standards and
reluctance with which it has addressed an issue that not
only poses a direct, serious and clear threat to
international peace and security, but also constitutes a
grave humanitarian situation. We therefore demand that
the Council fully shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations.
If the peace process is to succeed, all segments of
the Palestinian population must be involved. It is
unacceptable that some are attempting to divide the
Palestinian people into Hamas and Fatah factions, as
the occupation does not distinguish between the
parties, but affects everyone. No national differences
should serve as a pretext for Israel to continue its
occupation and aggression against unarmed civilians or
to divide the Palestinian people or the Palestinian
territory. Nor should the Palestinian people be
punished for exercising their right to vote in
accordance with the principles of democracy that we
all advocate.
We call on the Palestinians to achieve unity and
reconciliation. In addition, we call on all friendly
nations to show their solidarity with the Palestinian
people in their plight and to support them in their just
struggle to enjoy their legitimate and inalienable rights,
in particular the right to independence and selfdetermination and the right to establish their own State
on their national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Bangladesh.
Ms.
Jahan
(Bangladesh):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate on a subject
that has long been on the Council’s agenda —
regrettably, however, without any tangible progress. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in the Middle East this morning. Against the backdrop
of the humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in the Gaza
Strip, my delegation considers this session to be most
timely and attaches great importance to it.

11

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement. In addition, we would
like to highlight the following points.
At the outset, let me reaffirm Bangladesh’s deep
commitment to the cause of Palestine. I also take this
opportunity to pledge our continued solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their just and legitimate struggle
for self-determination and statehood. Bangladesh
reiterates its long-standing position that the continued
occupation of Palestine is the root cause of violence,
unrest and destabilization in the region. The people of
Palestine are being denied their fundamental right to
self-determination and the right to live freely in their
own land. We believe that the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, is the only sustainable solution to this longlasting conflict.
Bangladesh strongly condemns the attacks in
Gaza that took a bitter turn in the last week of
December 2008, killing and maiming innocent
Palestinians, including women and children, and
resulting in devastating humanitarian and economic
crises. It is alarming to note that not even the
humanitarian workers were spared from the atrocities
and that the universal symbol of unity and peace — the
United Nations compound — is no longer a safe place.
We strongly condemn these heinous actions, which are
blatant violations of international law. Bangladesh
condemns Israel’s ongoing illegal settlement activity in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which further
undermines the Palestinian territory’s unity and
contiguity. We express our grave concern at Israel’s
plan to build a museum on the site of an ancient and
historic Islamic cemetery and urge its immediate
reversal.
Bangladesh stresses the need to conduct a
thorough investigation of the heinous crimes and
violations committed in the Gaza Strip and hopes that
follow-up action will take place immediately thereafter
so that the perpetrators of the crime can be brought to
justice. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s dispatch
of a Board of Inquiry to conduct necessary
investigation in the Gaza Strip and expect that the
Board’s findings will be followed up without delay. We
also expect that the fact-finding mission called for by
the Human Rights Council will be sent immediately.

12

All concerned must comply with Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). The United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, must undertake
necessary measures to ensure the full and effective
implementation of that resolution. Border crossings
should be opened forthwith and humanitarian workers
must be guaranteed full and secure access to Gaza.
It is our belief that, under the continuous defiance
and blatant disregard demonstrated by the occupying
Power of the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law, all concerned, including the Security
Council and the international community at large must
make every effort to oblige Israel to comply with
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the Road Map.
While we are outraged by the brutal suppression
of the Palestinian people by the Israeli forces, we are
also frustrated at the factional divisions among the
Palestinian people. Such a lack of unity gives the
wrong impression and adds fuel to the fire, thus
making peace ever more elusive. We believe that unity
among the Palestinians is essential in their pursuit of
their just cause.
Bangladesh firmly believes that a comprehensive
and just resolution of the Palestinian problem is the
key to peace in the entire Middle East. The relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Middle East Road Map remain the guiding
principles in this regard. Bangladesh hopes that the
international community, particularly the permanent
members of the Security Council, will no longer shy
away from mustering the necessary political will to
achieve the much-aspired-to peace in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Paul Badji, Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Badji (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir,
allow me to congratulate Libya, a brotherly country to
Senegal, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. You have our
every wish for success. I also wish to express
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Yukio
Takasu, Permanent Representative of Japan, on the
exemplary manner in which he steered the work of the
Council in February.

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

While the massive Israeli assault and the shelling
of the Gaza Strip came to an end some two months
ago, the Palestinian people still cannot resume their
normal lives. We know that more than 1,400
Palestinians, many of them innocent civilians, were
killed. We also know that the destruction of homes,
farms and infrastructure has been so immense that
basic reconstruction will take years and billions of
dollars.
What is most shocking is not only the brutality
with which the Israeli army undertook its operations in
Gaza, but also its soldiers’ gross disregard for human
life. Indeed, recent accounts by Israeli soldiers now
make it clear that there was, in their words, “unbridled
contempt for and forcefulness against the Palestinians”.
As was reported in Haaretz, an Israeli squad leader
said that most of the men under his command felt that
the lives of Palestinians were “far, far less important
than the lives of our soldiers”. Danny Zamir, head of
the Yitzhak Rabin pre-military programme, was quoted
by Reuters as saying that the soldiers who had
participated in the Gaza operation had also “talked
about unwarranted fire on Palestinian civilians”.
Israel’s decision to conduct an investigation into
the soldiers’ accounts is welcome but, sadly, will do
little to relieve the horrendous suffering endured by the
Gazans and will not bring the many innocent civilian
victims back to life. Our Committee supports the
investigative missions established by the SecretaryGeneral, the Human Rights Council and the League of
Arab States, and welcomes similar efforts by a number
of international, Palestinian and Israeli nongovernmental organizations. We intend to devote one
of the international meetings planned for this year to
the issue of upholding international humanitarian law
and, in that regard, will pay close attention to the
results of the ongoing investigations.
Our
Committee
highly
appreciates
the
international efforts to assist the Palestinian people in
the economic and humanitarian areas. The international
donor community demonstrated its readiness and
generosity at the International Conference in Support
of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of
Gaza, held at Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March, by pledging
some $4.5 billion to jump-start the immense and urgent
task of rebuilding the Gaza Strip. The Committee urges
the early fulfilment of these pledges in order to come
to the assistance of the Palestinian people in Gaza.

09-28062

The Committee also commends the outstanding
work of United Nations personnel on the ground, first
and foremost the staff of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in Gaza, but also their colleagues from other
specialized agencies striving to restore the fabric of life
of the thousands of Palestinians affected by the war.
For its part, our Committee recently held the
United Nations Seminar on Assistance to the
Palestinian People in Cairo on 10 and 11 March,
contributing to the wider international discourse on
ways of streamlining and coordinating efforts towards
recovery and reconstruction in the Gaza Strip.
While in Cairo, the Committee delegation paid a
visit to the Palestine hospital to bear witness to the
human toll of the Gaza assault. in a number of highly
emotional and heartbreaking encounters with wounded
Gazans — mostly children and young people — we
were horrified by the severity of their injuries and
shocked by the accounts, both from the patients
themselves and from the medical personnel, that a
number of these cases, for unknown reasons, did not
respond to the customary treatment protocols. This, in
our view, is something that the international
community and the Security Council should very
seriously look into. This morning’s account by my
colleague the representative of Palestine was very
much to the point as we stress the responsibility of the
international community regarding this issue, which we
view as extremely serious.
Our Committee is deeply grateful to the
Government of Egypt for its determined support it
provides to the Palestinian people by promoting
international relief and reconstruction efforts for Gaza,
facilitating the much-needed ceasefire and prisoner
exchange and sponsoring talks on Palestinian national
reconciliation.
Our outrage about the assault on Gaza will not
overshadow the Committee’s serious concern about the
situation in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Israel’s
ongoing and planned expansion of settlements,
demolitions of Palestinian houses, land confiscations,
construction of the wall on Palestinian land and
arbitrary closures continue. We call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to halt all illegal policies and
practices throughout the Palestinian territory. It should
immediately lift the siege on the Gaza Strip and allow
uninterrupted humanitarian assistance to enter. We call

13

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

on both sides to urgently cease all acts of violence,
exercise the utmost restraint and agree on a sustainable
ceasefire.
The
Committee
stresses
the
permanent
responsibility of the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, towards the question of Palestine
until it is resolved in all its aspects in accordance with
international law. We urge the parties to resume
negotiations on permanent status, leading to the
establishment of a sovereign and viable Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders and living side by side
with Israel in peace and security. The relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative
remain the legitimate foundation for a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to begin,
Mr. President, by extending the appreciation of our
delegation to you for convening this pertinent and
timely meeting on such an important subject. I wish
also to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his important briefing.
My delegation would like to offer due recognition
to the recent International Conference in Support of the
Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza,
held in Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March 2009, at which
some $4.5 billion was pledged by members of the
international community. Indonesia is encouraged by
the determined commitment of the members of the
international community to make a significant
contribution to the cause of reconstruction and
rehabilitation in the Gaza Strip. The scale of the
devastation in the Gaza Strip and the urgency of the
needs of the Palestinian people and Palestinian
institutions simply cannot wait.
We welcome the 12 February decision of the
Secretary-General to set up a Board of Inquiry charged
with investigating specific incidents concerning United
Nations premises or United Nations operations during
the Israeli military attack on the Gaza Strip between
27 December 2008 and 19 January 2009. My
delegation looks forward to the wide distribution of the
report of the Board, once it has been completed.
Indonesia is of the view that, in addition to the
Board of Inquiry, which has an understandably limited

14

mandate, an independent commission should be
established with the mandate to look into possible
crimes against humanity committed during the Israeli
military assault and to bring the perpetrators to justice.
While we await that investigation, it is important
to draw fresh attention to the horrendous humanitarian
challenge existing in Gaza, which cries out for our
emphatic response. Regrettably, the level of assistance
being allowed into the Strip by Israel falls far short of
expectations, given the needs of the people. This
situation is being complicated by the lengthy clearance
procedures for aid workers, as well as by a variety of
items having been banned by Israel. We call on Israel
to grant unrestricted humanitarian assistance to all
Palestinians who need it. The blockade should be lifted
immediately and unconditionally, to permit the
movement of people and goods.
Let me also take this opportunity to reiterate once
again our outrage at the continuation of Israeli
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory.
With the construction of settlements in the West Bank
having nearly doubled since 2007, and the Israeliauthority-backed initiative of carrying out new
construction in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the prospects for the two-State solution are
steadily declining.
As the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories continues and as Israeli settlers keep
encroaching further into the territories, Palestinians
will watch their land claims disintegrate before their
eyes, making a viable Palestinian State very difficult to
achieve.
Israel’s settlement policies and practices, which
are aimed at altering the demographic composition,
physical character and status of the Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, are nothing but a
blatant violation of international law. The transfer of
civilians to occupied areas, whether or not in
settlements that are under military control, is contrary
to the sixth paragraph of article 49 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which clearly states that “The
Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of
its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies.” Furthermore, settlement activities are also
in contradiction with the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter. As
such, they contravene the commitment of Israel to be

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

faithful to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
If Israel has a genuine commitment to peace, it
must stop all settlement construction, expansion and
planning in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built therein, in compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
In 1980, through its resolution 465 (1980), the
Council called on Israel to “dismantle the existing
settlements and in particular to cease, on an urgent
basis, the establishment, construction and planning of
settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem” (resolution 465 (1980), para. 6).
We believe that the Council could take a similar step
by pronouncing itself collectively, and with a single
voice, to once again urgently demand that Israel
dismantle the existing settlements and cease the
construction and planning of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
We would also like to underline the importance of
inter-Palestinian dialogue and reconciliation. In that
regard, we commend Egypt for hosting the interPalestinian dialogue. Indonesia wishes to encourage
the Palestinian parties to ensure that their national
reconciliation talks become an unqualified success. As
we have stated in the past, Palestinians have much to
gain by coming together. A unified platform will grant
them the opportunity to negotiate the future from a
position of strength and to meet their objectives. We
encourage them to seize that historic opportunity.
Our commitment to an independent, viable and
democratic Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security with its neighbours, is absolute. A just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
based on the relevant resolutions of the Council, must
prevail. For its part, the Security Council, in
shouldering its Charter-mandated responsibilities,
must, and indeed can, exert a positive influence on the
Middle East peace process.
The President (spoke in Arabic); I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my country wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
a topic that concerns all States Members of the
Organization. My country would also like to align

09-28062

itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Without prejudice to that, in its national capacity,
my delegation wishes to reiterate its great concern at
the serious humanitarian and security situation to
which the Palestinian civilian population finds itself
subjected as a direct result of the occupation of
Palestinian territory by Israel, the blockade on the
provision of humanitarian assistance, food, medicine,
fuel and construction materials, the widespread
destruction of public and private infrastructure in
Palestine and the ongoing military aggression that
continues to raise the toll of thousands of dead and
wounded Palestinian civilians, including innocent
women and children.
In that regard, on behalf of the President of the
Republic, Rafael Correa, I wish to reiterate the
solidarity of the Government and people of Ecuador
with all innocent victims of the ongoing Israeli
aggression. At the same time, I would like to make an
urgent appeal for an immediate end to the hostilities, a
solution to the humanitarian crisis, resolute
international economic support to improve the grave
living conditions of the affected population and, in
particular, a resumed search for a definitive solution
and lasting peace in the region, in accordance with all
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.
As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Ecuador is an advocate for the peaceful settlement of
international disputes and conflicts and emphatically
rejects the threat or the use of force as a means to
resolve them. Ecuador therefore believes that any
comprehensive solution that makes it possible to
achieve and preserve lasting peace in the Middle East
must be a political rather than a military one. It must
also include the strictest respect for international law,
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Above all, it must include an
enduring commitment to non-aggression and
recognition that includes the withdrawal of Israel from
the territories occupied since 1967 and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
To achieve that, my country believes that —
without prejudice to the responsibilities of the Security
Council established in the United Nations Charter —

15

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

there are a number of legal alternatives in other bodies
of the international system that could enable the
international community as a whole to ensure that
justice is done, thereby effectively responding to the
urgent appeal of the Palestinian people and, at the same
time, paving the way for the restoration of lasting
peace and security in the Middle East.
Clearly, that effort must complement other
processes that are under way. In particular, we would
like to refer to the one recently established by the
Human Rights Council to investigate human rights
violations perpetrated during the latest attacks on the
Gaza Strip at the start of this year. We look forward
with great interest and anticipation to the steps to be
taken and the handling of that matter by the Human
Rights Council, including the special mission that it
has requested.
In all those efforts, my country is ready to extend
its support and cooperation in developing any initiative
aimed at consolidating a lasting peace that would
benefit not only the peoples of Palestine and Israel but
those of the whole region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. We align
ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf on the Non-Aligned
Movement.
We had hoped that this meeting could have been
held much earlier, closer to when the guns fell silent
over Gaza. With our eyes wide open and fresh
memories of the devastation wrought in the wake of
the Israeli Operation Cast Lead, our proceedings would
have more vividly captured the vast sense of outrage
and disappointment that many around the world had
expressed for our collective inability to stop the
unnecessary killings, injuries and destruction. More so,
the prospect for peace in the Middle East was slipping
away very fast.
Nonetheless, the convening of this meeting is still
timely, albeit two months after the tragedy. It would
seem that the world has moved on; or has it? Maybe
the world has, but definitely not the Palestinian
question. International efforts are afoot to try to rebuild
Gaza. Earlier this month, $4.5 billion was pledged at a

16

conference in Sharm el-Sheikh to reconstruct Gaza.
That is an effort, among few others, that we commend
and applaud, as that contribution will help the
survivors to pick up the pieces of their lives shattered
by that war.
It seems strange, however, from the perspective
of a layman, for someone else to be footing the bill, so
to speak, when it is clear who the perpetrator was that
caused all that damage and destruction and got off
scot-free. Definitely, questions are being raised as to
who caused the killing, destruction and maiming of the
families who lived in their homes. Where are the
perpetrators of those crimes? Why are they not being
brought to justice? Is there no recourse to take action
against those perpetrators, including prosecuting them
for war crimes and crimes against humanity? Is there
not enough evidence to bring them to justice? My
delegation believes that there is.
Recent action by the International Criminal Court
shows us that there is recourse in that direction.
Evidence, including testimonies and accounts by Israeli
soldiers that war crimes were indeed committed, is
beginning to surface.
We await the findings of the Board of Inquiry set
up by the Secretary-General to look into incidents
involving attacks by Israel on United Nations premises
and staff, and we are quite confident about what the
outcome will be. Indeed, we welcome the setting up of
the Board of Inquiry, but we would have expected it to
expand its mandate to include more than just United
Nations premises and staff. There should be no
distinction between attacks on United Nations premises
and staff and attacks on Palestinian civilians and their
homes, as they are both clear violations of international
law. The Council should consider all the evidence,
including the Board of Inquiry’s report, with due
seriousness and articulate its position on this issue.
We urge the Council not to remain silent on these
violations but to act appropriately. We are fearful that
inaction on the part of the Council on this matter would
signal that it condones these actions and, worse still,
justify criminality. Malaysia has called for the
establishment of a war crimes tribunal to investigate
and prosecute those who committed war crimes during
the Gaza war. There have been increasing calls towards
this end, including by civil society.
By not taking steps to investigate and prosecute
war criminals, we have failed to set the record straight

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

on the events that transpired during Operation Cast
Lead. It is our moral obligation to the survivors to give
them at least a sense of closure and succour for their
plight. If we do not do that, we risk seeing another
generation of Palestinians who have witnessed at close
quarters the death of their loved ones become even
more radicalized.
We should recall that, notwithstanding the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
the ceasefire which hangs over Gaza was taken
unilaterally. There is no guarantee that Israel will not
launch another strike, as it has done time and time
again, such as in Lebanon in 2006. The establishment
of a war crimes tribunal, inter alia, represents a clear
preventive measure against the recurrence of such
wanton acts.
Some have argued that the violence on Gaza was
self-inflicted. They argued that Israel’s attack was
justified as it was a response to the rockets fired into
towns in southern Israel. My delegation could agree
that the war brought on Gaza was not an isolated event
but in fact was part of the siege that at that time had
lasted 18 months — a siege that has choked Gaza, an
open prison to begin with, and cut it off from the
outside world. Under this siege, the people in Gaza are
forced to cope with the challenges of a humanitarian
crisis. For any people, indeed, living under such
circumstances would necessarily breed a sense of
desperation and despondency for the future. The siege
is still in place today and is curtailing the flow of
humanitarian aid that is even more necessary now to
rebuild Gaza.
In no way does my delegation condone violence,
but if some, even among Council members, can find it
in themselves to justify the right of Israel to defend
itself, can the Palestinians not also invoke this same
right, since it is they who have borne the brunt of more
than 40 years of the Occupation?
We should continue to focus on the question of
the occupation and on abolishing it, by which the
Council can contribute to building real security for the
region. We should recall that it is the Security Council
that adopted resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
which lay out the framework for the realization of
peace in the Middle East. Israel must cease its policy
of annexation of Palestinian lands and its further
appropriation of such lands. There must also be a just
solution to the Palestinian refugee problem.

09-28062

In this regard, we should also recognize that the
Arab countries, through the Arab Peace Initiative, have
offered peace and normalized relations with Israel
along the lines of the same terms struck in those
resolutions. However, my delegation fears that this
offer may not remain on the table indefinitely if there
is no sincere overture from Israel to achieve peace on
equal terms with its neighbours.
Indeed, the actions by the Israelis in no way
suggest that they are moving towards finding a
peaceful settlement. On the contrary, their actions are
hurting the Middle East peace process by making it
even harder to realize the vision of a two-State
solution — of a viable, territorially contiguous,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.
The separation wall continues to snake through
the West Bank. Its construction complements the
intricate system of roadblocks, checkpoints and other
barriers that hinder Palestinian movement and prevent
Palestinians from engaging in normal economic
activities. Illegal settlements continue to be built and
expanded in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. To
make way for these settlements, Palestinians are forced
to abandon their homes by various means including
so-called legal means. Palestinians are subject to heavy
fines by the Israeli authorities if they fail to comply,
which gives rise to reports of Palestinians being forced
to tear down their own homes with their own hands.
These illegal settlements also form the base from
which illegal settlers launch so much violence and
aggression upon Palestinians. The construction and
expansion of illegal settlements, which are in clear
contravention of Security Council resolutions and, in
particular, in violation of the recent understanding
reached, with United States mediation, at the Annapolis
Peace Conference in November 2007, are a major
cause of the failure of the Middle East peace process.
Israel must put a stop to these illegal settlements and
return this land to its rightful Palestinian owners.
The task for the Council is nothing less than
formidable. It is to rebuild the destroyed hope for
peace among Palestinians, Israelis and the inhabitants
of the wider Middle East, which would have
reverberations for the state of international peace and
security. It is a task that is even more difficult
considering the present situation in Israel and

17

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

Palestine. To prod the Middle East peace process
forward, the Security Council has no choice but to
force Israel to comply fully with the Council’s
resolutions. My delegation also hopes that intraPalestinian talks will find a successful conclusion in
which we can see a common people come to unity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
public debate. I should also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.
As is evident from today’s discussion, two
months after Israel’s savage assault on Gaza, the
situation remains troubling in the highest degree, both
in the Gaza Strip and throughout the Palestinian
territories. Despite the repeated appeals of the
international community to lift it, the intolerable
blockade of Gaza remains in place, illegal Israeli
practices continue with impunity throughout the
Palestinian territories, including the construction of
settlement, and the peace process is deadlocked.
Algeria firmly condemns the continued Israeli
military occupation of the Palestinian territory in
violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions. It expresses its concern with regard to the
negative repercussions on the future of the peace
process as a result of Israel’s determination to scuttle
all diplomatic efforts aimed at bringing about
conditions that could restart negotiations.
In order to confront the occupying Power’s
outlaw behaviour and its headlong rush to repeatedly
evade obligations placed upon it by the international
community, Algeria calls for unity in the Palestinian
ranks and calls upon the international community to
lend the support necessary to achieve this prime
objective. Algeria supports ongoing efforts at intraPalestinian reconciliation, with the welcome mediation
of Egypt. We welcome the support and constructive
role played here by States of the region, which have
placed within reach the formation of a government of
national unity under the Palestinian Authority for the
sole benefit of the Palestinian people and their cause.
The Israeli occupier has no illusions about the
importance of this strategic objective and continues to
add obstacles and demands aimed at undermining these
efforts, whose achievement which would mark the

18

beginning of the reconstruction of Gaza and the
moment of truth with regard to Israel’s intentions
regarding the peace process. In this regard, the
remarkable generosity shown at the donor conference
for the reconstruction of Gaza, which Algeria joined,
clearly illustrates Israel’s isolation on the international
stage.
Algeria is determined to remind the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, of
their obligation to complete all investigations of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and flagrant violations
of international law and international humanitarian law
of which Israel is guilty in Gaza, so that serious
measures may be taken to bring the perpetrators to
justice. An end must be put to the impunity that Israel
has displayed for too long at the cost of sacrificing all
efforts to achieve peace in the region.
Finally, Algeria would express its unwavering
support for Syria and Lebanon in their efforts to
recover their legitimate national rights and the territory
of which they have been despoiled by the Israeli
occupying force. We remain committed to a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict
based on international law and the principles defined
by the Madrid Conference and by the Arab Peace
Initiative.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mauritania.
Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to express my deep
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. I also take this opportunity to
welcome and congratulate you on assuming your
position as President of the Security Council for this
month. My delegation also thanks Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
valuable briefing.
The Security Council is meeting today to
consider the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. The meeting is taking place at a
time when tension continues to spread throughout the
area due to the disastrous effects of the destructive
Israeli war machine in the Gaza Strip including
immense destruction that did not spare even United
Nations facilities. Our Government therefore reiterates
the need for the international community, represented
by the Security Council as the organ charged with
maintaining international peace and security, to find a

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

just solution for the Palestinian people that guarantees
their right to self-determination and to establish an
independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, so
they may live side by side in peace and security with
the State of Israel. My Government also emphasizes
the need for the international community to work as
soon as possible to compel Israel to immediately halt
its ongoing illegal settlement activities in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, which seriously
threaten the demographic composition and geographic
integrity of the Holy City. The international community
must also urge Israel to end the blockade of the Gaza
Strip and implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 1860 (2009), which
calls, inter alia, for the unimpeded provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance, including food,
fuel and medical treatment, to citizens throughout
Gaza, for the opening of humanitarian corridors and for
international efforts to alleviate the humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza.
Our Government also notes with satisfaction the
results of the Sharm el-Sheikh donor conference and
calls upon the parties to expedite the delivery of
assistance to the Palestinian people, especially in Gaza,
and to begin reconstruction as soon as possible. We
also welcome the results of the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation talks and look forward to the
establishment, as soon as possible, of a national unity
Government that responds to the aspirations of the
Palestinian people.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to
emphasize that any solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict
cannot be achieved without the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and without the return of all of the
territories occupied in 1967 including the Syrian
Golan, the Lebanese Sheba’a farms and the Lebanese
part of Ghajar village. That can only happen through
Israel’s compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We join others in
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. We also welcome
the opportunity to participate and share our views on
the issue before the Security Council today. We thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for

09-28062

Political Affairs, for his briefing this morning. South
Africa aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The current multifaceted crisis in the Middle East
should be understood in the context of the ongoing
Israeli military occupation of Palestinian and other
Arab territories, which dates back to 1967, and the
associated denial of the right to self-determination of
the Palestinian people. Indeed, Israel’s long track
record of disregarding international law and the failure
of the Security Council to take any meaningful action
in response is the key contributing factor to the lack of
progress in the peace process.
It is essential to the maintenance of international
peace and security that all parties fully respect and
meet their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law, and that the Security Council discharge its
mandate under the United Nations Charter without
selectivity or double standards.
A few months have passed since Israel’s most
deadly attack on Gaza since the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
South Africa wishes to stress the importance of an
independent investigation of the events in Gaza and of
full accountability for any violations of international
law by whomsoever they were committed. In this
regard, we welcome the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to establish and dispatch a Board of Inquiry to
Gaza. We expect that the Board’s report will be
presented to the General Assembly and the Security
Council so that the necessary follow-up actions can be
taken.
While the latest military incursion has come to an
end, we should not forget the consequences of the
disproportionate and indiscriminate attacks on one of
the most heavily populated areas in the world, where
the civilian population was denied any means of
escaping the onslaught by land, air or sea. It is reported
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs that 1,455 Palestinians were killed and around
5,000 were injured and that most of the victims were
innocent civilians, including women and 431 children.
An entire civilian population is traumatized and
impoverished. Most of the Gaza infrastructure has been
destroyed, including a large number of schools, clinics
and hospitals. Israel bears full responsibility for
compensating the Palestinian people for its actions.

19

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

However, the international community must also take
the lead in efforts to rebuild Gaza.
For its part, the South African Government has
decided to contribute 1 million rand to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) emergency flash
appeal fund. This contribution is designed to
supplement the annual contribution to UNRWA and
other ongoing South African assistance programmes to
Palestine, including its contribution to the Palestinian
capacity-building initiative under the aegis of the New
Asian-African Strategic Partnership. Also, South
African civil society is actively assisting the
Palestinian people through, inter alia, the provision of
medical assistance.
South Africa condemns the continuing Israeli
blockade of Gaza and the ongoing construction and
expansion of illegal settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. The continuing construction of the
separation wall and the intensified home demolition
programmes that we are currently witnessing in East
Jerusalem constitute serious violations of international
law, as definitively clarified in the 9 July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
Those activities also undermine all efforts to achieve
peace between the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.
We also call on the Palestinians to stop firing
Qassam rockets into Israel. The only lesson that we
have been able to learn from those retaliatory actions
over the past decades is that they merely provide cover
for more violence to be perpetuated against the
innocent Palestinian people. We also call upon the
Palestinian parties not to be diverted from their
objective of forming a new unity Government. In that
regard, we support Egypt in its efforts aimed at
assisting the Palestinian parties to achieve national
reconciliation.
South Africa calls upon the parties to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict to fully respect international law,
and on the Security Council to discharge its Chartermandated responsibilities. South Africa continues to
support a negotiated and peaceful solution to the
conflict on the basis of the principle of land for peace,
as expressed in international resolutions and initiatives
such as resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515
(2003) and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, we look forward to a day when the
bloodshed ends and two States, Palestine and Israel,

20

are able to coexist in peace and security, within
internationally recognized borders. This vision of a
two-State solution, as endorsed by the Security Council
in resolution 1397 (2002), must underpin any
permanent settlement of this conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr.
Wetland
(Norway):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to speak. Nine weeks
ago, the fighting in Gaza came to an end, after the
parties each declared unilateral ceasefires. But for the
battle-scarred civilian population of Gaza, there has
been little improvement. The fragile ceasefires are
frequently violated by both sides, and the Israeli
embargo remains largely intact. A political solution to
the conflict — as opposed to military containment —
seems as elusive as ever.
Israeli military operations brought massive
suffering and large-scale destruction to the civilian
infrastructure in Gaza. But thus far very little has been
rebuilt, and the humanitarian situation remains grave.
Many families are still homeless and exposed to the
cold and the rain. Israel severely restricts the import of
basic building materials, such as cement, wood and
glass. Food, medicine and fuel are still in short supply.
We are concerned that Israel’s restrictions on cash
transfers to Gaza will impede the essential work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), such as its
school programme that feeds 200,000 children.
We recognize Israel’s security concerns, but
Israel must honour its obligation under international
humanitarian law and open its border crossings to
Gaza. We welcome the recent Israeli cabinet decision
to allow all food items into Gaza, and we look forward
to the full implementation of this decision.
The Sharm el-Sheikh conference brought the
international community together in a show of support
for the Palestinian people. Norway stands by its
pledges and is contributing 760 million Norwegian
kroner, which is equivalent to $120 million, towards
the Palestinian people this year. Without continued
budget support to the Palestinian Authority, 77,000
public servants providing basic social services will not
receive their salaries. We, the international community,
must set aside our differences. Financial and political
support for the Palestinians must be directed through
existing mechanisms and towards the Palestinian

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

Authority. The Security Council has given the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, which Norway
chairs, a central role in alleviating the situation in
Gaza. Norway will in the near future convene a
meeting of the Committee, in close consultation with
the parties.
The division among Palestinians is a tragedy. The
civilian population of Gaza has paid a high price for
this division. We support Egypt’s efforts to facilitate
Palestinian reconciliation and pave the way for an
interim Government. The Palestinian people, both in
Gaza and the West Bank, deserve a democratic and
peaceful Government. At the same time, we warn
against placing impossible hurdles to political
progress. We must not let the perfect become the
enemy of the good. Concerted efforts by the countries
in the region and the international community as a
whole are necessary to bring the peace process
forward.
While the situation in Gaza remains grave, we
must not lose sight of the situation in the rest of the
Palestinian territory. In violation of the commitments it
made, Israel has continued to expand settlements in the
West Bank. We are equally concerned by the continued
destruction of Palestinian houses and evictions of
Palestinian families. Settlements have become an alltoo-familiar theme in this Council, but it must be said
again that Israeli settlements and closures strangle the
Palestinian economy and undermine the prospects for a
viable Palestinian State.
Every day that passes without improvement in the
lives of the civilian population of Gaza adds to the
failure of the parties and, I regret to say, to our
collective failure to end the conflict and bring peace to
the region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open debate at this crucial juncture. I also
take
this
opportunity
to
congratulate
you,
Mr. Ambassador, on your new assignment as the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations and to wish you
every success.

09-28062

As mentioned by many speakers who took the
floor before me, during the period under review, as
throughout the past six decades, the Israeli regime has
continued its expansionist and destructive policies and
practices and its illegal and colonization measures
against the Palestinian people. It has also persisted in
its aggressive and expansionist policies towards
Lebanon and the occupied Syrian Golan. It continues
to violate the most basic principles of international law,
international humanitarian and human rights law and
the United Nations Charter, and persists in its defiance
of numerous resolutions of different United Nations
bodies, including this Council.
Palestinian civilians continue to be under
constant Israeli threat and attacks. The construction of
the illegal apartheid wall is continuing unabated
despite the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice and in spite of the strong condemnation
coming from the international community. Illegal
settlements are expanding much faster than in the past,
and Palestinian lives and livelihoods continue to be
shattered. More and more Palestinian homes are
demolished, including those located in refugee camps,
as a result of the widest campaign in the past 40 years
for the demolition by the Israeli regime of Palestinian
homes in the occupied Palestinian territories. This
move is undoubtedly orchestrated to illegally alter the
demographic composition and character of Palestinian
territories, particularly Al-Quds Al-Sharif and its
surrounding areas.
The international community has not forgotten,
nor will it ever forget, the Israeli atrocities in the Gaza
Strip. Every day, new faces of this regime’s war
crimes, and of crimes against humanity perpetrated
against the innocent Palestinians during its aggression
against the Gaza Strip, are revealed and new
revelations in this regard emerge, causing more and
more outrage across the globe. The recent reports by
United Nations human rights rapporteurs, including
that prepared by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
clearly indicate and illustrate some aspects of the
Israeli crimes against innocent Palestinians in the Gaza
Strip. Those reports attest to the appalling fact that, in
the Zionist regime’s aggression against Gaza, civilian
targets, particularly homes and their occupants, basic
infrastructure, schools, medical facilities and innocent
civilians, including women and children, have been
callously and deliberately targeted.

21

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

There are many shocking accounts of Israeli
crimes contained in those reports. For example, it is
mentioned that in one case, among many other similar
cases,
“Israeli soldiers shot a father after ordering him
out of his house and then opened fire into the
room where the rest of the family was sheltering,
wounding the mother and three brothers and
killing a fourth.”
Those reports cite yet another inhumane practice
that is in violation of the most basic principles of
international humanitarian and human rights law:
Israeli soldiers used children as human shields. It is
mentioned in these reports that for instance,
“on January 15, at Tal al Hawa, south-west of
Gaza City, Israeli soldiers forced an 11-year-old
boy to walk in front of them for several hours as
they moved through the town, even after they had
been shot at”.
Israeli soldiers are also confessing to the crimes
they have committed against the Palestinian people
during their aggression on Gaza. An Israeli commander
who was present during the aggression against Gaza
just recently told various international news agencies,
“If you want to know whether I think that we killed
innocents, the answer is unequivocally yes”.
The news reports regarding the tee shirt designs
made for Israeli soldiers that encouraged them to shoot
children and pregnant Palestinian mothers are another
indication of the criminal policies and practices of the
said regime, as well as of the depths of its atrocities in
its aggression against the Gaza Strip. Appalling
captions, such as “1 shot, 2 kills” printed on a tee shirt
depicting a pregnant Palestinian, or the shocking
caption of “The smaller, the harder” on another tee
shirt depicting a child, are indicative of the atrocious
and criminal nature of the Israeli regime’s policies and
practices in its aggression against the Palestinians and
other Arab peoples in the region.
There is now more than enough evidence for the
international judicial mechanism to move expeditiously
to bring Israeli war criminals to justice. The calls from
international public opinion to not allow these crimes
to go unpunished should be heard and heeded. The
Security Council has an important responsibility to
discharge in that regard.

22

We thank the Secretary-General for his efforts in
establishing a Board of Inquiry and dispatching it to
Gaza, as well as for his commitment to report back to
the Security Council on the findings of the Board. We
await that report and expect that more concerted steps
will be taken by the United Nations to hold the Israeli
war criminals accountable for their atrocities in Gaza.
The credibility of the United Nations is at stake.
International public opinion is closely watching how
the Security Council, and the United Nations in
general, will deal with these crimes.
As several human rights mandate-holders have
underlined in their reports recently, the suffering and
torment of the Palestinian people caused by the
inhuman Israeli blockade should be ended immediately.
The Israeli regime should be forced to end the
crippling blockade on Gaza and allow immediate and
unimpeded access by the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip
to humanitarian assistance, including food, medical
supplies, fuel and construction materials. We hope that
the Security Council will take meaningful steps to
compel the regime to end its blockade, which has
brought about an unprecedented humanitarian crisis for
the innocent Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip.
I wish to conclude by stressing that my
delegation rejects the unfounded allegations made
against the Islamic Republic of Iran by the
representative of the Zionist regime in today’s meeting
of the Council. Nothing could be more preposterous
than to hear the representative of a regime that has no
respect for the most basic standards of humanity and
decency, with its known record of State terrorism and
its possession of a nuclear arsenal, levelling baseless
allegations against others.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): It is a pleasure for me to welcome you,
Mr. President, a brother representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, a country that is a friend of
Nicaragua, and to see you leading this debate. Without
a doubt, your experience and knowledge will
contribute to the success of this debate. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for the
report he gave us this morning.
As stated by Dr. Kevin Cahill, Chief Adviser for
Humanitarian Affairs of the President of the General

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

Assembly and his special envoy on the situation in
Gaza,
“Seeing Gaza in February 2009, shortly after the
Israeli invasion, reminds me of engravings of
Dante’s Inferno. The level of destruction recalled
images from Dresden or Hiroshima at the end of
the Second World War. There were areas in the
northern Gaza Strip in which not a single
structure was left standing.”
The primary responsibility for resolving the
Palestinian problem lies with the United Nations, and
specifically with the Security Council, which has
simply not acted in conformity with its mandate under
the Charter of the United Nations. Why was the
Security Council unable to act and call for a ceasefire
in the course of 22 days of aggression, knowing that
this was not a mere skirmish but rather a total massacre
against the Palestinian people? Is there any other
example in today’s world of an invading occupying
country being able to settle more than half a million
colonists on the territory of the occupied country
without being sanctioned even once by society, as
represented in the United Nations? We want to
condemn and to emphasize the illegality of these
actions, which are tantamount to a de facto annexation
that undermines the integrity, contiguity, viability and
unity of the Palestinian territory, thereby jeopardizing
the very establishment of a State.
What is worse, however, is that the situation
continues to be the same as when Dr. Cahill witnessed
it. Rebuilding has not yet begun, because Israel will
not allow the import of steel, cement or glass, among
other building materials. The people of Gaza have
lived under hostile occupation for more than four
decades. In recent years, there has been a continuous
reduction in all imports and exports, which has served
to slowly strangle the economy. That has led to one of
the highest rates of unemployment and among the
lowest levels of nutrition in the developing world.
Even the import of lentils, pasta and tomato juice has
been restricted, based on the incomprehensible logic
that such items could pose a threat to the security of
Israel.
Military controls have been imposed through
grinding force and a level of disregard that clearly
illustrates the intention to crush the human dignity of
the proud and heroic Palestinian people. The daily
humiliation at border crossings and in the course of

09-28062

constant incursions by Israeli soldiers, as well as the
herding together of people, reveal a consistent and
generalized pattern on the part of the occupation. The
Council must demand that all crossing points be
opened and that people and goods be allowed free
access. In particular, the Council must demand
humanitarian access to the Palestinian population,
which has yet to recover at all from the latest
aggression.
In his report to the Human Rights Council,
Mr. Richard Falk, United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the occupied
Palestinian territories, indicated that the number of
dead Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip was six
times as high as the number of heroic combatants
killed. That illustrates that no distinction was made
between civilian and military targets. He also
underscored the fact that Israel also used all sorts of
weapons against densely populated areas, including
aeroplanes, heavy weaponry and even prohibited
weapons. The forced confinement of Gaza’s civilian
population to the zone of conflict during the operation
denied them the option of finding sanctuary. Such a
policy must be viewed as a new type of crime against
humanity. The Rapporteur also stated that people in
Gaza holding foreign passports were allowed to leave
the territory, while Palestinians — including the sick,
disabled, orphaned, elderly and injured — were denied
that option. The Special Rapporteur requested an
in-depth investigation into the abuses committed,
emphasizing the need to draw on the relevant
experiences and rulings of the principal international
courts.
We wish to take this opportunity to request that
the Secretary-General distribute the report containing
the conclusions and recommendations of the Board of
Inquiry be dispatched to Gaza. We have no doubt that
that new report will further inform the international
community about the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and that its recommendations will
be of great importance for future action by the Security
Council and the General Assembly. We also wish to
emphasize the importance of the immediate dispatch of
the Human Rights Council fact-finding mission.
My Government supports the adoption of the
measures necessary to ensure that Israel withdraws
totally and unconditionally from the occupied
territories, that those responsible for Israel’s war
crimes and crimes against humanity against the

23

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian people — including genocide and ethnic
cleansing — are prosecuted, that the peace process is
intensified and that the Palestinian people can exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination on the basis
of the borders prior to 4 June 1967, with East
Jerusalem as their capital.
My Government supports negotiations to achieve
reconciliation among all Palestinian forces and to form
a government of unity and reconciliation whose
representatives can sit down, united and strong, at the
negotiating table with the occupying Power and its
allies. The entire Non-Aligned Movement will stand
with them.
Nicaragua expresses its solidarity with the
Government and the people of Lebanon and calls on
Israel to end the occupation of northern Ghajar and the
adjacent area north of the Blue Line and to avoid any
violation of the sovereignty and independence of
Lebanese territory. We also demand a swift resolution
of the issue of the Shaba’a farms with full respect for
the territorial integrity of Lebanon, in accordance with
resolution 1701 (2006). In addition, we join with others
in demanding, as a matter of humanitarian concern,
that Israel provide maps of the mines that it planted
during its attacks on Lebanon. Thus, we could prevent
many deaths.
My Government also expresses its solidarity with
the people and the Government of Syria and condemns
Israel’s illegal occupation of the Golan Heights. It
should be recalled that any change intended to alter the
physical, legal, demographic or institutional character
of the Golan Heights or any measure to impose Israeli
jurisdiction and administration there is contrary to
international law and null and void.
Accordingly, Nicaragua will continue to support
all measures, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, that will help us to achieve a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East and, in particular, to
ultimately establish a free, sovereign and independent
State of Palestine.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Zoubi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the
sisterly Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current

24

month and to congratulate your predecessor, who
skilfully conducted the work of the Council last month.
My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Palestinian question continues to be at the
core of the conflict in the Middle East, and there
continues to be an urgent need to find a peaceful
solution that will lead to a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace accepted by all parties. There is no
alternative to the two-State solution. All parties must
seriously engage in negotiations targeted at achieving
the only possible solution: an independent Palestinian
State. Peace and stability in the region and for its
peoples can be achieved only through a peaceful
solution based on the two-State vision.
The peace to which Arabs aspire is one based on
the restoration of the Palestinian people’s legitimate
rights, including their right to establish an independent,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State on their
national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative,
which is a basic attempt to address all aspects of the
Israeli-Arab conflict. In that regard, Jordan welcomes
the efforts of the Quartet. We commend the European
Union, the Russian Federation and the United Nations,
including the Security Council, and approve of the
positive moves by the United States Administration in
embarking directly on peace efforts. We also commend
and appreciate the international support for efforts to
find a solution to the problems in the Middle East, and
we hope that it will be reciprocated by all parties
concerned.
Jordan condemns all unilateral measures and
practices that obstruct the peace process, in particular
the settlement activities being carried out in East
Jerusalem. Moreover, the natural growth in the existing
settlements in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and East
Jerusalem constitutes a violation of international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, threatens the negotiations on final status
and runs counter to Israel’s obligations. Such activities
remain an obstacle to the establishment of a viable
Palestinian State.
Israel, the occupying Power, must refrain from
any attempts to change the character of East Jerusalem,
including excavations near the Al-Aqsa mosque, and

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

put an end to its aggressions against Islamic sites,
notably the historic Ma’man Allah cemetery, which
contains the tombs of prominent Arab and Muslim
personages, and to its attempts to deface or eliminate
its Islamic and Arab features and to build a museum
over it. Israel must halt those illegal and sacrilegious
activities and respect Jordan’s special and historical
role in preserving those Muslim holy sites, in
accordance with the provisions of the Jordan-Israel
Peace Treaty.
The Security Council should exert pressure on
Israel to put an immediate end to its aggressions, which
can only increase tension in the region. Israel’s
unilateral and illegal measures, which seek to create
new facts on the ground, to eliminate Jerusalem’s Arab
and Islamic character and alter its legal status,
constitute aggressions against the rights of the
Palestinian people, sacred Muslim shrines and the
Islamic heritage, whose preservation has been called
for by UNESCO. Those measures run counter to all
international norms and resolutions calling on Israel to
maintain the historic sites and religious shrines in
Jerusalem.
Israel must fully lift its blockade on Gaza, open
all crossing points and refrain from obstructing the
efforts of humanitarian relief agencies to meet
humanitarian needs and provide medical treatment. The
humanitarian situation in Gaza remains desperate.
Gaza must be rebuilt, and the devastating effects of the
Israel invasion must be addressed.
My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will seriously and expeditiously consider the report of
the Board of Inquiry established to investigate Israeli
against United Nations facilities in Gaza. Jordan is
fully committed to supporting its Palestinian brothers
and sisters, alleviating their suffering and providing
them with humanitarian assistance through Hashemite
philanthropic agencies. We also stand ready to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
provided by other States and entities. Typically,
between 18 and 24 trucks leave Jordan daily. As of
18 March, a total of 47 convoys, comprising 804
trucks, have left Jordan since the aggression against
Gaza.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Australia.
Mr. Hill (Australia): The Australian Government
remains committed to the Middle East peace process

09-28062

and to the vision of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security. The tragic
events of December and January have underlined yet
again the vital importance of efforts towards Middle
East peace. Australia was deeply saddened by the
recent conflict in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel
and its humanitarian cost. Australia condemns any
ongoing rocket and mortar fire perpetrated by Hamas
as a threat to peace in the region.
We recognize the importance of the Gazan
people’s having access to humanitarian and other
assistance so that rebuilding and reconstruction can
take place, and call on Israel to do all it can to help
increase the flow of humanitarian goods and other
necessary supplies into the Gaza Strip.
Australia believes that the priority for both sides
remains just as much as ever the pursuit of a two-State
solution to the conflict based on the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to a viable State of
their own and Israel’s right to live in peace within
secure borders. It is also essential that members of the
international community lend their support. In this
regard, we recognize and commend efforts, such as the
Arab Peace Initiative, towards a broader Middle East
peace. We also commend the role Egypt has played and
strongly support a durable and fully respected
ceasefire, as called for in resolution 1860 (2009). We
welcome Palestinian reconciliation, which should be
consistent with Quartet principles.
Australia recognizes the vital importance of
recovery and reconstruction efforts and the central role
of the Palestinian Authority in this regard. That is why
Australia was pleased to announce at Sharm el-Sheikh
a contribution of $20 million to assist the efforts of the
Palestinian Authority, with United Nations agencies
and other donors, to meet the recovery and
reconstruction needs of the Palestinian people. This
assistance builds on the $10 million which Australia
had already committed in January for emergency and
humanitarian relief through United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations, and the $45
million provided in 2008. Australia stands ready to
provide whatever further practical assistance we can.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): It is very
unfortunate and deplorable that, two months after the
declaration of unilateral ceasefires, the situation in the

25

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

Gaza Strip is still fragile and a proper ceasefire regime
is yet to be established. Moreover, as we have heard
today, all too many Gazans, most of whom have
nothing to do with the cause of the conflict, are still
suffering from the lack of basic goods and supplies
such as food, nutrition, shelter and proper medical
supplies due to the aftermath of the January conflict.
This unjustifiable misery and the humanitarian
suffering of the population of Gaza must be stopped
immediately.
In this vein, my delegation joins many others that
have spoken before us in urging all parties directly
concerned to work to establish a durable and fully
respected ceasefire agreement at the earliest juncture,
secure unimpeded passage for humanitarian aid to the
suffering people in Gaza, and take all necessary
measures to fully implement resolution 1860 (2009).
The effective provision of international aid and the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip depend on the creation
of a stable environment. In order to enable long-term
development and help people to engage in their
everyday lives, Israel and Palestine must work
diligently for an enduring peace settlement.
Three weeks ago, representatives of 72 countries
and 12 international organizations gathered together at
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, to discuss ways to assist in the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip following its
destruction during the January military conflict. At the
meeting, nearly $5 billion were pledged to aid the early
recovery and reconstruction of the Gaza Strip. The fact
that so many countries congregated and offered to
mobilize so much capital in such a short time clearly
represents our shared desire and hope for enduring
peace and security in the Gaza Strip and the Middle
East.
However, it should be remembered that,
regardless of how many resources are mobilized or
donors committed to pledged contributions, the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip and, more broadly,
long-term economic development in the area cannot be
pursued unless all parties directly concerned
demonstrate strong political will for peace and exercise
restraint. All the assistance of the international
community will be in vain unless substantial progress
is made in the peace process. Those directly concerned
should shoulder the primary responsibility for peace
and reconstruction in the Middle East. With the United
Nations and the international community, Korea stands
ready to provide our support to the peace process

26

between Israel and Palestine and to the reconstruction
and long-term development of the Palestinian
territories.
Since we have a vivid memory of the misery of
war ourselves, Korea promptly provided relief aid to
the Palestine refugees in Gaza through the International
Committee of the Red Cross shortly after the conflict
arose in the Gaza Strip last January. Korea also has the
experience of a nation and community rebuilding from
the destruction of war. We are ready to share this
experience to assist in reconstructing the Gaza Strip
and pursue longer-term economic development in the
Palestinian territories. The Korean Government has
already pledged $15 million in assistance to the
Palestinians in 2009 and 2010, including an additional
$2 million-worth of assistance.
My delegation assures you, Sir, and the Security
Council that Korea will continue to contribute to the
reconstruction and humanitarian relief efforts for the
Gaza Strip and the Palestinian territories.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and your country,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
your initiative to convene this open debate on the very
important issue of the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
Indeed, the Middle East, as the cradle of the three
monotheistic religions, might have served as a true
bridge between the peoples of the world. Regrettably,
however, for several decades it has remained a zone of
tension. Instability in that part of the world naturally
affects all other regions of the planet. Need I recall that
no issue more fully encapsulates all the resentments
prevalent in the region than the Palestinian question?
We believe that the settlement of the problem can
no longer be postponed. The outlines of a peaceful
settlement to the conflict, involving the creation of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State living in
peace and security within secure and recognized
borders alongside the State of Israel, have long been
well defined. It is therefore high time to work to
achieve that noble objective.
In that regard, it is important to ensure the
effective implementation of the relevant resolutions of

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

our Organization, especially those of the Security
Council, including resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January,
which calls for a ceasefire, the lifting of the blockade
against Gaza and the resumption of negotiations with a
view to reaching a comprehensive peace. We call for
the timely resumption of the peace process and
encourage Egypt’s efforts to achieve reconciliation
among the Palestinians.
The situation has become all the more critical as
a result of Israel’s recent aggression against the Gaza
Strip, which not only exacerbated the rift between the
Israeli and Palestinian communities, but also and above
all unleashed a humanitarian disaster in Gaza. We
commend the Secretary-General’s initiative to dispatch
a fact-finding mission to Gaza in order to investigate
war crimes committed by the Israeli army. We also
applaud the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and other
humanitarian organizations, who are doing outstanding
work in the field.
Allow me to reiterate the constant and tireless
support of the people and Government of Mali for the
just and noble cause of the Palestinian people on the
path to comprehensive peace, which we all fervently
desire. Mali remains firmly convinced that, with the
support of the international community and the
solidarity of all peace- and justice-loving peoples, the
valiant people of Palestine will regain their national
rights, especially their right to a sovereign and
independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I, too, would like to
thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing this morning. It
is also a pleasure to see you, Mr. President, presiding
over this meeting.
A lot has been said here today. A lot has been
expressed in terms of a lot of hope and in terms of
what the future holds. I believe that peace is slowly
becoming a word in the world lexicon of diplomacy
that actually means “do nothing”, and that is a very sad
comment on where mankind is headed.
I know for a fact that the Jewish community
faced a horrible diaspora. I read about it in history. As
a historian, the way they were dispersed was abhorrent
to me. As a person who read about the Warsaw ghettos,
who read The Diary of Anne Frank and who enjoyed

09-28062

the great music that they created internationally and the
very strong traditions of culture that they brought to
the Abrahamic religions and communities as their
forerunners, I know that they were in many ways a
model of fortitude. Those who had faced an
Armageddon surely would know better than to create
one.
I read in the press recently the statements of
young, idealistic soldiers of the Israeli army and saw
how they spoke about how a fervour of religious war
was encouraged in them to make them go out and face
the Gaza Strip and what was happening there. It is a
sad day when we play these games that create divisions
in the world.
I know for a fact that Muslims have a long and
old tradition. At one stage, after the very horrible
persecution of the community, when registers were
drawn up in Spain, the Muslim caliphs who at that time
ruled Jerusalem invited the first return of the diaspora
back to Jerusalem. It was the Ottoman caliphs who
reinducted, at a later stage, a member of the
community into the Jerusalem council. This is history. I
believe that to give this a tinge of a holy war, as I read
in the papers today, is a sad, sad statement.
It is an even sadder statement because, in many
ways, as I have said earlier, some of the very strong
leads for civilization come from the Jewish community.
Its travails are a part of history. Who has not read Leon
Uris? Have we not all sympathized with what
happened? Then, if you have faced all this, how can
you inflict such things on others? The one thing that
the various books and various prophecies have
revealed is the enormous fortitude, enormous patience
and enormous caring for the people of God. Are we all
not the children of God? We are.
Therefore, I feel that this is the time to make the
statement that one would expect better. The world
looks upon Israel as a role model in the West. How
many children do we know in homes across America
and Europe who play with little toys that can
sometimes cause immense damage? How many do we
know about who have actually, through an incendiary
device, accidentally killed thousands of people, even in
the city of New York? Yesterday they had a day of
remembrance for many people who died due to a fire.
To retaliate, then, with the might of an empire, with
thousands killed in a reprisal, this is regrettable.

27

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

It is more regrettable because it comes from a
people who should be known in history for their
resilience, their fortitude and their courage. Those
beliefs do not make you weak, they make you strong.
But strength does not come through dominating others.
That is why a little, defiant David shot the sling that
killed Goliath. The issue was, however, that he
remained a personable person and remembered that his
strength was not to be used to inflict harm on the
innocent. That is a lesson we should take from history.
The unresolved Arab-Israeli conflict remains a
severe thorn in the side of the United Nations and the
world community. There is a lack of any tangible
process. We hear of the peace process, we hear of road
maps. It is amazing. I never fully understood the words
“one step forward and two steps back” until this
particular part of the world proved to me that this is
something to be believed. We have seen hopes
repeatedly dashed and international incidents created
out of relatively small events. We have seen the stark
violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions. We have seen draconian policies and
practices. We have seen the fragmentation and the
absolute fracture of Palestinian society. We have seen
walls built.
Amazingly, the greatest wall in the world, the
Great Wall of China, could not keep the marauders out
for too long, but certainly kept a lot of people in who
could not escape the vicious practices of many
empires. Does this create hope? Does this create a
better system? Does this create something that the
world can be proud of? I think the right to personal
movement and unabated settlement activity are
creating new aspects on the ground. The continuing
inhumane and unlawful siege of the Gaza Strip has
transformed it virtually into an open prison, where
hundreds of thousands are living lives of abject misery,
so near to the Mediterranean and the civilized world of
the Greeks, where it all starts from, yet bombed into
the Dark Ages. The world at large has witnessed much
cruelty, and more cruelty, as a mere spectator: the
haunting memories of the devastation inflicted on the
innocent population of Gaza, the killing of five sisters
through a shot in the window for no apparent reason.
I do not know how anyone is going to justify any
of that. But where is the moral outrage that translates
itself into something tangible — a meaningful change
in the lives of the Palestinians? While Israel deserves
criticism, no less responsible is the international

28

community, which is complicit in its inaction. The
proverbial water off a duck’s back rings true here. The
attacks on the United Nations buildings and personnel
itself showed complete disrespect. It was not the
physical damage caused alone, but the icon that
tumbled and crumbled with a lot of innocence inside.
The Secretary-General’s initiative for a Board of
Inquiry is welcomed by us.
But we must not lose sight of the larger picture.
The general sense of pessimism around the peace
process does not augur well. The international
community needs to refocus its attention and to
synergize its energies and its efforts to reinvigorate the
peace process of negotiation and to address all core
issues for a comprehensive and just settlement and for
the durable solution for which the parameters already
exist, namely, the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly, the principle of
land for peace, the Madrid Peace Conference terms of
reference, the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the principles set out at the Annapolis Conference.
There must also be parallel progress on the Israel-Syria
and Israel-Lebanon tracks for a comprehensive peace
in the region.
In conclusion, an early comprehensive settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the core issue of
Palestine, should be our collective strategic objective.
All Member States must throw their full moral,
diplomatic, political and economic support behind its
early realization. Indeed, that would have a positive
impact on regional and international peace and security
and help stabilize other simmering situations across the
region. While remaining fully committed to the just
cause of the Palestinian people, Pakistan will continue
to play its rightful role in the collective endeavour to
establish lasting, just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, Mr. President,
to greet you very respectfully and to express, on behalf of
the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
our appreciation to you for the important work that you
have been doing at the helm of the Security Council. We
acknowledge your resolute commitment to peace and the

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

defence of the sovereignty of the peoples of the world, in
particular of Palestine.

responsible for the Gaza siege should be indicted and
tried for violations of international criminal law.

When our Government, through the Mission of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United
Nations, expressed its views on the Middle East crisis
and on the situation in Palestine in this body, we
warned of the urgent need to prevent the Government
of Israel from committing, through its war machine,
what we predicted would be a crime against humanity.
Those 22 days of occupation and aggression between
27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009, according to
figures provided by the United Nations Special
Rapporteur for Human Rights, have borne that out.

Today, we note that despite General Assembly
resolution ES-10/8, adopted by the General Assembly
at its resumed tenth emergency special session on
illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, held on
15 and 16 January 2009, which called for an end to the
occupation, the Israeli aggression continues. United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories Richard Falk has
again reported that Israel committed massive violations
during the 22 days of its invasion of the Gaza Strip. He
confirmed that the bombings carried out by Israeli
forces on the Palestinian civilian population constituted
a massive violation of international humanitarian law.
The report of the Special Rapporteur will be very
important for the Human Rights Council in Geneva to
confirm that the Israeli Government committed war
crimes under the Geneva Conventions. The findings of
the United Nations expert are conclusive. The Israeli
army carried out crimes such as the deliberate
execution of women and children by sharpshooters. It
deliberately destroyed infrastructure such as schools,
universities, public services, electricity and water
systems and 21,000 homes, thus worsening the already
negative human development indicators and dragging
the population of Gaza to the lowest levels of poverty.

During the occupation, 1,434 Palestinians died, of
whom 235 were combatants, 239 police officers and
960 civilians, including 288 children and 121 women.
Also, 5,303 Palestinians were wounded, of whom
1,606 were children and 828 women. Even today, most
have not been able to return to a normal life as a result
of war-inflicted injuries. In the world’s memory, there
has never been such callousness displayed before our
very eyes.
Our Government is emphatic in denouncing the
flagrant violation of international law and of the human
rights of the Palestinian people in Gaza. The ineffective
application of resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
which has still not been implemented, brought about
the tragedy that we deplore today. The resolution, in
which the Security Council called for an immediate,
durable and fully respected ceasefire, sadly illustrated
the inaction of the major Powers in urging Israel to
stop the attacks against Gaza. Nor has the blockade
been lifted; nor is there free transit to allow
humanitarian aid to enter and to put an end to Gaza
being a prison and concentration camp.
We must remember that the Bolivarian
Government of President Hugo Chávez Frías decided
to expel the Israeli Ambassador to our country for
disproportionate and unjustifiable military action
against the Palestinian people. United Nations Special
Rapporteur Richard Falk himself urged the
Organization “to take urgent action to protect a civilian
population being subjected to collective punishment
that amounts to a crime against humanity”. At that
time, Mr. Falk believed that the International Criminal
Court should investigate the situation in order to
establish if the Israeli civilian and military leaders

09-28062

The Government of Israel cannot indefinitely
remain beyond international laws. Complacency and
complicity clearly have negative consequences on
Palestinians every day, Worse yet, however, they create
a precedent that could affect all countries, including as
regards international impunity, which could create an
environment for the destabilization of the international
system. Hence, it is important to establish criminal
responsibility for what took place, lest the Security
Council lose even further credibility and legitimacy.
Our criticism of the Israeli Government and
Israeli army policy of genocide cannot be mistaken for
anti-Semitism. The Bolivarian Government respects
the Jewish people and its religious beliefs and
practices. In Venezuela, Jewish communities enjoy full
guarantees that their culture, economic well-being and
social aspirations will be respected — as befits a
tolerant, multi-ethnic and multicultural country that
demonstrates tolerance both to those born in Venezuela
and to immigrants. Our respect is extended to Jewish
people in Venezuela and throughout the world.

29

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

We believe in the importance of all initiatives
towards the attainment of peace in the Middle East, in
particular the demand by Palestine as a nation for
peace, respect for its sovereignty and the full
development of its people. The League of Arab States
is playing a fundamental role in that regard. The
United Nations must stress the need to meet the urgent
needs of the population and bring about lasting peace.
That will be possible only if justice is systematically
sought.
It is a fact that there can be no peace in the
Middle East so long as the occupation continues, so
long as the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination is denied, so long as inhumane and
degrading practices continue daily against thousands of
Palestinians, and so long as colonization, carried out
through Israeli settlements, continues.
In the midst of its tragedy, Palestine has produced
great poets, lending distinction to the memory of its
people. I shall conclude by quoting from “Homeland,”
by the Palestinian poet Ibrahim Nasrallah.
“Under the yoke of our mornings
The sun crumbles
And in the darkness of our steps
Our panting breath is on fire
These incomplete homelands
In which we appear to be
Nothing more than prisoners of war.”
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor, and I
call on him now.
Mr. Weissbrod (Israel): I will not take much of
the Council’s time, but will only make a short remark
on the speeches of the representatives of Syria and
Iran. It is astonishing that countries that continue to
actively support terror, sabotage the peace process and
encourage suicide bombings and that continue to
smuggle arms to the region — Lebanon and Gaza — in
these very days and these very moments are lecturing
us about the peace process, moral values and human
rights records. I suggest to those countries and to some
other Member States that spoke to dig into their own
human rights records before speaking about others. In
Israel, we are proud of the sense of self-criticism that
we have as a society and as a State. We hope that
countries like Syria and Iran, and some other Member
States that spoke, will have a bit of that sense of selfcriticism.

30

The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked
for the floor, and I call on him now. I would ask that he
be brief.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor again. I wish
only to respond to the statement just made by the
representative of Israel. That statement included
misleading claims and distortions of the truth, which
form part of Israel’s desperate campaign to deflect the
attention of world public opinion from the activities,
atrocities and holocaust daily carried out by the
terrorist State of Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories.
Any attentive and wise observer will immediately
see that the Israeli representative’s claims and
allegations today are intended to camouflage Israeli
violations of the sovereignty of Lebanon and of
resolution 1701 (2006). The reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) underscore that Lebanon’s Common Border
Force, which comprises the four main relevant
Lebanese Government agencies, has not found any
instance of arms smuggling. That very significant
information is in line with previous statements of
senior Lebanese officials and the findings of the
Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Teams I
and II.
Israel’s statements do not alter the fact that Israel
possesses the largest, blackest record of terrorism,
which would need an encyclopaedia, a museum and an
archive to document and shed light on the crimes of
genocide, war crimes and ethnic cleansing carried out
against the Palestinians, the Syrians, the Lebanese, the
Egyptians, the Jordanians and others by Israel
throughout its bloody history.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran has
asked for the floor, and I call on him now.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am not
going to take very much of the Council’s time, because
we have already placed on record my country’s
position. I just wanted to reiterate that we reject the
baseless allegations raised yet again by the
representative of the Israeli regime. Undoubtedly —
and needless to say — these are statements that are
made only to distract the international community’s
attention from where it should be, and that is the Israeli

09-28062

S/PV.6100 (Resumption 1)

crimes and atrocities, which are very well known to the
international community. Time and again they have
been emphasized not only by Iran and some of the
other countries that the representative of Israel
mentioned, but actually by the whole membership of
the Council and by the whole international community.
We are on record as condemning in the strongest terms
all those crimes and atrocities, which are perpetrated
against the Palestinian people. Indeed, the Israeli
regime has actually displayed one of the clearest
examples of State terrorism. The State terrorism which

09-28062

is being practised by the Israeli regime, together with
the nuclear weapons that are in the hands of that
regime and also coupled with its wicked behaviour,
poses one of the greatest threats that the region and the
international community are facing today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

31
