General Assembly-Twentieth Session

28

( a) To take all possible steps i111mediately to increase the effective flow of international capital to developing countries to the level indicated in the recommendation contained in annex A.IV.2 of the Final Act
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in all cases where that level has not yet
been reached,
( b) To devise such terms and conditions that the
servicing of this expanded flow of capital does ~10t
impose an unduly heavy burden on the developm_g
countries and thereby jeopardize the prospects of their
further growth,
Bearing in inind the inadequacy of the data on capital
flows and economic assistance gathered by international
organizations for .carrying out the type of analysis of
foreign financing that would be required to provide
a regular appraisal of the factors influencing economic
growth in the United Nations Development Decade,
Having considered the Secretary-General's reports
entitled "International flow of long-term capital and
official donations, 1961-1964", 28 and "Measurement of
the flow of long-term capital and official dvnations: concepts and methodology", 29
l. Expresses concern at the fact that the net flow
of international assistance and long-term capital to the
developing countries has failed to attain the necessary
increase in recent years, thereby retarding the progress
towar·ds the attainment of the target of 1 per cent laid
down in the recommendation contained in annex
A.IV.2, section III, of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
2. Reiterates its request to the developed countries
to take urgent measures to accelerate and ensure the
flow of international assistance and long-term capital
to the developing countries so as to attain the abovementioned target;
3. Urges the developed countries, in framing their
policies with regard to the terms of lending to the
developing countries, to bear in mind the objectives
set forth in annex A.IV .4 of the Final Act of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop•·
ment in order to secure more meaningful and progressive financial co-operation with the developing countries
and to ensure greater efficiency in aid programmes ;
4. Requests the competent United Nations bodies
and/or other international financial institutions to take
urgent steps to implement the recommendations con-•
tained in annex A.IV.5 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development relating
to the problem of servicing the external debt of the
developing countries ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
study requested of him in its resolution 1938 (XVIII)
and to submit his proposals to the Economic and
Social Council at its forty-first session and to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session.

1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2089 (XX). Establishment of the United Nation!!
Organization for Industrial Development

The General Assembly,
Considering that the declaration contained in General
Assembly resolution 1940 (XVTIT) of 11 December
1963 on the need to carry out changes in the existing
2BE/4079/Rev.l and Add.1.
211 A/~7'J2.

United Nations machinery so as to provide an organization capable of i11teusifyiug, concentrating and c:-..pediting United Nations efforts for industrial development received decided support at all meetings whid1
have been held since then nn this subject hv varirnts
United Nat ions bodirs,
Bearing in mind the recommendation made by the
Committee for Industrial Development at its fourth and
fifth sessions that a specialized agency for indnstria 1
development should be promptly established,
Taking into account the proposal contained in the
report of the Advisory Committee of Experts 30 regarding the establishment of a United N atiom industrial
<lrve lopment organization,
Taking also into account the recommrndatiou contained in annex A.TIT. 1 of the Final Act of the Unitrd
Nations Conference on Trade and Development 31 that
thr General Assembly should take suitable ac~ion wi_th
a view to establishing a sprcialized agency for md11st nal
development,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1081 F (XXX1X) of 30 July 1965, in which the
Council noted with appreciation the report prepared
hv the Secretary-General on the scope, structure and
fimctions of a specialized agency for industrial development,32 and Council resolution 1030 B (XX.XVTT) nf
13 August 1964,
Taking note of the widespread desire for a comprehensive organization for industrial devrlopment,
1. Decides to establish within the United Nations
an autonomous organization for the promotion of industrial development to be known as the United Nations
Organization for Tndustrial Development :
2. Decides that the administrative and research activities of this organization shall be financed from the
United Nations regular budget, and its operational
activities shall be financed from voluntary contributions
to it by Governments of the States Members of tlw
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well
as through participation in the United Nations Development P,ogramme on the .snme has is as other
participating organizations:
3. Decides that the principal organ of the organization shall be the Industrial Development Board;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make arrnngements, in accordance with Article 101 of the Charter
of the United Nations, for the immediate establishment
of an adequate, permanent and full-time secretariat,
as a part of the organization, which will avail itself of
the other appropriate facilitirs of the Secretariat of
thr United Nations;
S. Decides that the secretariat of the organization
shall be headed bv an Executive Director, who shall he
appointed by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and whose appointment shall be confirmed hy
tlw General Assembly:
6. Decides to set up an Ad H oc Committee on tlw
United Nations Organization for Industrial Development, composed of thirty-six States M rmbers of the
United Nations aml members of the specialized agrncif's
30 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cn,mril.
Thirty-sixth Session, S11pplemr11t No. 14 (E/3781), annex Vll l.
3 1 See Proceedings of the United Nations Co11fere11CP 011
Trade and Development, vol. T. Final Act and Report (Pnit, cl
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.U.B.11), p. 'J4.
~2 Official Rrcords of thl' General AssPmbly, Twrntirl/, ',,•scion. Annr:res, agenda item 40. doc11ment A/5826.
0

29

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and
chosen in accordance with the principle of equitable
geographical representation, to prepare the necessary
operating procedures and administrative arrangements
of the organization established under paragraphs 1 to
5 above, taking into account the reports of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly, 83 a note by the
Secretary-General, 34 the reports of the Committee for
Industrial Development35 and the relevant views expressed in that Committee, in the Economic and Social
Council, at the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and in the General Assembly, and
to report thereon to the Committee for Industrial Development at its sixth session, to the Economic and
Social Council at its forty-first session and to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session;

7. Decides to review, in the light of experience, the
effectiveness and further evolution of these institutional
arrangements with a view to deciding upon such
changes and improvements as might be necessary in
order to meet fully the growing need~ in the field of
industrial development;
8. Notes with satisfaction that the Secretary-General
has, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1081 E (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, provided a
substantial increase in the budget of the Centre for
Industrial Development with a view to carrying out
its existing and expanding functions ;
9. Expresses its appreciation of the work done by
the Centre for Industrial Development since its establishment and the efforts made by the Commissioner
for Industrial Development in the field of industrialization, within the limited possibilities of the resources at
his disposal ;
10. Expresses its satisfaction at the decisions taken
by the Economic and Social Council at its thirty-ninth
session on the holding of international and regional
symposia on industrial development;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing
the organization of the symposia, to take into account
the decisions embodied in the present resolution.

1404th plenary meeting.
20 December 1965.

*

• •

At its 1408th plenary meeting, on 21 December 1965, the
General Assembly apbointed, on the proposal of the President
of the Assembly, the members of the Ad Hoe Committee on
the United Naiions Organization for Industrial Dez•elopmenl,
established under Paragraph 6 of the above resolution.
The Ad Hoe Committee z.vill be composed of the followinq
States: ARGENT1NA, AUSTRALIA, BRAZIL, CHAD, COLOMBIA,
COSTA

RICA,

GERMANY,
JORDAN,

CUBA,

FINLAND,

LIBYA,

CZECHOSLOVAKIA,
FRANCE,

MEXICO,

FEDERAL

REPUBT.IC

GUINEA, INDIA, ITALY,

NETHERLANDS,

NIGERIA,

OF

JAPAN,

PAKISTAN,

PERU, PHILIPPINES, Ro:vrANJA, SPAIN, SUDAN. SWEDEN, SYRIA,
THAILAND,

TUNISIA,

UGANDA,

UNION

OF

SOVIET

SOCIALIST

REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
AMERICA and Yur.os1.AvTA.

T ANZANTA, UNITF:n STATES OF

ss Ibid., documents A/5826 and A/6070/Rev.1.

3 4 A/C.2/L.794.
311 Official Records

of the Economic and Social Council
Thirty-seventh Session. S11pplement No. 6 (E/3869) ; i/,iri '
Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4065).

2090 (XX). The role of the United Nations in
training national technical personnel for the
accelerated industrialization of the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1824 (XVII) of 18 December
1962 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1029
(XXXVII) of 13 August 1964,
Attaching great importance to the training of national
technical personnel for the accelerated industrialization
of the developing countries on the basis of the latest
achievements of science and technology,
Considering that, in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1029 ( XXXVII), the report
of the Secretary-General3 6 was transmitted to the Governments of Member States, the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the regional
economic commissions and the Committee for Industrial
Development, for their comments and recommendations,
Desiring to contribute further to the successful solution of the problem of training national technical personnel for the accelerated ir,dustrialization of the developing countries with a view to attaining the aims of
the United Nations Development Decade,
1. Notes with appreciation the valuable report prepared by the Secretary-General in co-operation with
the specialized agencies;
2. Commends the Centre for Industrial Development,
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency for their activities in training national
technical personnel for the industrialization of developing countries, such as symposia, seminars and advanced training courses, undertaken within the framework of the United Nations technical assistance
programmes ;
3. Requests the Centre for Industrial Development
to continue and to expand such activities, financed
from the funds of the United Nations Development
Programme, and to co-ordinate them with the related
activities of the specialized agencies concerned, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the regional
economic commissions ;
4. Requests Governments, the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United
Nations Development Programme and the regional
economic commissions to consider the recommendations
contained in the above-mentioned report and to transmit to the Secretary-General their comments and
suggestions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
action taken in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4
above and on proposals for further measures in this
field to the seventh session of the Committee for Industrial Development, which would present its recommendations on the question to the Economic and Social
Council at its forty-third session for consideration and
submission to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session.

1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
3ft !hid., Thirty-se1•rnth Session, A,me.i-es, agenda item 12,
rlornments E/3901 an<l Add.I and 2.
