IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

come ofthe proceedings against the offender, and on measures adopted with a view to preventing a repetition of
such violations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To circulate to all States, upon receipt, the reports
received by him pursuant to paragraph 9 above, unless the
reporting State requests otherwise;
(b) To draw the attention, when appropriate, of the
States directly concerned to the reporting procedures provided for in paragraph 9 above, when a serious violation
has been reported pursuant to paragraph 9 (a) above;
(c) To address reminders to States where such violations have occurred and have been reported, if no followup report has been made pursuant to paragraph 9 (b)
above by such States within a reasonable period of time;
(d) To send, in due time before the issuance of bis
yearly report on the present item, a circular note to all
States requesting them to indicate whether they have any
such violations, as referred to in paragraph 9 (a) above, to
report for the preceding twelve months;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare guidelines embodying the relevant questions that States may
wish to consider when reporting; the guidelines shall be
circulated to all States with a view to strengthening the reporting procedures provided for in paragraph 9 above;
12. A/so requests the Secretary-General to invite States
to inform him of their views with respect to any measures
needed to enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its forty-second session a report containing:
(a) Information on the state of ratification of, and
accessions to, the instruments referred to in paragraph 7
above;
(b) The reports received and views expressed pursuant
to paragraphs 9 and 12 above;
14. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-second session any views he may
wish to express on the matters referred to in paragraphs 11
and 13 above;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives: report of the Secretary-General".
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

41/79.

Twenty-fifth anniversary of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the development of diplomatic relations
in accordance with norms of international law and the
purposes and principies of the Charter of the United Nations is an important factor in building confidence, developing co-operation among States and strengthening international peace and security,
Convinced that the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 27 has been widely recognized as the
most authoritative and universal of the international treaties codifying the norms of international law governing
diplomatic relations,
27 United Nations,

Treary Series. vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.

261

Confirming the importance it attaches to the strict compliance by States with their obligations under the Convention,
Concerned, at the same time, at still persistent cases of
non-compliance with obligations under the Convention,
Expressing particular concern at the terrorist acts committed against diplomatic missions and representatives
and at infringements of their inviolability,
Recalling that, in accordance with the Convention,
without prejudice to their privileges and immunities, it is
the duty of ali persons enjoying such privileges and immunities to respect the laws and regulations of the receiving State,
l. Reaffirms its conviction that the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations has played, for over twenty-five
years, and will continue to play an essential role in promoting co-operation and understanding among States, in
creating normal conditions for the activities of diplomatic
missions and representatives and in the progressive development of international law in this field;
2. Notes with satisfaction that at present one hundred
and forty-nine States are parties to the Convention;
3. Recommends to States that have not yet become
parties to the Convention to consider doing so at an early
date;
4. Stresses the importance of the process of codification and progressive development of international law in
the field of diplomatic relations;
5. Calls upon ali States to observe strictly the provisions of the Convention in arder to create an appropriate
atmosphere essential for the normal discharge by diplomatic missions of their functions;
6. Urges ali States to take effective action at national
and international levels to suppress terrorist and other
acts of violence against diplomatic missions and representatives, to prosecute without delay the perpetrators of
such acts and, in accordance with the Convention, to
avoid abuses of diplomatic privileges and immunities.
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

41/80.

Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting
of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principies of sovereign equality, política! independence,
territorial integrity of States and self-determination of
peoples, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and developed in the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations,2 8
Recalling its resolutions, particularly resolutions
2395 (XXIII) of 29 November 1968, 2465 (XXIII) of
20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970 and 3103 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973, and its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, as well as Security Council resolutions
405 ( 1977) of 14 April 1977, 419 (1977) of 24 November

2X Resolution

2625 (XXV l. anna
