General Aa11embly-Ei1hteenth Session

24

1897

(XVIll). United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1785 (XVII) of 8 December
1962, as well as Economic and Social Council resolutions
917 (XXXIV) of 3 August 1962, 944 (XXXV) of
18 April 1963 and 963 (XXXVI) of 18 July 1963,
Having considered the part of the report of the Economic and Social Council pertaining to the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development,1
Noting with satisfaction that the purposes of the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development are gaining strong support, which has
been reflected during the eighteenth session of the Assembly in a general recognition of the need for thorough
preparations for the Conference in order to ensure its
full success,
Believing that the joint statement by representatives
of the developing countries, contained in the report on
the second session of the Preparatory Committee of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,2
summarizing the views, needs and aspirations of those
countries with regard to the Conference, represents a
well-considered basis for the examination of the problems of developing countries at the Conference and an
important contribution to its deliberations,
I. N ates with appreciation the work already done
by the Preparatory Committee of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development at its first and
second sessions and by the Secretary-General of the
Conference ;
2. Welcomes the Joint Declaration of the Developing
Countries with regard to the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, which was made at the
eighteenth session of the General Assembly and which
is annexed to the present resolution;
3. Invites the States which will participate in the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
in dealing with the various items on the agenda and
with documents and proposals contributing to the lofty
aims of the Conference, to give serious consideration
to the Joint Declaration of the Developing Countries.
1256th plenary meeting,
11 November 1963.
ANNEX
JOINT DECLARATION OF THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES MADE AT
THE EIGHTEENTH SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY BY THE
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE FOLLOWING STATES: AFGHANISTAN,
ALGERIA, ARGENTINA, BOLIVIA, BRAZIL, BURMA, BURUNDI,
CAMBODIA, CAMEROON, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, UYLON,
CHAD, CHILF., COLOMBIA, CONGO (BRAZZAVILLE), CONGO
(LEOPOLDVILLE), COSTA RICA, CYPRUS, DAHOMEY, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, ECUADOR, _EL SALVADOR, ETHIOPIA, GABON,
GHANA, GUATEMALA, .GUINEA, HAITI, HONDURAS, INDIA,
INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, JAMAICA, JORDAN, KUWAIT, LAOS,
LEBANON, LIBERIA, LIBYA, MADAGASCAR, MALAYSIA, MALI,
MAURITANIA, MEXICO, MOROCCO, NEPAL, NEW ZEALAND,
NICARAGUA, NIGER, '.'-JIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PARAGUAY, PERU, PHILIPPINES, RWANDA, SAUDI ARABIA, SENEGAL,
SIERRA LEONE, SOMALIA,
SUDAN,
SYRIA,
TANGANYIKA,
THAILAND, TOGO, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, TUNISIA, UGANDA,

I Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, S11pplement No. 3 (A/5503), chapter III, section II.
2 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 5, part III, document E/3799, para. 186.

UNITED Al<AB REPUBLIC, UPPER VOLTA, URUGUAY, VENEZUELA,
YEMEN

ANO YUGOSLAVIA

I
I. The developing countries consider that the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development should represent an
outstanding event in international co-operation conducive to the
development of their economies and to the integrated growth
of the world economy as a whole. They believe that the full
attainment of even the modest targets of the United Nations
Development Decade will depend on the concrete decisions taken
at this Conference and on their effective implementation. The
developing countries are already making, and are determined
to continue to make, great efforts for their economic and social
advancement through full mobilization of domestic resources,
agricultural development, industrialization and diversification
of their production and trade, However, this task can be
accomplished only if these domestic effort, are supplemented
and assisted by adequate international action. The developing
countries look to the Conference to help them reach the stage
of self--sustaining growth.
II
2. Internatiom,l trade could become a more powerful instrument and vehicle of economic development not only through
the expansion of the traditional exports of the developing
countries, but also through the developme,1t of markets for
their new products and a general increase in their share of
world export, under improved terms of trade. For this purpose,
a new international division of labour. with new patterns of
production and trade, is necessary. Only in this way will the
economic indept:ndence of the developing countries be strengthened and a truly interdependent and integrated world economy
emerge. The development of production and the increase in productivity and purchasing power :>f the developing countries
will contribute to the economic growth of the industrialized
countries as well, and thus become a means tc world-wide
prosperity.
3. The existing principles and patterns of world trade still
mainly favour the advanced parts of the world. Instead of helping the developing countries to promote the development and
diversification of their economies, the present tendencies in
world trade frustrate their efforts to attain more rapid growth.
These trends must be reversed. The volume of trade of the
developing countries should be increased and its composition
diversified; the prices of their exports should be stabilized at
fair and remunerative levels, and internatio1 al transfers of
capital should be made more favourable to those countries
so as to enable them to obtain through trade more of the means
needed for their economic development.
4. To achieve these objectives, a dynamic international trade
policy is required. This policy should be based on the need for
providing special assistance and protection for the less developed
parts of the world economy. The removal of obstacles to the
trade of the developing countries is important; but the accelerated development of the parts of the world which are
lagging behind requires more than the unconditional application
nf the most-favoured-nation principle and the mere reduction
of tariffs. More positive measures aimed at achieving a new
international division of labour are essential to bring about the
necessary increase in productivity and diversification of economic activity in the developing countries. The measures taken
by developed countries to promote the development of the
relatively backward areas within their national boundaries
provide a guide for the purposeful and dynamic action which
needs to be taken in the field of international economic
co-operation.

III
5. The fundamental trade problems of developing countries
are well identified. What the world lacks today is, therefore,
not the awareness of the problem, but the readiness to act.
Ma~y constructive proposals were advanced during the second
session of the Preparatory Committee of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development. The representatives of

Resolalions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

developing countries making the present Declaration recommend to all Members of the United Nations that they give
earnest consideration to these proposals and that they explore,
before the beginning of the Conference, all practical means for
their implementation, so as to make it possible to reach at the
Conference basic agreement on a new international trade and
development policy. This policy, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1785 (XVII) of 8 December 1962, should
lead to the adoption by the Conference of concrete measures
to achieve, inter alia, the following :
(a) Creation of conditions for the expansion of trade between countries at a similar level of development, at different
stages of development or having different systems of social and
economic organization ;
(b) Progressive reduction and early elimination of all barriers and restrictions impeding the exports of the developing
countries, without reciprocal concessions on their part;
(c) Increase in the volume of exports of the developing
countries in primary products, both raw and processed, to the
industrialized countries, and stabilization of prices at fair
and remunerative levels;
(d) Expansion of the markets for exports of manufactured
and semi-manufactured goods from the developing countries;
(e) Provision of more adequate financial resources at favourable terms so as to enable the developing countries to
increase their imports of capital goods and industrial raw
materials essential for their economic development, and better
co-ordination of trade and aid policies :
(/) Improvement of the invisible trade of the developing
countries, particularly by reducing their payments for freight
and insurance and the burden of their debt charges ;
(g) Improvement of institutional arrangements, including,
if necessary, the establishment of new machinery and methods
for implementing the decisions of the Conference.
IV
6. The developing countries are looking to more stable and
healthy international economic relations in which they can
increasingly find from their own resources the means required
for self-sustaining growth. The developing countries are confident that the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development will not only be able to contribute to the acceleration of their economic development, but will also be an important instrument for promoting stability and security in the
world.
7. The developing countries expect that the Conference will
offer an opportunity for the manifestation, in the field of trade
and development, of the same political will that was responsible
for the Charter of the United Nations signed at San Francisco
and the creation of the Organization. They are confident that,
in this spirit, the decisions of the Conference will bring about
fuller international co-operation and that greater progress can
be made towards the attainment of collective economic security.
International trade will thus become a strong guarantee of
world peace and the Conference will be a landmark in the
fulfilment of the Charter.

;1.914 (XVIII). Review of the composition of
the United Nations/FAO Inter-Governmental
Committee on the World Food Programme
The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendation of the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 937
(XXXV) of 10 April 1963, that the United Nations/
F AO Inter-Governmental Committee on the World
Food Programme should be enlarged by the addition
of four members, two to be elected by each appointing
body,
I. Decides to amend section I, paragraphs 2 and 3,
of its resolution 1714 (XVI) of 19 December 1961, so
as to provide the following :

25

(a) The Committee will consist of twenty-four States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations;
( b) The Economic and Social Council will elect
two additional members;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its
resumed thirty-sixth session, to elect these two additional members and to undertake the review of the
membership of the United Nations/FAQ InterGovernmental Committee specified in section I, paragraph 9, of General Assembly resolution 1714 (XVI).
1274th plenary mpeting,
5 December 1963.

1931 (XVIII). Conversion to peaceful needs of
the resources released by disarmament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1837 (XVII) of 18 December
1962 entitled "Declaration on the conversion to peaceful
needs of the resources released by disarmament" and
Economic and Social Council resolution 982 ( XXXVI)
of 2 August 1963 entitled "Economic and social consequences of disarmament", concerning, inter alia, the
advantages which disarmament could have for economic
and social programmes throughout the world,
Encouraged by the conclusion of the Treaty banning
nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space
and under water,
Hopeful that further agreements will be reached
which will lessen world tensions and lead ultimately
to general and complete disarmament under effective
international control,
Noting the report submitted by the Secretary-General
to the Economic and Social Council3 and made available
to the General Assembly-' pursuant to paragraph 7 of
Assembly resolution 1837 (XVII) with regard to the
activities of Member States, the various United Nations
bodies, the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency in studying the economic and
social consequences of disarmament, and pursuant to
Council resolution 982 (XXXVI),
Noting further the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly 5 pursuant to paragraph 8 of Assembly resolution 1837 (XVII) with
regard to development plans and projects for an economic programme for disarmament,
Noting with satisfaction that a number of Governments as well as some specialized agencies and regional
economic commissions have already initiated, or expressed their readiness to start, in co-operation with the
Secretary-General, the study of the economic and social
consequences of disarmament,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
982 (XXXVI) and urges that Member States do everything possible to facilitate the carrying out of General
Assembly resolution 1837 (XVII) and Council resolution 982 (XXXVI);
2. Invites the specialized agencies concerned, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the regional
economic commissions to co-operate with the Secretary3 /bid., agenda item 7, documents E/3736 and Add.1-9.
-' Official Records of the GenerGl Assembly, Ejghteenlh Session, Annexes, agenda items 12, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39 and 76,
document A/5537.
IS Ibid., document A/5538.
