V.

32/158.

Re90lutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

United Nations Water Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3513 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 (LIX) of 31 July 1975,
Recalling further its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the E~tablishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 197 5 on development and international economic co-operation,
Noting that the United Nations Water Conference,
held at Mar dcl Plata, Argentina, from 14 to 25 March
1977, took far-reaching decisions on the entire spectrum
of the management and development of water resources,
Considering that the agreements reached at the
Conference call for urgent action,
1. Adopts the report of the United Nations Water
Conference and approves the Mar del Plata Action
Plan°~ and the other agreemc'nts reached at the Conference;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Government and
the people of Argentina for their generous hospitality
during the holding of the Conference;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General of the Conference for the effective preparation and
organization of the Conference;
4. Urges Member States and all organizations of
the United Nations system to take intensified and
sustained action for the implementation of the agreements reached at the Conference;

95

1977 of the Committee on Natural Resources, 71 with
the allocation, if necessary, of additional resources;
9. Requests the Committee on Natural Resources,
at its special session, to review plans and programmes
prepared at the national and regional levels and to formulate immediate and concrete steps to promote and
secure their early implementation;
10. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report on the
results of the special session of the Committee on
Natural Resources and on the measures adopted by
the whole United Nations system for the implementation of the Mar dcl Plata Action Plan and the agreements reached at the Conference.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/159.

Implementation of the medium-term
aml long• term recovery and rehahilita•
tion programme in the· Sudano-Sahelian
region and urgent measures to he taken
on hchalf of the region

8. Requests the regional commissions to strengthen
and intensify their responsibilities in the water sector
~nd, to thi& end, assign specific responsibilities to an
mtergovernmental committee within the regional commissions, in accordance with the recommendations of
the Conference and with resolution 1 (V) of 16 May

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971. 2959 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972
and 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973,
Recalling further its resolutions 3253 (XXIX) of
4 December 1974. 3512 (XXX) of 15 December 1975
and 31 / 180 of 21 December 197 6 and Economic and
Social Council resolutions l 918 (LVIII) of 5 May
1975 and 2103 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Taking note of the decision of 27 June 1977 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme'~ concerning the implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region,
DeerJ/y concerned at the magnitude of the effects of
the new drought prevailing in the Sudano-Sahelian
region and, in particular, at the serious shortage of
food and the livestock losses,
Taking note of the declaration adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe! at its special
session held at Niamey on 26 and 27 October 1977,
. Mindful of the fact that the transport problem, particularly the state of the infrastructure and the inadequacy of the present capacities, constitutes a major
obstacle for the countries of the region,
Noting the measures taken by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World
~ood Programme to establish large stockpiles of food
111 the ports of the Sudano-Sahelian region,
Noting the individual and collective efforts made
by States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!,
N oti~1g with '.~atisfaction the decisive role played by
the Umtt.:d Nations Sahelian Office, on the one hand,

(!f tfie U~1ited Natio11s W,;/cr Conference (United
Nations pubhcat1on, Sales No. F.77.II.A. l 2). chap. I.
70 E/6015.

Sixt_,·-tlr ·,-d Session, Suprlcment No. 2A ( E/6004), chap. 1:
sect. B. and E/6004/Ad<l. I.
,-~ Ibid., Supplement No. 3 A ( E/6013 /Rev. I), para. 165.

5. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolutions 2115 (LXIII) and 2121 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977;
6. Reaffirms that due priority should be given to
the measures needed to implement the Mar de! Plata
Action Plan as well as other agreements reached at
the Conference;
7. Recommends that Governments should consider,
where necessary, the desirability of designating national
~ater resources committees or other suitable organizations to co-ordinate and monitor the implementation
of the Conference's recommendations at the national
level on the basis of detailed national action programmes, encompassing areas specified in the note
by the Secretary-General on recommendations of the
Conference and follow-up action. 70 and recommends
more p~~ular inv_olvement in the process of planning
and dec1S1on makmg towards the formulation of a national policy;

6 ~ Report

71 Official

Records of tire Economic and Social Council

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

96

in helping to combat the effects of the drought and to
implement the priority medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme adopted by the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!, and, on the other
hand, in mobilizing the necessary resources to finance
priority projects,
Taking note of the expansion of the recovery and
rehabilitation programme in the Sabel as a result of the
adoption by the Council of Ministers of the Permanent
Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!,
meeting at Ouagadougou from 25 to 28 April 1977,
of the drought control and development strategy and
programme for the SaheL
Considering that the nature and magnitude of the
needs of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region,
which are among the least developed countries, make
it necessary for the international community to continue and to strengthen its action of solidarity in support of the recovery efforts and economic development
of those countries,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the medium-term
and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in
the Sudano-Sahelian region, 73

I
EMERGENCY MEASURES

1. Urges Governments, United Nations agencies and
intergovernmental organizations to respond immediately
to the appeal made by the Council of Ministers of the
Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control
in the Sahel at its special session held at Niamey, in
particular by taking emergency measures to meet the
requirements for food aid specified in the declaration
adopted at Niamey;

2. Calls upon Member States, donor agencies and
the competent United Nations agencies to employ
special procedures for the transport of this aid and to
inform the World Food Programme thereof so that it
may co-ordinate shipments to the affected regions;
3. Invites Member States, donor agencies and the
competent United Nations agencies to dispatch any
evaluation missions required for the purpose of determining accurately the exact requirements of each of
the countries concerned;
4. Urges Member States, particularly the developed
countries, international financing institutions and intergovernmental organizations to intensify their assistance
to the Sudano-Sahelian countries by providing them
with increased financial assistance to alleviate the effects
of the drought;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the DirectorGeneral of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to apply the experience gained in
relief operations in continuing to produce forecasts and
to provide adequate assistance to overcome the problems of supply, storage and distribution;
6. Urges the Secretary-General and the DirectorGeneral of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to continue to operate the early
73 DP/252

and Corr.I; A/32/254.

warning system in order to keep abreas_t of d~vclopments in the situation in the Sudano-Sahehan region;

II
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MEDIUM-TERM AND LONGTERM RECOVERY AND REHABILITATION PROGRAMME

1. Takes note ·with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-GeneraF 4 on the efforts made to implc~1.ent
the medium-term and long-term recovery and rehab1htation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region drawn
up by the States members of the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments,
United Nations agencies, intergovernmental organizations, private organizations and individuals that have
contributed to the implementation of the programme;
3. Urges all States to provide financial and technical support for efforts to strengthen transport infrastructures and facilities, with particular emphasis on
ensuring uninterrupted movement of food-stuffs and
other products from the ports of unloading to all regions of the land-locked countries of the SudanoSahelian region;
4. Also urges all Governments, United Nations
agencies, intergovernmental organizations, private organizations and individuals to continue to respond
favourably and in a continuing manner, either bilaterally
or through the United Nations Sahelian Office or any
other intermediary, to requests for assistance from
the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe! and its member States;
5. Draws the attention of Member States and of
the Secretary-General to the importance of the meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel held
at Banjul from 16 to 19 December 1977, and of the
third Conference of Heads of State and Government
of the Permanent Inter-State Committee to be held at
Banjul on 20 and 21 December 1977;
6. Requests the United Nations Sahclian Office to
continue its close co-operation with the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel
and its efforts to ensure co-operation and co-ordination
between United Nations programmes and bodies, with
a view to the implementation of the medium-term and
long-term assistance programmes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
action aimed at mobilizing the financial resources necessary for the implementation of the medium-term and
long-term projects identified by the States members of
the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
report to the General Assembly, through the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme and the Economic and Social Council, on the
implementation of the medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelian region and to report to the Assembly at its
thirty-third session on the implementation of section I
of the present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
H

A/32/254.
