A/65/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records
:

Sixty-fifth session

85

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 7 April 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Tragedies in Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
The President (spoke in French): On Friday,
1 April, a violent attack against the United Nations
took place in Mazar-i-Sharif, killing and injuring many
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. The day before, a volunteer with the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire was shot
and killed in Abidjan. I strongly condemn those attacks
and express my sincere condolences to the grieving
families.
In addition to those attacks, in recent days several
United Nations staff members have lost their lives
while carrying out their tasks on behalf of the
international community, including in the airplane
accident in Kinshasa and other tragic circumstances. I
believe all of us grieve each time that someone
working for the United Nations pays for their
commitment with their lives or by being injured. In
tribute to the courage and commitment of those men
and women who served the United Nations, I now
invite the General Assembly to stand and observe a
minute of silence.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.

consideration of agenda item 50 at its 62nd plenary
meeting, on 10 December 2010. In order to enable the
General Assembly to consider the draft resolution
before it today, it will be necessary to reopen our
consideration of agenda item 50. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to reopen its
consideration of that item?
It was so decided.
The
President
(spoke
in
French):
Representatives will recall that at its 2nd plenary
meeting, on 17 September 2010, the General Assembly
allocated agenda item 50 to the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee). In
order for the Assembly to proceed expeditiously on this
item, may I take it that the Assembly decides to
consider the item directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): May I further
take it that the Assembly agrees to proceed
immediately to the consideration of agenda item 50?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 50 (continued)
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space
Draft resolution (A/65/L.67)

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
begin our consideration of this item by making some
opening remarks.

The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the General Assembly concluded its

Today more than ever, we cannot ignore what is
taking place elsewhere in the world. Everything moves

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-29158 (E)

*1129158*

A/65/PV.85

faster and everything is closer. For many decades now,
the pace of progress made by science and technology
has increased unimaginably. We have just had a prime
example of that, with three cosmonauts addressing us
from outer space. The development of high-speed
transport and innovations in information and
communication technologies have shortened distances
and made us more mobile. The world as well as the
risks and challenges we face — to which the United
Nations and the international community must
respond — have of course become more complex.
However, new possibilities and greater benefits for
humankind have also emerged.
The first human space flight, whose fiftieth
anniversary we commemorate this year, was a
landmark in human history and technological progress.
The initiative of the delegation of the Russian
Federation to propose making 12 April the
International Day of Human Space Flight will provide
us an opportunity to pay tribute both to the courage of
Yuri Gagarin and to the individual merit of other Soviet
cosmonauts and the team that supported them. This
international day could also be a useful opportunity to
reflect upon the contribution of this mission to
scientific progress.
The venture into space led to developments in
such diverse areas as meteorology and agriculture,
satellite navigation and telecommunications and
biology and physics. Today, such flights last for days
and even months, and citizens from various countries
are working together in a space station. Crucially,
international cooperation also occurs in outer space.
That is especially important for us at the United
Nations.
The international community should ensure that
outer space is explored and used for peaceful purposes.
This is one of the hallmark activities of the United
Nations. In that connection, I would like to commend
the commitment of Member States and the efforts of
the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs.
It is said that during his flight aboard Vostok-1,
Yuri Gagarin marvelled that our planet was blue. We on
Earth know that this effect is produced by the many
oceans, seas, forests, mountains, glaciers and a
plethora of other natural treasures. It is our collective
responsibility both to ensure that, seen from the skies,
our Earth remains blue and that we use our natural
resources in a measured and sustainable manner.

2

I wish to underscore the important contribution
made by space exploration in that regard. Technologies
developed through space exploration are employed in
such diverse areas as the fight against global warming,
desertification and biodiversity loss. By way of
example, satellite imagery is making an essential
contribution to assessing the risk of natural disasters.
The positive effects of the use of outer space are
substantial. It is essential that we ensure that as many
people as possible can benefit from that, and
international cooperation is instrumental to that end. I
therefore encourage members to pursue and intensify
the efforts of the United Nations for the peaceful uses
of outer space. It is in that spirit that I call on members
to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s
achievement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation to introduce draft resolution
A/65/L.67.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me first to share with the members of
the Assembly an address by the President of the
Russian Federation.
“I welcome participants in the special
meeting of the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly devoted to the fiftieth anniversary of
the first human space flight.
“Russia is rightly proud of the fact that the
first and the most decisive step in the exploration
of outer space was taken on 12 April 1961 by our
compatriot, Yuri Alekseyevich Gagarin. His flight
became one of the most striking and significant
events of the twentieth century, starting a new
chapter in the history of mankind.
“In the past 50 years, space has become a
special area of foremost achievements. Those
include space walks, the establishment of orbital
space stations, where various scientific and
technological experiments are carried out, and
flights to other planets. Equally important, outer
space has become a platform for close, open and
fruitful international cooperation to the benefit of
universal peace and development.
“Large-scale multilateral programmes and
projects, namely, Apollo-Soyuz, Intercosmos and
Shuttle-Mir, have been carried out within the
framework of that cooperation. The International

11-29158

A/65/PV.85

Space Station is working successfully. The day
12 April, celebrated every year in Russia as
Cosmonautics Day, is a tribute to the joint
success in the exploration of the universe, the
courage and boldness of its brave conquerors and
many years of work by scientists, designers and
engineers. From now on, it will be a universally
recognized
commemorative
day
—
the
International Day of Human Space Flight.
“I am sure that multilateral cooperation in
the exploration and use of space for peaceful
purposes will extend to an increasing number of
countries and will promote joint efforts to find
solutions to global problems and the scientific
and technical progress of civilization. As Sergey
Korolev, a leading spacecraft designer, said, ‘the
future of cosmonautics has no limits and its
prospects are as infinite as the universe itself’.
“I wish the meeting’s participants fruitful
work and all the best.”
I would like to express my gratitude to all those
who have gathered here today to mark a very important
milestone in the history not only of our country but,
without any exaggeration, of all mankind. On 12 April
1961 the road to new heights, namely, man’s
exploration of outer space, was opened.
Broad interest in outer space arose as a result of
the launch in 1957 by the Soviet Union of the first
artificial satellite and grew with every new
achievement and development in space technology.
News of the human space flight was met with
particular enthusiasm. Not only at home but throughout
the world, Yuri Gagarin became the embodiment of
humanity’s achievements.
Already at the beginning of the space age, it
became clear that the exploration of outer space was
not possible without cooperation among States and the
drafting of rules and laws for peaceful cooperation.
The role of the United Nations as a forum to discuss all
aspects of cooperation in the peaceful use of outer
space has always been invaluable.
In 1959, the United Nations reacted to developing
trends by establishing the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space. This year, the Committee will
meet in Vienna for its fiftieth anniversary session.
Today, the peaceful use of outer space includes the

11-29158

entire range of issues
Organization’s activities.

covered

by

the

world

The 1967 Outer Space Treaty has become the
keystone of the ever strengthening international legal
basis. International cooperation on the peaceful use of
outer space is for the benefit and in the interest of all
States, regardless of their economic, social, scientific
and technological development, and is the achievement
of all humanity. Together, we must carry out much
work to ensure that space is used exclusively for the
progress of the human civilization.
Today, flights into space are no longer anything
extraordinary. Over 50 years, more than 500 people
from 38 countries have visited space. Even the term
space tourism has emerged. As technology develops
and becomes more accessible, the number of States
actively participating in space activities will certainly
increase.
Humanity’s space odyssey — the fruitful
cooperation of many States in outer space — would
have been impossible without the first step, that is, Yuri
Gagarin’s flight. It is highly symbolic that recently, the
Gagarin spacecraft carried a Russian-American crew to
the International Space Station.
In the year of the fiftieth anniversary of Yuri
Gagarin’s feat, the Russian Federation has prepared
and submitted draft resolution A/65/L.67, whose
objective is to declare 12 April the International Day of
Human Space Flight, to be celebrated internationally
every year.
The draft resolution is short and its content is
clear. Its provisions will not require any additional
financial expenditure for the Organization. We are
convinced that the adoption of the draft resolution will
serve as an important contribution to strengthening
cooperation on the peaceful use of outer space.
More than 60 countries have expressed interest in
sponsoring the draft resolution. We are grateful to them
all for their support. We call on the representatives of
States present in the General Assembly Hall today to
support Russia’s draft resolution.
We hope that from today, for all humanity
12 April will be celebrated as the International Day of
Human Space Flight. The atmosphere of this Day will
always be full of aspiration towards the future, as it
was 50 years ago, when the first astronaut on Earth

3

A/65/PV.85

launched a new era in the history of humanity — the
space era — in his famous “We’re off”.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolution A/65/L.67,
entitled “International Day of Human Space Flight”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the publication of draft resolution
A/65/L.67, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Algeria, Azerbaijan, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, Greece,
Guyana, Honduras, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, San Marino, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkmenistan, the United States of America and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.67?
Draft resolution A/65/L.67
(resolution 65/271).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to those representatives who wish to
speak in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary) (spoke in Russian): It is
my particular pleasure to speak on behalf of the
European Union at this very special plenary meeting of
the General Assembly to celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the first human space flight.
(spoke in English)
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
(spoke in Russian)
As we have heard and seen today, and as we all
know, the first human space flight, on 12 April 1961,

4

was not only an impressive technical achievement but a
major milestone in human history. Major Yuri Gagarin,
a cosmonaut and the commander of the spaceship
Vostok-1, became a hero not only to his people but also
to the whole of the international community. Following
his flight, qualities such as bravery, modesty,
confidence, professionalism, leadership and team spirit
became forever associated with cosmonauts. Gagarin’s
legacy will stay with us into the future. It is an honour
that we have adopted today a resolution proclaiming
the International Day of Human Space Flight.
(spoke in English)
Space makes an important contribution to the
economies of the world and affects our daily lives in
many ways for the common good of all mankind. It
plays a vital role in the monitoring of our planet and
the protection of the environment. Moreover, space
exploration has brought technical advances to the
material
sciences,
computing,
engineering,
communications, biomedicine and many other fields.
With the help of satellites, we are now able to see
our home planet in detail. Space probes have made
landings on distant planets, moons and asteroids,
journeying to the very edge of our solar system.
Orbiting astronomical telescopes have given scientists
magnificent insights into the creation of life and of the
whole universe.
Europe, in partnership with Russia, the United
States, Japan and Canada, is sharing in the
International Space Station project. Working through
the European Space Agency, Europe is exclusively
responsible for the European Columbus laboratory and
the Automated Transfer Vehicle, the two key elements
of the Station.
The European Union is fully committed to
strengthening the security of activities in outer space in
the context of expanding space activities that
contribute to the development and security of States.
The growing number of actors and the rapid
development of activities in outer space reinforce the
long-standing position of the European Union and its
member States in favour of the enhancement of the
multilateral framework concerning the preservation of
a peaceful, safe and secure environment in outer space.
To that end, the European Union is promoting the
elaboration of an international, voluntary code of
conduct for outer space activities — a tool that would

11-29158

A/65/PV.85

strengthen the safety, security and predictability of all
space activities. Such a code should, among other
things, limit or minimize harmful interference,
collisions or accidents in outer space, as well as the
creation of debris.
(spoke in Russian)
The prevention of an arms race in outer space and
the need to prevent outer space from becoming an area
of conflict are essential conditions for the
strengthening of strategic stability. The European
Union continues to promote international cooperation
aimed at the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes.
Today, with the adoption by the States Members
of the United Nations of a resolution on an
International Day of Human Space Flight, we bow our
heads in memory of the heroes of the space era, first
and foremost among them the first man who went into
space and who opened the path for all of us.
Mr. Mac-Donald (Suriname), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
behalf of the Chinese delegation, I should like to
welcome the convening of this special meeting of the
General Assembly to commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of human space flight.
On 12 April 1961, astronaut Yuri Gagarin of the
former Soviet Union made the first space flight on
Vostok-1, thus opening a new chapter in the human
exploration of outer space. We see the need to
commemorate this important day and reaffirm the
contribution made by the first human space flight to the
development of space science and technology.
We welcome the adoption by the General
Assembly of a resolution designating 12 April as the
International Day of Human Space Flight. That will
help us to remember that historic moment, reaffirm the
commitment to the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes and ensure that those
technologies serve the interests of humankind as a
whole. We also thank the Russian delegation for having
put forward this initiative.
Over the past 50 years, thanks to the efforts of
scientists from all countries, great progress has been
made in human space flight. Although the process has
not been a smooth and easy one, human exploration of

11-29158

outer space has never stopped. To date, nearly 40
countries have sent astronauts into space.
We are very pleased that China is making a
contribution in that respect. Since 1999, China’s human
flight project has successfully completed seven flights,
sent six astronauts into space three times and carried
out a space walk. This year China will carry out the
first rendezvous and docking flight and has begun to
build a space station.
With the utmost confidence and courage, China
will explore the unknown and make determined
advances, thereby promoting, and making our
contribution to, the cause of human space flight.
We should like to reiterate that we will always
abide by the basic principles set out in the Outer Space
Treaty and conduct all exploration and use of outer
space for the benefit of humankind as a whole. We are
ready to strengthen our cooperation with the
international community in the exploration and use of
outer space and in making advances in space science
and technology for the benefit of all countries, in
particular the developing countries. We hope that the
international community will work together to promote
harmony in the use of outer space, which is good for
peace, development, cooperation and the rule of law.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space on its fiftieth anniversary. We appreciate
the leading role played by the Committee in the
promotion of the peaceful use of outer space, the
improvement of outer space legislation and the
deepening of international cooperation. China will
continue to promote the cause of the peaceful use of
outer space together with all other countries.
Mrs. Pessôa (Brazil): We are gathered here today
to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the first human
space flight. In a letter to Galileo Galilei, written in
1609, Johannes Kepler observed that
“Ships and sails proper for the heavenly air
should be fashioned. Then there will also be
people who do not shrink from the dreary
vastness of space”.
We salute the pioneers who inaugurated the promising
era of the exploration and use of outer space, the
province of all mankind, for peaceful purposes.

5

A/65/PV.85

On that distant day of 12 April 1961, when Yuri
Gagarin was launched into outer space and orbited the
Earth on board the Vostok-1 spacecraft, one hardly
could have anticipated the benefits that space
technology would provide to life on our shared planet.
Today, space technology is an integral part of the
everyday life of citizens around the globe. It has
greatly contributed to resolving some of the most
pressing issues through its applications for forecasting
the weather, preventing natural disasters, protecting the
environment, providing humanitarian assistance,
controlling
pandemics, imparting
long-distance
education and supporting sustainable development. It
generates products and services for communications,
imaging and navigation, which are essential for the
functioning of several spheres of activity in our
contemporary world.
Brazil is pleased to have sponsored resolution
65/271, which declares 12 April the International Day
of Human Space Flight. As a developing country, we
are convinced of the need to invest in our own space
programme for peaceful uses and in benefit of our
sustainable development. We rely on the cooperation of
international partners, but we also do our part in
partnering with other developing countries to promote
the peaceful uses of space technology in several areas
of societal benefit.
We are firmly convinced of the need to use outer
space for peaceful purposes and to ensure, through
international cooperation, including South-South
cooperation, that all nations have access to the
products of space applications for their development
and the enhanced well-being of their people.
We are sure that the General Assembly’s adoption
of today’s resolution will promote awareness of the
importance of space technology so that the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes can be
carried out for the benefit and in the interests of all
countries.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): In taking the floor, Italy
endorses the statement made by the representative of
Hungary on behalf of the European Union and wishes
to add some comments in its national capacity.
Fifty years ago, on 12 April 1961, Flight Major
Yuri Gagarin entered the Vostok-1 space capsule and
the annals of human history when his ship was
launched into orbit around the Earth. I can still

6

remember that moment — although I was, happily,
much younger than I am now — and how it felt to
know that humankind had breached the final frontier,
inaugurating a new era in science and exploration.
Gagarin’s name was on everyone’s lips. He was a hero
who inspired people around the world with his skill,
his demeanour and his bravery.
Gagarin’s achievement also brought within
human grasp, into tangible reality, a world that had
long been celebrated in the masterpieces of
imagination. In Italy, the celestial spheres were
envisioned by our first poets, and the greatest of them,
Dante Alighieri, dedicated his magnum opus, The
Divine Comedy, to the heavens. The first book, the
Inferno, concludes with the famous indelible image of
the two pilgrims emerging from the underworld to
contemplate the sky above:
“We climbed up, he first and I behind him,
far enough to see, through a round opening, a few
of those fair things the heavens bear. Then we
came forth, to see again the stars.” (Inferno,
Canto XXXIV)
Another great Italian, Galileo Galilei, turned his
telescope towards the stars some three centuries later
and made discoveries that forever altered our view of
the universe. When he published his findings in the
Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, he
chose to do so not in Latin, the scientific language of
the day, but in a modern language, Italian.
In the modern era, Italy’s space adventure began
in the 1960s. After Russia and the United States, we
were the third country to launch its own satellite, the
San Marco 1, on 15 December 1964.
That heritage makes me all the more proud that
one of the astronauts speaking to us from the
International Space Station today is Paolo Nespoli, an
Italian national. He will soon be joined by another
Italian, Roberto Vittori, marking the first time that Italy
will have two astronauts working together on the
International Space Station.
Nespoli and Vittori join an illustrious list of
predecessors to cap off a series of Italy’s contributions
to the human exploration of space. As one of the first
countries engaged in space exploration, Italy became a
founder and key partner in the European Launcher
Development Organization and the European Space
Research Organization, both established in 1962.

11-29158

A/65/PV.85

Those organizations would later merge to form the
European Space Agency, in 1975.
More recently, in February 2010, a special
module called the Cupola, designed and built entirely
in Italy, was brought on board the International Space
Station. The Cupola provides seven large windows
through which to observe the Earth and the universe.
Let me take this opportunity to highlight what has
become perhaps the most significant aspect of human
space exploration. Where once there was a race to
space, now there is cooperation among countries, best
exemplified by the International Space Station itself.
The Station represents an international partnership
comprised of Europe, Russia, the United States, Japan
and Canada, with each country lending its own
resources and expertise to that common project.
There could thus be no forum more appropriate in
which to celebrate human space flight than here, at the
United Nations, where we join together as one family
in celebrating the achievements of humankind over the
past 50 years. That is why we praise and support the
initiative of the Russian Federation to declare 12 April
the International Day of Human Space Flight.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
I am honoured to deliver my statement to the General
Assembly on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of
the first human space flight.
The exploration of and human ventures into outer
space are an integral part of my country’s history. It is
a history that enables Kazakhstan to claim its rightful
position as an international launching pad and space
harbour. It was from the Baikonur launch pad, aboard
the Vostok-1 spacecraft, that Yuri Gagarin ushered in
the era of space flight on 12 April 1961.
Kazakhstan is of course a sponsor of resolution
65/271, whose adoption we welcome. Clearly, a great
many journeys to other planets and galaxies will be
made in the future, but Yuri Gagarin’s accomplishment
will always be warmly remembered as magnificent,
timeless, historic and legendary. With his 108-minute
flight into space, he exemplified not only the triumph
of science, engineering and technology, but also the
irrepressibility of human endeavour and its infinite
possibilities.
Baikonur is the world’s first and largest
operational space launch facility. Like Cape Canaveral
in the United States and the Jiuquan Satellite Launch

11-29158

Centre in China, Baikonur is fully equipped to launch
various types of rockets, including manned and
unmanned spacecraft. Baikonur celebrated its fiftieth
anniversary on 2 June 2005. Over the past 50 years,
more than 1,500 spacecraft of various types were
launched into space, including 38 types of rockets and
more than 80 categories of spacecraft.
The President returned to the Chair.
The word Baikonur in Kazakh means fruitful
land. The people of Kazakhstan saw the cosmonauts
take off from there with great anticipation and
excitement. We were always overjoyed when space
crews returned to Earth after their long and courageous
efforts in outer space. We were proud that it was on
Kazakh soil that cosmonauts again felt the gravity of
their home planet, saw the blue sky overhead and
received our warm and friendly embrace. I know that
these sentiments are shared by cosmonauts from 23
Member States. Kazakhstan can truly be proud of its
two cosmonauts, Toktar Aubakirov and Talgat
Musabayev, who are members of the international
group of space travellers.
Baikonur opened a great many chapters in the
history of astronautics. One of the highlights of these
innovations was the dawn of the era of space tourism,
when on 28 April 2001 an international crew was
launched from Baikonur, including the first space
tourist, the American Dennis Tito.
Kazakhstan attaches great significance to
developing its own space activities as an important and
sustainable source of innovative technologies and
progress. For us, this is an issue of international
competitiveness that will give powerful impetus to
national industrial development. The creation of a fullfledged space industry is one of the priority areas of
our national policy directly supported by the President
of Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev.
Kazakhstan is implementing its national
programme for space development on the basis of
broad international cooperation with Russian,
European, American and several other partners. Since
our independence, we have developed the necessary
legal framework for cooperation and undertaken joint
projects with the Russian Federation, France and other
leading countries.
Kazakhstan has formulated its space development
policy in accordance with the relevant international

7

A/65/PV.85

conventions, agreements, obligations and United
Nations resolutions. We champion the peaceful use of
outer space.
Kazakhstan is ready to continue to work within
the framework of multilateral efforts to fulfil the
objectives of the United Nations in the field of the
peaceful use of outer space in the twenty-first century
to guarantee the collective security of all of
humankind.
Mrs. Hernández Toledano (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The dawn of space exploration was one of
humankind’s greatest achievements in the past century.
When, 50 years ago in 1961, the Soviet Union
launched the first human space flight, it heralded a new
era of exploration, research and international
cooperation in the use of outer space. Cuba therefore
commends the timely initiative of the Russian
Federation to hold this meeting of the General
Assembly and the proposal to celebrate 12 April as the
International Day of Human Space Flight.
For Cuba, this meeting and the resolution we
have just adopted (resolution 65/271) are particularly
meaningful. Only three months after his historic flight
into space, Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin visited Cuba. He
won the hearts of our people, who welcomed him like a
son. Hundreds of thousands of Cubans turned out to
see him receive the Order of Playa Girón in the Plaza
de la Revolución.
During his time in our country, Gagarin stated
that the day would come when Cuba could send its
own cosmonauts into space. His prediction came true.
To the great pride of the Cuban people, history was
made in 1980 when Arnaldo Tamayo became the first
cosmonaut from Cuba, and the first from Latin
America and the Caribbean, to travel to space. During
that voyage, more than 20 research experiments
prepared by Cuban and Soviet scientists were carried
out, which later had important practical applications.
Cuba firmly believes that the peaceful
exploration of outer space will contribute to the
preservation of the human race. That is why we firmly
reject the development of an arms race in space. It is
unacceptable that certain countries continue to spend
astronomical sums on war plans, including in outer
space. If this continues, not only will the promising
future of space applications be destroyed, but their
very existence will be threatened.

8

Space belongs to humankind as a whole and
should only be put to such noble uses as the pursuit of
sustainable development and the prevention of natural
disasters. The right of all States to explore and use
outer space for the benefit of humankind is a
universally accepted principle. This is why, even
though the number of States participating in space
activities is growing, there is an urgent need for greater
bilateral and multilateral cooperation, in particular
through the sharing of experience and technology,
especially with developing countries.
The role of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space should be strengthened. Moreover,
relations between the Committee and the Commission
on Sustainable Development should be promoted with
a view to ensuring that space technologies are applied
for the good of development.
Gazing down at our planet from space during his
108-minute flight in the Vostok-1 spacecraft on
12 April 1961, Yuri Gagarin exclaimed “People of the
world, let us safeguard and enhance this beauty — not
destroy it!” On the fiftieth anniversary of the first
human space flight, we could pay no greater tribute
than to commit together to realize that wish of the first
cosmonaut.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this plenary meeting of
the General Assembly to celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the first human flight to outer space. I
also thank the delegation of the Russian Federation for
the initiative that led to this event.
We are gathered here today to celebrate not just a
single event — the launch of a spaceship and its pilot,
Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin — we are here to
celebrate what his flight stood for, namely, exploration,
adventure, scientific discovery and development. The
flight was a huge milestone in the history of
humankind. By turning a dream cherished by
generation after generation of leaders, scientists,
writers and ordinary people around the planet into
reality, the flight heralded a new age of activities in
space exploration, contributing immensely to man’s
ability to improve the quality of life on Earth.
In addition to the tremendous successes recorded
in subsequent human space flights and robotic
discoveries across the solar system, human beings now
have unprecedented insights into Mother Earth’s
systems from orbiting satellites. That also includes

11-29158

A/65/PV.85

incredible advances in biological and physical
research. Increased international cooperation in space
science has also helped diminish the mystery of the
unknown universe and bring down the frontiers of
space in the interests of all.
Conscious of the role that space science plays in
development, Viet Nam attaches great importance to
research in this field. As early as 1979, the Government
of Viet Nam set up a commission on space research to
prepare for the joint Soviet-Viet Nam human space
flight. As a result, the first Vietnamese cosmonaut, hero
and pilot Pham Tuan, successfully undertook his joint
mission with Russian cosmonaut Viktor Gorbatko in
such a flight aboard Soyuz-37, which lasted 7 days, 20
hours and 42 minutes, from 23 to 31 July 1980. The
flight enabled the Vietnamese cosmonaut to conduct
experiments on melting mineral samples in
microgravity, carry out experiments on plants and
perform aerial photographing of Viet Nam for mapping
purposes.
For the exploration of outer space to serve the
interests and benefit of all humankind and for
international cooperation in this field to be fruitful, the
international community must also strengthen efforts to
prevent an arms race in outer space. While supporting
and contributing to the exploration of outer space for
peaceful purposes, Viet Nam supports the consideration
of further measures in the search for agreements to
prevent an arms race in outer space, including the
weaponization of outer space, in accordance with the
spirit of resolutions 65/68 and 65/97, as well as other
previous Assembly resolutions. We support the
conclusion by the Conference on Disarmament of a
treaty to this effect.
In line with this fundamental policy on space
activities, in 2006 the Government of Viet Nam
adopted its strategy on research and application of
space technology by 2020, which states that all
activities in the research and use of outer space must be
aimed at peaceful purposes, contribute to the
prevention of a possible arms race in outer space and
strengthen international cooperation in formulating a
legal framework for the exploration and use of outer
space for peaceful ends.
It is also in line with this fundamental policy on
space activities that Viet Nam was a sponsor of
resolution 65/271, presented by the Russian
Federation, as we are convinced that it will further

11-29158

promote the effective peaceful use of outer space for
the benefit of all humankind.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): On 12 April
2011, the world will mark the fiftieth anniversary of
the first human flight into space. Our delegation
appreciates the initiative of the delegation of the
Russian Federation to hold this special plenary meeting
to introduce the draft resolution declaring 12 April as
the International Day of Human Space Flight
(resolution 65/271) in honour of Yuri Gagarin’s space
flight. We are happy to have been a sponsor of the
resolution. I also take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and members of the General
Assembly on this historic occasion.
I would like to mention that India is celebrating
the twenty-seventh anniversary of space flight by an
Indian. Rakesh Sharma was the first Indian to go into
space, aboard the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics’
Soyuz-T11 from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in
Kazakhstan on 3 April 1984.
India’s own Chandrayaan-1, with many
international payloads, including one from the United
States, was instrumental in conclusively establishing
the presence of water and hydroxyl molecules on the
lunar surface. India performed a unique joint
experiment known as a bistatic experiment, involving
Chandrayaan-1 and NASA’s lunar reconnaissance
orbiter spacecraft, on 21 August 2009, in order to
obtain additional information on the possibility of the
existence of ice in a permanently shadowed crater near
the north pole of the Moon. Additionally, the analysis
of data obtained by the miniature synthetic aperture
radar on-board the Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft has
provided evidence for the presence of ice deposits near
the Moon’s north pole.
Chandrayaan-2, India’s second mission to the
Moon, will be launched on India’s geosynchronous
satellite launch vehicle some time in the 2012–2013
time frame. It will have an orbiter and land a rover
module. The Indian Space Research Organisation
(ISRO) will have the primary responsibility for the
orbiter and the rover. The Russian Federal Space
Agency will be responsible for the lander. The goals of
the mission are to further improve the understanding of
the origin and evolution of the Moon, using
instruments on board the orbiter and in situ analysis of
lunar samples using the lander and rover.

9

A/65/PV.85

ISRO is carrying out studies on undertaking
human space flight to carry human beings to low-Earth
orbit and ensure their safe return. It has initiated
pre-project activities to study technical and managerial
issues relating to undertaking a human mission, with an
aim to build and demonstrate our capability. The
programme envisages the development of a fully
autonomous orbital vehicle carrying two or three crew
members to about 300 kilometres in low-Earth orbit,
including their safe return.
The emphasis of the Indian space programme has
always been on integrating the advances in space
technology and applications with national development
goals, particularly in vital service areas such as
telecommunications,
television
broadcasting,
meteorology, disaster warning and natural resource
surveying and management. We place considerable
importance on international cooperation in space
activities, mainly in taking up new scientific and
technological challenges and defining international
frameworks for the exploitation and utilization of outer
space for peaceful purposes.
India continues to provide expertise on services
for supporting developing countries in the application
of space technology through capacity-building. The
Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in
Asia and the Pacific, which is affiliated with the United
Nations and operates from India, has so far benefited
894 scholars from 31 countries of the Asia-Pacific
region and 28 scholars from 17 countries outside that
region. India would like to request more participation
from member countries.
Under the Severe Thunderstorm Observations and
Regional Modelling Programme of the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation, India is
providing a Doppler weather radar to its member
countries. India is also committed to sharing the data
obtained from its Indian Remote Sensing satellites
within the countries of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations for disaster management support. We
recently made an arrangement with Brazil to provide
RESOURCESAT-1 data.
The myriad beneficial developments that have
flowed from space research and exploration have been
enumerated by many of those who have spoken before
me. The first spaceflight by Yuri Gagarin was a
pioneering human achievement in the exploration of
outer space. India considers the declaration of 12 April

10

as the International Day of Human Space Flight in
honour of Yuri Gagarin as a tribute to human efforts in
space exploration and the harnessing of the potential of
space for the benefit of humankind. India supports
resolution 65/271.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America):
Humanity’s journey beyond Earth famously began as
the space race — a high-stakes struggle for security
and prestige between two competitors, the United
States and the Soviet Union. Today, the space race is
over and, thanks to the remarkably improved
atmosphere of cooperation, we have all won.
Space exploration is no longer a competition. It is
a vital aspect of modern science and an endeavour
requiring close cooperation between international
partners in pursuit of our scientific and technological
goals. The United States and Russia’s work together on
space science and exploration has long been, and
continues to be, a model of productive partnership
between nations. Earlier this week, Russia’s Soyuz
mission was the latest to carry both Russian and
American nationals to the International Space Station.
Next week, the chiefs of our space agencies, NASA
and the Russian Federal Space Agency, will meet in
Moscow to discuss future projects and missions that
will push the frontiers of human knowledge of space
farther than ever before.
The accomplishments of space exploration stretch
beyond learning about our planet and universe and
have provided the technological basis for innovations
in computer technology, medicine, renewable energy
and countless other fields. What is more, human space
flight has turned into one of the world’s truly
international undertakings, with citizens from more
than 30 different countries — from Afghanistan to Viet
Nam — travelling beyond Earth’s atmosphere. In the
coming years, those intrepid explorers will be joined
by citizens from other nations.
The fiftieth anniversary of human space flight is a
proper occasion to reflect upon humanity’s
achievements in space and to renew our commitment to
realizing our common aspirations. Through cooperative
space exploration, all nations that operate in space find
their horizons broadened, their knowledge enhanced
and the lives of their citizens improved. As President
Kennedy said in 1962,
“We set sail on this new sea because there is
new knowledge to be gained, and new rights to be

11-29158

A/65/PV.85

won, and they must be won and used for the
progress of all people.”
Those words ring just as true today. For all these
reasons, the United States is honoured to have been a
sponsor of the resolution we have just adopted, and to
join in the commemoration of this historic milestone.
Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus, including as a former Soviet
republic, enjoys a long history of participation in space
exploration
programmes.
Soviet
cosmonauts
participating in the exploration of outer space included
natives of Belarus, Petr Klimuk and Vladimir
Kovalenok. In 1978, two Belarusian cosmonauts were
in orbit simultaneously. The Republic of Belarus
participated in many space programmes of the former
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, starting in the
early 1960s. That served as an important stimulus for
the development of the scientific and industrial
complex of Belarus in the field of space technologies.
Currently, Belarus is actively implementing its
national space programme for the period 2008 to 2012,
whose goal is the effective use of the space sector’s
accumulated scientific and technological potential for
the social and economic development and individual
industrial sectors of Belarus, including for the benefit
of our citizens and the purposes of science education.
The Republic of Belarus fully supported and
joined as a sponsor the resolution initiated by the
Russian Federation proclaiming 12 April as the
International Day of Human Space Flight, which
underscores the historic importance of space flight in
the development of humankind (resolution 65/271). As
the great Russian scientist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky,
who was one of the founders of today’s space
activities, said, “Earth is the cradle of mankind; but
one cannot live one’s whole life in a cradle”. The
importance of Yuri Gagarin’s flight as man’s first step
into outer space is clear, just as is the need to continue
to integrate international scientific space achievements.
The delegation of Belarus fully associates itself
with the provisions of the resolution we have adopted.
The resolution attaches great importance to
international cooperation for the peaceful use of outer
space, in which the United Nations must play an
important role.
In conclusion, allow me to express our conviction
that the Assembly’s adoption of this resolution and the

11-29158

proclamation of 12 April as the International Day of
Human Space Flight will not only underscore the
universal importance of this event, but will also serve
as the United Nations contribution to strengthening
international cooperation for the peaceful use of outer
space.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to thank
the delegation of the Russian Federation and the other
sponsors of resolution 65/271, which we have just
adopted and which signifies the importance of space
science and technology for achieving sustainable
development goals and increasing the well-being of
societies. The diverse sponsorship of the resolution
reflects the willingness of many Member States from
different regions to further promote and expand the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes.
Fifty years ago, Yuri Gagarin’s words “Let’s go!”
at the beginning of the first manned flight into space
marked a new page in world history and opened the
way for space exploration for the benefit of all
humankind.
A decisive role in realizing the flight was played
by academician Sergei Korolev and the Council of
Chief Designers created under his leadership, a body
that was unprecedented in the history of science.
Putting together the talents and skills of many
outstanding scientists, engineers and researchers, the
Council made it possible to put a man in space.
It is with honour that we note that the esteemed
ranks of the Council included Armenia’s own Andronik
Iosifyan, who served as the chief designer of the AllUnion
Scientific
Research
Institute
of
Electromechanics. Under his leadership, the Institute
became responsible for solving the diverse electrical
engineering problems that arise in rocket and space
technologies.
In addition to the numerous members of the
Armenian scientific community who have played a
prominent role in developing space technology, such as
Grigor Gurzadyan, who is considered to be the founder
of radio astronomy, there were others who were
directly involved in the work leading to Gagarin’s
flight, including Ruben Chachikyan, the chief designer
in charge of pressurization elements within the landing
system, and Armen Mnatsakanyan, one of the chief
designers for the space radio system, who at that time

11

A/65/PV.85

headed the Scientific Research Institute of Precision
Instruments.
I am proud to say that today Armenia continues to
be actively involved in this difficult knowledgeintensive field that is so vital for the development of
economies, even if it is constrained to some degree by
the difficulties that our country continues to face.
The outstanding work of the Yerevan Physics
Institute’s cosmic ray division in the area of space
weather, which is endorsed by the United Nations and
undertaken in collaboration with a number of the
sponsors of today’s resolution, and that of the
Institute’s Electric Sky Project, which is at the
forefront of the research on the not yet well understood
but powerful and important electrical phenomena in the
upper atmosphere, are just a couple of examples of the
research currently being done in Armenia.
We note with satisfaction that as a result of
international cooperation progress has been achieved in
furthering the goals of space science and technology
education. In that context, Armenian scientists
currently cooperate with a number of space-related
organizations in connection with their research,
including NASA, the European Space Agency, the
Russian Federal Space Agency, the Committee on
Space Research and others. The success of our
common goals in this respect depends heavily on
global cooperation. We hope that this resolution once
again reaffirms the importance of that fact.
Today, we fully recognize the usefulness and
significance of that international endeavour. Our
scientific community is ready to continue its
international and regional cooperation programmes
with a view to achieving a convergence of positions on
many issues of common concern in the peaceful uses of
outer space.
Let me conclude simply by saying that Armenia
remains entirely supportive of the increasingly
important role of the United Nations in ensuring that
outer space is maintained for peaceful uses and
exploration and that the achievements of space science
and technology are applied for the benefit of all
peoples.
Ms. Ochir (Mongolia): Space science and
technology touch many aspects of our daily lives and
make a significant contribution to the advancement of
human development. It is therefore difficult to

12

overestimate the historic importance of the first human
space flight, on 12 April 1961, undertaken by Soviet
cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin.
The first human flight in outer space was indeed a
milestone in human history, paving the way for space
exploration for the benefit of all humankind. It was an
event that captivated, and will never cease to captivate,
the minds of people all over the world. For those who
made that flight possible, it was also the result of their
genius and many years of arduous work. On behalf of
my Government, I would like to congratulate the
Russian Federation and its people on the fiftieth
anniversary of that historic achievement.
The first human space flight established a great
legacy not only of space exploration, but also of
international cooperation in that area, which has
benefited many countries, including Mongolia. A vivid
example is the Soviet Intercosmos programme for
international cooperation in space exploration, which
enabled a joint Mongolian-Soviet space flight to take
place on 22 March 1981, with the first Mongolian
cosmonaut on board. During their seven-day flight, the
joint Mongolian-Soviet crew successfully performed a
total of more than 30 scientific experiments and studies
in the fields of space physics, technology, medical
biology, remote sensing and other areas. The joint crew
thoroughly photographed and surveyed Mongolia’s
territory from space, which provided invaluable
insights into its geography, natural resource reserves,
geology, agricultural land, surface waters and climatic
conditions.
Thanks to the Intercosmos programme and the
outstanding Soviet cosmonauts who supported our
cosmonaut during the flight, Mongolia became the
tenth country out of the more than 30 countries that so
far have travelled into space, as well as the twentieth
country to have carried out scientific experiments in
space. That example vividly demonstrates how farreaching the legacy of Gagarin’s space flight was by
making it possible for small developing countries such
as Mongolia to benefit directly from space exploration.
Mongolia is proud to have been a sponsor of
resolution 65/271, which declares 12 April as the
International Day of Human Space Flight.
Mr. Cujba (Republic of Moldova): At the outset,
I would like to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this plenary
meeting to mark the fiftieth anniversary of Yuri

11-29158

A/65/PV.85

Gagarin’s flight to outer space. Commemorating the
first human flight to space once again acknowledges
the relevance of that most remarkable event of modern
history to the future development and progress of
humankind.
Along with the launching of the first man-made
satellite, the first manned space flight opened new
horizons and frontiers for human endeavours and
established the beginning of space research and
exploration, revealing unprecedented prospects for the
world. Undoubtedly, the half century that followed
became an era of space science and the peaceful uses
of outer space for the well-being of humankind.
The increased number of States capable of
launching satellites, the work of international crews in
outer space, and common interest in promoting and
expanding its exploration and use for peaceful
purposes have become a reality and form an integral
part of international cooperation and of everyday life.
The benefits derived from space applications have
transformed the way people look at their environment
and planet, influenced their communication and
interaction and changed the way people move from one
place to another, greatly increasing its safety, security,
accuracy, predictability and convenience.
Equally, the development of space science and
the practical applications of its achievements through
the production and implementation of innovative
technologies in various fields was an important
prerequisite for the advancement of economies and
sustainable development.
Over the past five decades, the United Nations
has played, and continues to play, an important role not
only in the exploration and peaceful use of outer space,
but also in ensuring that the benefits of space activities
are shared by all nations. As the standing body
concerned exclusively with such tasks, the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its two
subcommittees have been successful in fostering
international cooperation in space activities, especially

11-29158

in meeting new scientific and technological challenges
and in defining an international framework for the
exploitation and peaceful use of outer space.
It remains the central focal point for United
Nations Member States to seek avenues for further
enhanced partnerships in advancing research and space
science, devising programmes and United Nations
technical cooperation and integrating advances in space
technologies and applications into development goals.
The United Nations should further strengthen its
role in shaping international standards for space
activities and in promoting cooperation and
coordination at the global, regional and interregional
levels. The increased international cooperation and
contribution of all countries participating in the
peaceful uses of outer space development activities can
maximize the benefits of space capabilities in the
service of humanity and create a positive change with
regard to climate change, desertification, biodiversity
loss, the energy crisis and artificial and natural
disasters.
Space exploration and its peaceful uses are a
great achievement of mankind, and the international
community should develop new forms of collaboration
for the benefit and prosperity of all States. We believe
that the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary and the
declaration of 12 April as the International Day of
Human Space Flight will give new impetus to
international cooperation in outer space activities. We
hope that today’s resolution 65/271 will make a solid
contribution to sustainable space exploration in the
service of all humanity.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker on this item. May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 50?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

13
