UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1836th

MEETING:

11 AUGUST

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l836)

. .. ... ... .. .. ... ... ... . .... .. ... .. ...

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Report of the Security Council Committee on the Admission of New Members
concerning the applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam (S/ 11794) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 1836

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1836th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Shizuo SAITO

of the provisional rules of procedure. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose that the Council
agree to invite the representative of Algeria to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I invite the representative
of Algeria to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when he wishes to address the Council.

(Japan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l836)
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. BouayadAgha (Algeria) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

Report of the Security Council Committee on the
Admission of New Members concerning the applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam (S/l 1794)
The meeting

11 August 1975, at 3 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its discussion of the matter before it, which
was begun at our morning meeting. The next speaker
is the representative of Romania. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption

4. Mr. DATCU
(Romania)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, I should first like to express
to you and the other members of the Security Council
the gratitude of the Romanian delegation for having
provided us with the opportunity to present the position of the Romanian Government
on the item now
being dealt with by the Council.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Report of the Security Council Committee
on the
Admission of New Members concerning the applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam (S/l 1794)

5. It is a source of particular
satisfaction to us
to speak before the Security Council under the presidency of an illustrious
representative
of Japan-a
friendly country with which Romania is developing
excellent relations of co-operation
based on mutual
confidence and respect, on equality of rights and
mutual advantage.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken this morning [283&h meeting], I propose now,
with the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of Cuba, the German Democratic Republic,
Guinea, Hungary, India, Poland, Romania, Somalia
and Yugoslavia
to participate
in the discussion
without the right to vote.

6. It is for me a signal honour to be able warmly
to welcome, on behalf of the Romanian Government,
the presence here in the United Nations of the first
representantives
accredited as Observers for the
Republic of South Viet-Nam,
Mr. Dinh Ba Thi, and
for the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, Mr. Nguyen
Van Luu. I should like to extend to them our warm
congratulations,
to express to them our best wishes
for success and to assure them of our complete
support in the accomplishment
of their mission.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Acosta
Rodriguez (Cuba), Mr. Neugebauer (German Democratic Republic), Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cissh (Guinea),
Mr. B&y&z (Hungary), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Czarkowski (Poland), Mr. Datcu (Romania), Mr. Hussein
(Somalia) and Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have received
a letter from the representative of Algeria requesting
that he be invited to participate in the discussion
of the question on the Council’s agenda in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37

7. At present the Security Council is considering
the requests for admission to the United Nations of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam,
both sovereign States which
1

love peace and justice and with which my country
is closely associated by links of friendship
and
brotherly solidarity. The admission of new Member
States is a subject which is of concern to the Organization as a whole. The interest which Romania has
in this matter is particularly easy to understand since
our country has always been a militant protagonist
of the universality of the United Nations and we have
always spoken in favour of its strengthening and the
enhancement of its role in international
affairs.

12. There can be no doubt that the presence of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
as fully fledged Members
of the United Nations will make it possible for the
Organization to make an increased contribution to the
strengthening of peace and co-operation both in the
great continent of Asia and throuahout the world.
13. Acceptance of the applications would not only
be a political act in harmony with the principles of
the Charter of the Organization;
it would also be an
act of justice, and would mean that the Organization
had fulfilled its duty towards the Vietnamese people,
which, through
its countless
sacrifices, has so
gloriously
defended the great principles
of the
Charter. The admission
of the two Vietnamese
States to the United Nations must be considered
the recognition of a right that has been won by the
Vietnamese people at the end of a long and arduous
struggle, the culmination of their struggle for national
independence.

8. For 30 years the Vietnamese people has had to
struggle against internal reactionary forces and against
foreign intervention
in order to defend its right
to free, dignified
and independent
development.
The resounding victory of the Vietnamese people has
once again confirmed the great truth of our times,
that when a people is determined resolutely to defend
its sacred and inalienable right to freedom and national
independence
no force in the world is capable of
preventing it from winning a complete victory.

14. The people of Viet-Nam
has addressed itself
to the Organization.
The Organization
as a whole,
and each and every one of its Members, must find
a source of satisfaction in the fact that after such a
lengthy struggle, and even before their wounds had
healed, one of the first acts of foreign policy of the
two Vietnamese States was to seek membership
in
the Organization so as to contribute to it their experience, their energy and their efforts and to work with
the other nations of the world to strengthen peace
and co-operation internationally.
It is now up to the
Organization,
and particularly
at this stage it is up
tn you, the members of the Security Council, to
give them an unequivocal
and affirmative reply. It
is in that spirit that the Romanian
Government
voices the hope that the members of this lofty
forum will accede to the justified requests submitted
by the. Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam
and that the draft
resolutions sponsored by nine States [S/Z1795 and
S/l 17961 will be adopted.

9. Socialist Romania
has from the very outset
expressed its solidarity with the heroic struggle of the
Vietnamese people and we have given it all our support for the final liberation of its homeland. We consider the victory of the Vietnamese people a historic
contribution
to the success of the struggle of progressive anti-colonial forces against the former policies of
force, diktat and interference in the internal affairs
of countries in order to support and to safeguard
the right of all peoples to be masters of their own
destinies and to organize their lives along independent
lines in accordance with their own aspirations and with
a view to building a better and fairer world.
10. The fortunate outcome of events in Indo-China
has created for the sorely tried Vietnamese people
conditions which will enable it to get down to the
task of reconstruction
and the democratic development of its society in order to achieve the noble
ideals of economic and social progress. In this complicated task they must be able to rely on the support
and solidarity of the international
community
as a
whole and at the same time to derive benefit from the
fruits of multilateral
co-operation
within intemational organizations.

15. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of India. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
16. Mr. JAIPAL
(India):
Mr. President,
may I
extend to you my warm congratulations
on your
assumption of the office of President of the Security
Council for this month and wish you every success.
My delegation is grateful to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Security Council for giving us this
opportunity
to express our views on the important
question now engaging the attention of the Council.

11. The admission of the Republic of South VietNam and of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
to membership
in the United Nations is, after all,
only a natural and logical step, long awaited by the
world public, that will thus bring about their complete incorporation
into the ranks of the community
of sovereign independent
nations. That is why the
Romanian Government
gives its full support to the
requests of the two Vietnamese
States to become
Members of the United Nations. We sincerely believe
it is the mission of the Organization
to concert the
efforts of all peace-loving States in order to strengthen
its capacity and to enhance its role.

17. The Government and people of India have long
been interested in the successful outcome of the struggle for independence
of the Vietnamese people, an
interest which goes back to the days of our own
national movement
for independence.
Historically
2

and spiritually,
the Vietnamese struggle was a part
of the wider global movement
of colonial peoples
towards their emancipation.
Actually,
it _meant
perhaps a little more to us in India, since the Vietnamese are, an Asian people and certain common
aspects of our culture had created bonds of natural
and mutual sympathy between our two countries and
peoples.

ciple of universality
of the Organization.
The only
fair thing to do in the circumstances
is to decide
each application
for membership
on its individual
merits in relation to Article 4 of the Charter.
21. We are well aware of precedents in the past
for denying admission to one State or more unless
some other States were also admitted at the same
time. Those precedents have not added to the
glory of the Organization.
But there are surely other
precedents to follow, and my delegation hopes that
the members of the Security Council would not
allow alien factors to enter into their consideration
of the applications
for admission before them. On
the contrary, we hope that they will base their decision exclusively on whether or not the two applicant
States fulfil the conditions for admission established
by the Charter. We think that they do, and therefore
we think they should be admitted without question
and without delay.

18. It was our expectation-and,
indeed, that of
many others too-that Viet-Nam would have joined the
United Nations at the same time as the other two
States of Indo-China,
but that did not happen.
Instead, the struggle of the Vietnamese people to
free themselves of all foreign forces entered a new
and more harrowing phase in which the country
became divided and the land and the people became
the testing-ground
for the terrifying
weapons of
modern war. No other war of national liberation
has left such a big scar on the conscience of the
United Nations, because, as an organization,
the
United Nations stood aside and did nothing. That
was one local conflict which the United Nations did
not even try to stop, and as a consequence the
United Nations has, if I may say so, developed a
sort of guilt complex about Viet-Nam. It must therefore make all of us feel quite small to be facing a
situation in which the Vietnamese people themselves
seek representation
in the Organization
that did so
little for them. In these circumstances
one would
have thought that the United Nations would admit
the two applicant
States of Viet-Nam
quietly,
without any fuss, and, what is more, offer to make
amends to them for the years of neglect by the
United Nations,

22. Lastly, I should like to draw the attention of
the members of the Council to Article 2, paragraph 6,
of the Charter, which reads: “The Organization
shall ensure that States which are not Members of
the United Nations act in accordance with these
principles so far as may be necessary for the maintenance of international
peace and security”.
23. Is it not an obligation
of the United Nations
under this Article to admit a State that qualifies
for membership?
Because by doing so the United
Nations would be ensuring that it does in fact act
in accordance with the Charter’s principles for maintenance of peace and security. It would be a very
strange way indeed for the United Nations to fulfil
its clear obligation under Article 2, paragraph 6, of
the Charter by denying States membership
when
they apply for it and when they fulfil the conditions
for membership.
This aspect of the Charter I would
commend to those who may be thinking of casting
a negative vote on the two draft resolutions before
the Security Council.

19. There is a certain pathos and irony in the
present situation that cannot have escaped even the
most unsentimental
among us. However, let me
now turn to the cold legal aspects of the case. The
conditions
for, admission
of new Members
are
stipulated in Article 4 of the Charter as being three.
First, the applicant must accept the obligations contained in the Charter. Secondly, the applicant must
be a peace-loving State. Thirdly, the applicant must
be able and willing to carry out the obligations contained in the Charter.

24. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list
of speakers is that of the representative
of Hungary. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

20. I believe that it is the general view of all members in the Council that these three conditions are
fulfilled in the case of the two applicant States, of
Viet-Nam.
Even so, the Charter and the provisional
rules of procedure permit any member of the Security Council to cast a negative vote for reasons
unrelated to the conditions of admission of appiicant
States. And if one permanent member of the Council
were to cast a negative vote for extraneous reasons,
the applicant States could not be admitted to the
United Nations. That is the correct legal position.
It seems that what the Charter gives with one hand,
it takes away with the other. In such a curious situation it is not possible to maintain the so-called prin-

25. Mr. BANYASZ
(Hungary):
Mr. President, I
should like to extend our sincere appreciation
to
you, Sir, and to all members of the Security Council for giving my delegation
the opp,ortunity
to
express our views in the course of the discussion
in the Council on the question of the applications
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam for membership in the
United Nations. It is our privilege to participate in
this meeting under your wise guidance.
26. I am pleased to take the opportunity,
on behalf
of my Government,
to welcome whole-heartedly
3

the applications of the Democratic Republic of VietNam and the Republic of South Viet-Nam for in the
United Nations. At the same time, I wish to extend
our warmest greetings
to their representatives
present here at United Nations Headquarters:
to
Mr. Nguyen Van Luu of the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam and Mr. Dinh Ba Thi of the Republic of
South Viet-Nam, and to their colleagues.
27. The delegation
of the Hungarian
People’s
Republic asked to be allowed to speak on this occasion of great significance not only because we followed closely the consideration
of the question
concerned, but for the very reason that there are
warm and very friendly ties between the Hungarian
and the Vietnamese people. The cause of the Vietnamese people has always been close to our heart.
The Hungarian people, in the true spirit of proletariat
internationalism,
has consistently
stood for the
heroic struggle of the Vietnamese people to attain
national independence,
sovereignty
and freedom.
The Hungarian People’s Republic has done its utmost
to assist the Vietnamese people in their legitimate
struggle, and we shall do our best in the future as well.
28. Along with the overwhelming
majority of the
States Members of the United Nations, the Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic is convinced
that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the
Republic of South Viet-Nam truly and fully deserve
membership in the Organization
without any delay.
The Governments of these countries have repeatedly
expressed their readiness and willingness to fulfil
their obligations
under the Charter of the United
Nations.
29. The delegation
of the Hungarian
People’s
Republic is certain that the admission of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of
South Viet-Nam will definitely strengthen the United
Nations and its endeavours towards international
peace, security and co-operation.
Thus, everybody
will gain and nobody will lose. Even those countries ‘which today do not seem to realize it will gain
through the admission.
The victory of the Vietnamese people in their legitimate
struggle for
national independence
has given a very significant
impetus to detente in the world and in particular
provides a step forward to lasting peace and security
in South-East Asia, whose peoples have suffered so
much in the past.
30. A great number of countries have paid their
tribute to the victory of the Vietnamese people and
pledged their assistance for the building up of their
war-torn country. It is my privilege to confirm here
again that the Hungarian
people and Government
fully support the friendly people of Viet-Nam in the
reconstruction of their homeland.
31. It is my ‘delegation’s
firm conviction that the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic

of South Viet-Nam shall join the family of the’ United
Nations in the very near future, proving that trying
to prevent those two countries from gaining admission to the United Nations is an unsuccessful policy
and that victory shall be on the side of the just
cause. In the light of the foregoing, were are of the
opinion that the applications of the two Viet-Nams
.for membership
in the United Nations will ,be considered favourably, thus meeting the demand of the
international
community.
32. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a letter from
the representative
of Bulgaria requesting that he be
invited
to participate
in the discussion
of the
question on the Council’s
agenda in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure. I propose that
the Council agree, in accordance with the usual
practice, to invite the representative of Bulgaria to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
In view of the limited number of seats available at
the Council table; I. invite the representative of Bulgaria to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding
that he will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when it is his turn to address the Council.
At the’ invitation
of the President,
Mr. Ghelev
(Bulgaria) took ihe place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
33. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on’the list
of speakers is that of the representative
of Poland.
I invite him to take ‘a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
34. Mr. CZARKOWSKI
(Poland): Mr. President,
permit me in the. first place to congratulate
you
very warmly on your assumption of the presidency
of this principal organ of the United Nations. Indeed,
it is rewarding for a Pole to see the representative
of Japan, ,with which my country maintains. friendly,
relations, presiding over the Security Council.
35. I should also like to express my delegation’s
gratitude to you, Sir, as well as to all the other members of the.Council for having enabled me to express
the views of Poland on the important item beforeus.,
Furthermore,
I wish, also to greet cordially here in
the United Nations the Observers for, the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of ,Viet-Nam,
Mr. Dinh Ba Thi and Mr. Nguyen
Van Luu.
36. As the members of the Council are aware, Poland
has for a number of years been a member of the
International
Commission
for Supervision and Control in Viet-Nam. With all the memories of the Second
World War, which took a toll of more than 6 million
Polish lives, our representatives
carried out their
mission in Viet-Nam
with particular
sensitivity to
the cause of the heroic struggle of the Vietnamese

people for their national liberation. For a nation like
mine:, it is not hard at all to understand the immensity of the suffering and sacrifice of the people of
Viet-Nam,
especially now when the thirtieth anniversary of the termination
of, the grim world war
warns us against its repetition anywhere at any time.

40. Poland therefore joins the appeal of the Coordinating Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries
[S/11793] to all non-aligned as well as fair-minded
and peace-loving States to support the admission to
the United Nations of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.

37. With all the greater satisfaction and joy, shared
by all the peoples of the world, we welcomed the
end of the war in Viet-Nam, effected as it was by the
victory of its brave people. We have particularly
appreciated the overwhelming
reaction of easiness
and understanding
demonstrated
in this connexion
by the people of-the United States. My delegation
is firmly convinced that there is hardly anyone
-unless
deprived of human feelings and political
realism-who
would not wish the people of VietNam every success in the construction of a peaceful
life after more than an entire generation of its courageous struggle. Hence we both greet and hail the
applications by the Republic of South Viet-Nam and
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam for admission
to membership
in the United Nations. Poland lends
them its full and unequivocal support. In our view,
these applications testify to the growing confidence
of the two countries towards the world community
and to the expectations they link with the Organization. To disappoint them would be tantamount to
repeating the old mistakes, when resort to obsolete
tactics more than once harmed the effectivness of
the Organization.

41.

The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Somalia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

42. Mr. HUSSEIN
(Somalia):
Mr. President,
I
should like,. first of all, to thank you and, through
you, the members of the Council for having allowed
us to participate in the debate on the item which
the Council is now considering. May I, at the outset,
express my delegation’s congratulations
to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of August. I am confident that your
wisdom and long experience will guide the Council
in the right direction in its deliberations.
43. I should like also to express my delegation’s
congratulations
to your predecessor, Mr. Plaja of
Italy, on the successful and skilful manner in which
he conducted the business of the Council for the
month of July. I should like to address the same
expression to Mr. Cavaglieri, who made a positive
contribution
and tactfully conducted the informal
and formal activities of the Council during Mr. Plaja’s
absence.

38. Much to our amazement, a point has been raised
lately about the so-called linkage with some other
issues of the admission of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
to membership in the United Nations. My delegation
does not believe that moves of that sort help to
strengthen the Charter of the United Nations. Quite
to the contrary, they are bound only to undermine
its provisions by departing from the only correct
and legal criteria for membership
in the United
Nations, as laid down in Article 4 of the Charter.

44. In view of the importance of the items which
the Council now has before it-namely,
the applications for admission to membership in the United
Nations submitted by the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam-my
Government
considered it necessary to request the
Council, through you, Sir, to permit it to explain its
views on the subject under consideration.
45. After decades of continuous aggression, devastation, bloodshed, and destruction,
it is gratifying
to note today that the long-frustrated
aspirations
of the people of Viet-Nam have been realized. The
heroic and legitimate
struggle of the Vietnamese
people for the attainment of their birthright, national
independence
and sovereignty,
and for the elimination of all foreign intervention
in the internal
affairs of their country has at last produced the desired
result. This historic-and,
in a way, unique-victory
of the people of Viet-Nam
in achieving the total
liberation of their country from foreign domination
can only be, and quite rightly so, attributable to their
courageous and undaunted determination
to become
the true masters in the management
of their own
affairs. These long-cherished
objectives have been
achieved, and there is now peace throughout VietNam, for the first time in almost two generations.

39. It is the considered view of the Government
and the people of Poland that there is only one
logical and consistent road to follow on the question
we are discussing, namely, that of recommendation
by the Security Council to admit the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam to the United Nations. Both of them enjoy
recognition
by a great number of States; they are
full-fledged members of the world community
and
deserve admission on all grounds, be they legal or
political. We are saying this also in the spirit of wellconceived universality of the Organization.
In these
days of growing understanding among nations, at a
time of progressing detente and general rapprochement, it is all the more the duty of the family of
nations to help the people of Viet-Nam in whatever
way we can to restore its war-ravaged land to normal
life.

46. It is against this background that my delegation
takes special pleasure in seeing today that the appli5

cations for admission to the community
of nations
from these well-deserving countries are being taken
up by the Council. We strongly believe that it is high
time for the two sister States to take their rightful
places in the family of nations, and it is with this
conviction that my Government whole-heartedly
and
firmly supports their admission and strongly urges
the Council to consider their applications favourably,
thus sending its recommendations
to the General
Assembly in due time.

50. In the opinion of my Government,
supporting
the applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam for membership in the United Nations is not only perfectly
in keeping with the Charter, but, more importantly,
it is an action that will doubtless enhance and further
strengthen the development of friendly relations and
co-operation among all peoples.
51. It will be unfortunate
if, because of the declared intention of the Government
of the United
States of America to use its veto power, the Security
Council fails to meet the requests of the two States
that have applied for membership
when they have
fully met the conditions required by the Charter for
the admission of States. It will therefore be injudicious, in the opinion of my delegation, if the United
States Government
links their admission to that of
South Korea as a package deal.

47. It has been argued that in order to consider
these two applications,
from the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
respectively,
a third application-submitted
by the
Republic of South Korea-must
be also considered.
My delegation considers such an argument out of
context. We feel that the Council’s acceptance or
rejection of one country’s application should not be
a condition for the consideration of that of another.
In fact, I am grateful to the representative of Guyana
‘for having quoted, this morning, in order to refresh
our minds, the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on this particular point [1835th meeting, para.

52. It is in view of these considerations
that my
delegation wishes to call upon the Government
of
the United States to reconsider its position and go
along with the rest of the members of the Council
in recommending
to the General Assembly the admission to membership
of the two Vietnamese States,
so that they can take their rightful places in the international community.

93.

48. In this connexion, the Council was completely
right in declining to consider the South Korean
application, for it has been the normal practice of the
United Nations not to consider favourably a unilateral application for membership from a Government
representing a part of a divided country. This is especially true with regard to the Korean peninsula when
we take into account the well-known joint communique of South and North Korea of 4 July 1972,
which, among other things, provided that: The reunification of the country should be achieved independently, without reliance upon outside force or its
interference; The reunification
of the country should
be achieved by peaceful means, without recourse to
the use of arms against the other side; and great
national unity should be promoted.’
It was in the
light of that breakthrough that the General Assembly,
in a decision adopted at its twenty-eighth
session,
affirmed by consensus the need to promote the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea.2

53. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
54.

Mr.

RODRiGUEZ
(Cuba) (in?erpreMr. President, my delegation
is pleased to greet you as President of the Security
Council at a time when this body is witnessing events
of an undoubted
historical importance.
We know
that your talent and ability are dedicated to the smooth
progress of our proceedings,
and my delegation
therefore assures you of our continued support. I
also thank you for having swiftly acceded to the
request of Cuba to speak, in accordance with the
provisional
rules of procedure, on the item on the
agenda.
tation from

49. My delegation notes with surprise that, in spite
of all these facts, the United States delegation has
made it clear that it is prepared to vote in favour of
the consideration
of these applications
only when
the South Korean one is also included for consideration. In reaction to the expressed position of the
United States, the Co-ordinating
Committee
of the
Non-Aligned
Countries,
of which my country is
privileged to be a member, on 7 August issued a
declaration [S/11793] in which, among other things,
it reiterated the unqualified support of the non-aligned
countries for the cause of the Vietnamese people in
general, and especially for their applications
for
admission to the United Nations, a matter it considers as being fully in conformity
with the spirit
and the letter of the Charter of the United Nations.

ACOSTA

Spanish):

55. Cuba wishes without delay to express its
unconditional
support for the just aspiration of the
Republic of South Viet-Nam and of the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
to become fully fledged
Members of the United Nations.
Cuba considers
that the admission of the Republic of South VietNam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam is a
logical
consequence-which
pleases us-of
the
achievement
by their peoples of sovereignty and
independence after a lengthy and bloody struggle.
56. Cuba considers that the Republic
of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
are prepared and willing and able to shoulder the
responsibilities
placed upon them under the Charter
of the United Nations, and would therefore make a
6

great contribution
to international
peace and security. And yet we have heard those who stubbornly
differ from such judgements.
Thus, some spokesmen
of the Government
of the United States of America
in the first place, and the Permament
Representative of that country to the United Nations himself
later during the 1834th meeting of the Council have
indicated as much. Those gentlemen have attempted
to link the admission of the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam and the Republic of South Viet-Nam to the
United
Nations to that of the regime of South
Korea, and make the one conditional
on the other,
in a manoeuvre that was as puerile as it was sterile,
causing astonishment and protest on the part of the
majority of States Members of the United Nations.

approved
a declaration
confirming
this understanding, a declaration which is largely based on the
agreements of the Fourth Conference of Heads of
State or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries,
held at Algiers in 1973, and the third ministerial
meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries, which was held recently in the capital
of my country. This too is the understanding
of
the progressive forces throughout the world which
only yesterday were clamouring for an end to the
aggression in Viet-Nam and today support the right
of both Republics to join the ranks of the Organization .
61. Cuba is happy and proud to have present among
us the representatives
of the Republic
of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
whom we have seen arriving in this city and at
United
Nations
Headquarters
with no show of
rancour or hostility and even extending a friendly
hand to the selfsame Government which so viciously
committed
aggression against them, despite the fact
that it even refuses to participate in the tasks of
reconstruction of Viet-Nam as stipulated in article 21
of the Paris Agreements.3

57. More than 80 new States have entered the United
Nations since the Council considered this question in
1949. The matter was considered three times again,
that is to say, in 1955, 1957 and 1958, with the same
decisively negative result.
58. My delegation will comment specifically on the
Korean item when the time comes and in the appropriate body. Now I wish merely to recall that it has
been United Nations practice in the case of the admission of two States which share the territory of a
divided
country
that both should express firm
agreement in applying for membership.
And if this
were not enough, we still recall the decision adopted
by the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session with the aim of encouraging the reunification
of Korea into a single State.2

62. What kind of reaction have the Vietnamese
representatives
encountered
in response to their
attitude? On the part of the Government
of the
United States, they have encountered what might,
in a sad recollection
of the past, which has taught
us so much, be described as an escalation of the
veto. If the veto is applied, it will suffer as resounding
a defeat as did the bellicose escalations of the past.
If necessary, the General Assembly will speak for
Viet-Nam;
it will take it upon itself to defend its
right and to remove the ladder from the escalation,
as it were, thus transforming it into a leap into the
void. My delegation proclaims that the veto will not
achieve what bombs and bullets failed to win. Neither
bombs nor bullets nor vetoes can hinder the work
for peace and justice.

59. As regards the admission of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam,
we believe that only a distorted understanding of history and a deformed view of the recent
experience of yesterday, of what is real today and
of the prospects for the future would lead any State
actually to carry out its threat to exercise its right
of veto. The peoples of the Republic
of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
with infinite self-abnegation
bore the cruellest and
most unjust war of aggression of contemporary
history. Half a million soldiers, millions of tons of
bombs, incendiary napalm, impressive aerial forces,
the massacres which shook the world for almost a
decade did not succeed in weakening the firm will
of the men and women who fought in the south
and in the north.

63. Cuba once again reiterates its determined support for the admission of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and of the Democratic Republic of VietNam as fullfledged Members of the United Nations.
Cuba would like to recall that this position is upheld
by the vast majority of Member States and progressive forces throughout the world. Cuba would like
to remind everybody that there is no insurmountable
difficulty for the Vietnamese people, who, even when
bombs were falling on Viet-Nam, resisted and at the
same time announced the building of a Viet-Nam
that would be 10 times more beautiful.

60. This unrivalled sacrifice was also made for the
sake of the rights of our peoples, for the sake of
the rights of all peoples of the world, who see today
in Viet-Nam
a fruitful example of resistance to
injustice and aggression, of generosity,
kindliness
and decency. This is the understanding
of my delegation; this is also the understanding
of the Governments
and the peoples of the countries
in
the non-aligned
movement,
whose Co-ordinating
Committee
met some days ago in New York and

64. In conclusion, Cuba would like to repeat here
a thought of that visionary, the heroic and immortal
leader Ho Chi Minh: “Nothing
is difficult. The only
obstacle is the heart that does not persevere. Firm
and resolute men will raze mountains and fill the
seas”.
7

65. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the-representative
of Guinea to take a place at the Council table and
to make her statement.

technology
was used in Viet-Nam
in the struggle
against the generalized popular war, once again it
emerged that a people that knows what it is fighting
for is invincible.
This truth has now become’ selfevident, and there is something further that must be
borne in mind in evaluating the relationship of forces
throughout the world. In effect, thanks to the vietory
of Viet-Nam,
all peoples and all humankind
have
become the subjects of history.

66. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, on behalf of my
delegation
I should like to congratulate
you on
your assumption to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. My delegation also
welcomes the bonds of close co-operation
existing
between the Republic of Guinea and your beautiful
country. Your wisdom and the wealth of experience
you have acquired throughout
your long career
justify our hope that these historic meetings on the
requests for admission to the Organization
of the
Republic of -south Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam will be crowned with success.

71.’ The demarcation lines between the great and the
small, the developed and the underdeveloped,
have
faded when we consider what is meant by the dtruggle for freedom. In this context the viCtory of VietNam must be ranked among the major events of
contemporary
history, and in its effects it will be
compared with events such as the victory of peoples
over fascism, colonialism,
and all forms of exploitation of man by man. We can realize quite easily,
generally speaking, that the entire system which arose
after the Second World War was a fragile one, that
it was built without taking account of the new countries and the new force represented by the movement
of those peoples struggling in order to exercise
their free choice as to the way they should develop
and to make a sovereign choice about their future
fate.

67. May I also thank you for having permitted me
to participate
in the discussions of the Security
Council, thus providing me with an opportunity
to
welcome the presence in this room of the worthy
representatives
of the valiant peoples of Viet-Nam.
My delegation considers that the time has come to
welcome into our universal family the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam,
and thus seek to redress the enormous
and incalculable
wrong that has been committed
against two peoples whose only crime was to’ defy
arbitrariness
and injustice in order to defend the
noblest concepts of dignity and justice-a
just cause
supported by the majority of peoples of the world.

72. The war in Viet-Nam has given rise to an international solidarity which has been shown to a country
which has decided to struggle for its freedom. This
solidarity did not only take the form of the material,
military and political support which was given to the
Vietnamese
people, particularly
by the socialist
and non-aligned
countries,
a support which was
reflected, most strikingly of all, in the recognition
of the Revolutionary
Provisional
Government
of
South Viet-Nam
by a number of States during the
Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Algiers. It was
also embodied in the condemnation
of that war by
the immense
majority
of peoples, including
the
peoples of the opponent. Today, it is further confirmed by the unanimous
support of non-aligned
countries for the request for the admission of the
two Viet-Nams.

68. Both Viet-Nams, throughout their arduous strnggle against imperialism,
have continually
demonstrated by the heavy sacrifices which they ‘have
made, how wedded they were to peace, to justice
and to freedom. Thanks to their undoubtedly difficult
but ennobling
combat,. the Vietnamese
people in
particular and Indo-China
in general have scored
resounding victories which today herald the total
bankruptcy of the policy of imperialist and colonialist
aggression in South-East Asia.
69. The victory of the Vietnamese people is the
most telling example in recent days of the heroism
of an underdeveloped
people which, in a conflict
that pitted them against an infinitely more powerful,
more developed and better armed opponent, succeeded in fulfilling its legitimate,
national and social
aspirations, and even in making its highest contribution, that of bringing about a change in the world
balance of forces in favour of the forces of progress,
peace, national liberation and social transformation.
Undoubtedly,
this victory will prove to be the ideal
example enabling us to analyse and evaluate the different types of war in all their aspects, the behaviour
of international
factors and of various segments of
the population, the role of international public opinion
and other aspects of the art of modem warfare.

73. For all peoples who love peace and liberty, an
entire era, our era, has expressed itself through the
heroic struggle of the Vietnamese people-an
era
which has been marked by fundamental
changes of
world-wide importance.
We would repeat that it is
high time to take further steps forward along the
noble way to peace and justice. Certain arguments,
which seek hypothetical
victories for a lost cause,
should be abandoned and reason should prevail.
There is one thing which is quite certain and that is
that the victory of the peoples of Viet-Nam is something which is irreversible.
It may be held up, but
it is something which will come about whatever the
cost, because the will of the Indo-Chinese
people is
there, omnipresent,
and can be seen on all fronts.

70. It is particularly
edifying to note that, despite
the fact that the complete arsenal of sophisticated
8

An anti-imperialist
crusade, which lives in the heart
of the cities and deep in the countryside, represents
a powerful striking force which has wrought the
downfall of the enemy war machine. This will has
shown once again that even with tons of bombs
and thousands of troops it is impossible to overcome
a people which is resolved to safeguard its freedom
and its dignity-in
other words, a people that is
resolved to vanquish.

77. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place
at-the Council table and to make his statement.
78. Mr. BOUAYAD-AGHA
(Algeria)
(interpretation from French): Mr. President, may I, on behalf
of the delegation of Algeria, thank you and also the
members of the Security Council for having authorized me to participate in your debate. It is a pleasure
for me, Mr, President, to congratulate you on your
Presidency of the Council and to say how happy we
are to see an eminent representative
of an Asian
country, Japan, with which my country has good
relations, presiding over the debates of the Security
Council at a time when it is considering the application for membership
in the United Nations of
countries which belong to the same continent as
your own.

74.. The Indo-Chinese people, through their indomitable. courage and their fearless determination,
have contributed something to the universal revolution and have provided
an invaluable
historical
example
for future
generations.
The Security
Council is on the point of taking a decision of vast
importance
for the international
community.
The
historic facts are there to show that this is the kind
of decision which we venture to hope will reinforce
peace and security throughout
the world. In fact,
in an organization which we .would like to be universal, how can we fail to admit two countries which
for more than 30 years have with courage and selfsacrifice fought and paid costly ‘sacrifices to realize
the ideals of freedom, justice and peace, which are
after all the fundamental
principles underlying
the
United Nations?

79. The question which is before the Council is of
great importance
for my country. I need hardly
recount here the history of the struggle waged by the
Vietnamese people, because we are all aware of the
extremely
painful sacrifices made by that valiant
people during the past 30 years to regain its independence and freedom. The victory won by that heroic
people is testimony to its ability to inspire all the
peoples of the third world that are victims of colonialism and imperialism
with legitimate
feelings of
self-confidence and trust in the value of the struggle
for national liberation.
This victory represents a
guarantee for an era of peace, security and cooperation. It will have fat-reaching repercussions in
the international community.

75. My delegation is convinced that the Security
Council, whose task is to preserve peace and to
ensure that justice is done, will heed the appeal
of the non-aligned
countries and be equal to its
responsibilities
and thus make it possible for the
Republic
of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
to join the great family of
the United Nations, and thus to share with us the
wealth of experience
which they have acquired
throughout
more than a quarter of a century of
heroic struggle.

80. Algeria feels deeply moved as the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of
Viet-Nam
apply for membership
in the United
Nations, thus placing a final seal on the defeat of
American imperialist
aggression and ushering in an
era of peace and international
co-operation.
It is
thus difficult for us to understand the exact nature
of the American manceuvres which are designed to
prevent the Vietnamese people from emerging for
ever from a terribly cruel war.

76. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to informe
the members of the Security Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Czechoslovakia requesting that he be invited to participate
in the discussion of the question on the Council’s
agenda in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules
of procedure. Accordingly,
I propose that the Council agree, in accordance with the usual practice,
to invite the representative
of Czechoslovakia
to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
In view of the limited number of places available at
the Council table, I would request .the representative of Czechoslovakia
to take the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber, on the
usual’understanding
that he will be invited to take a
place ‘at the Council table when it is his turn to
address, the Council.

81. What is behind this far-fetched idea of a
package deal? For some days vain attempts have
been made to convince us that we should place on an
equal footing the people of Viet-Nam
and South
Korea. How can one compare a people which has
become a symbol with a caricature of a State?.
Can one forget that the liberation of Viet-Nam is one
of the events whose repercussions have changed the
face of the world? Those who preach universality
would do well to recall that China, with its human
potential, its revolution
and its achievements,
was
-long deprived of its lawful rights in the United
Nations in the name of a universality
manufactured
by a tyrannical minority.

‘At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Jachek
(Czechoslovakia)
took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.
i

82. Algeria protests against this attempt to prevent
the admission to the United Nations of the Republic
9

..

of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam,
thereby jeopardizing
international
peace
and security. Despite all such manoeuvres, the fact
remains that the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
enjoy evergrowing international
recognition and support. The
Republic
of South Viet-Nam,
a member of the
group of non-aligned countries, and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam, whose admission to the group
of non-aligned countries is imminent,
can count on
the support and solidarity of all peoples that love
peace and justice.

table victory. The victory of the Vietnamese people,
which is the victory of the cause of peace and social
progress, has paved the way to a free life for that
sorely tried people, and at the same time has provided
new prospects for the establishment
of stable .and
lasting peace and security in South-East Asia, the
establishment
of good neighbourly
relations and
co-operation among all the peoples of that region.
87. After 30 years of war imposed upon the Vietnamese people by foreign intervention,
peace has
finally settled upon the Vietnamese land. The entire
world was relieved to learn of the end of that long
cruel war that had repercussions throughout
the
entire world. The struggle of the Vietnamese people
gave rise to an unprecedented movement of intemational solidarity and won the sympathy and admiration of all peoples. It is for me a source of legitimate
pride to be able to state before this lofty intemational body that the Bulgarian people and Government
have stood unrelentingly
and unconditionally
in
the first rank of all progressive forces and all men
of good will who supported that struggle and contributed to that victory.

83. Algeria is proud to have present among us the
Observers far the Republic of South Viet-Nam and
the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam.
They have
come without rancour and without passion to request
their admission to the United Nations, because the
entire Vietnamese
people aspires to peace and
national concord. The policy of those two countries
is anti-imperialist
and anti-colonialist;
it is opposed to
any form of domination
or foreign intervention.
It is necessary for the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
to
become Members of the United Nations so that, side
by side with us, they can contribute to making the
Organization
serve the cause of political, economic
and social justice. The delegation of Algeria therefore whole-heartedly hopes that the General Assembly
at its thirtieth session will admit the two countries
to the&ganization.

88. In his message to the Vietnamese people, the
President .of the Council of State of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, Todor Zhivkov,
in paying a
tribute to the Vietnamese people on the occasion of
their historic victory, said, inter aliu, the following:
“The just struggle of the Vietnamese people for
freedom, independence
and peace, and for the
right to self-determination
has won the sympathy
and the full fraternal support of the socialist
countries, headed by the Soviet Union, as well
as the support of all peace-loving forces throughout the world. This struggle was crowned with a
glorious victory which represents a considerable
revolutionary
achievement.”

84. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
85. Mr. GHELEV
(Bulgaria) (interpretation
from
French): I wish first of all to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Security Council for having
given me an opportunity
to express the views of the
delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria on the
important
matters before the Council at its present
meeting.
My delegation
would venture to hope,
Mr. President, that under your wise and competent
guidance the Council will adopt a just decision in
accordance with the Charter, a decision that will be
a landmark in the history of the United Nations.
Both you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council are fully aware, I am convinced,
of the
reasons why the Bulgarian delegation feels it should
speak at this time when the Council is called upon
to take a decision on the requests for admission to
membership
in the United Nations of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of
South Viet-Nam;

89. The Security Council is now dealing with a
question of prime importance.
The decision to be
taken on the requests for admission of the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
to the United Nations will, beyond a
shadow of a doubt, be of exceptional importance;
undoubtedly it will be a historic event. This decision
will symbolize the deep aspirations of peoples to
freedom and independence,
to their right to choose
their own way of development
and their own social
system. There can be no doubt that these two
countries have every right to be admitted as fullfledged Members of this world organization.
They
have won that right through their heroic struggle
during which they have proved their devotion to
the cause of peace and justice-in
other words,
their devotion to the most sacred principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

86. The Bulgarian Government and people have, in
effect, supported
and sustained the Vietnamese
people since the very outset of and throughout
their heroic liberation struggle. This sacred struggle
for national independence
cost that people immea, surable sufferings and sacrifices, but it led to inevi-

90. The Bulgarian delegation sincerely hopes that
this afternoon the Security Council, in its collective
10

wisdom, will succeed in adopting a decision that is
worthy of the authority of this, one of the most
responsible bodies of the United Nations-a
decision worthy of the authority of the United Nations.
We are profoundly
convinced that the admission
of the two Vietnamese States will be an important
contribution
to the cause of peace and security
throughout the world, and to the cause of co-operation and friendship among all peoples. Such a decision
will’ at the same time mark a new step towards
consolidating
the process of detente and improving
the international
climate-a
process which has so
happily emerged in recent years, of which a striking
example was the recent historic Conference
on
Security and Co-operation in Europe.
91. The United Nations and the cause of peace have
everything to gain and nothing to lose if such a
decision is taken. Moreover, no one can deny that if
they are admitted the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam will make
an important and extremely constructive contribution
to the activities of the United Nations.
92. A number of delegations have already referred
to the inadmissibility
of attempting
to establish a
link between the question of the admission of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic
of South Viet-Nam and other questions which quite
clearly have nothing to do with what is being
discussed by the Council now, and to make the one
hinge upon the others. We associate ourselves entirely
with the pertinent arguments that have been adduced
by a great number of delegations on this point.
93. Before concluding, may I be allowed to address
to the Observers for the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
the
warmest, most cordial fraternal greetings of the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria, and to tell them how
happy and proud we are to see them with us in this
room. I should like to assure them, on behalf of my
delegation,
that the entire Bulgarian
people and
Government
are, Andy will remain, at their side,
and that we shall spare no effort to ensure the
triumph of their just cause and the rebuilding of their
country in conditions
of peace and independence,
just as we stood with them, throughout their long
and glorious armed struggle and throughout the difficult days of the liberation war.
94. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia.
I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
95. Mr. JACHEK
(Czechoslovakia)
(interpretation
from French):
Sr, my delegation wishes to .congratulate you most sincerely on the occasion of your
assuming the lofty post of President of the Security
Council. It is a pleasure for my delegation to see
you, an eminent representative
of a country with
which Czechoslovakia has friendly relations, presiding

over the Council. We wish to express our hope
that under your enlightened guidance the Security
Council, which is now dealing with a question of
utmost importance,
namely,
the applications
for
membership
of the two Vietnamese
States, will
achieve results in accord with the principles and
spirit of the Charter. May I also say how grateful
my delegation is to you, Sir, and to the members
of the Security Council for having given me an
opportunity to speak.
96. Czechoslovakia firmly supports the applications
for membership of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam,
which
have clearly expressed their desire to become
Members of the United Nations so that they may
make a contribution
to the struggle for peace, independence and the development
of friendship among
peoples. The friendship
between the peoples of
Czechoslovakia
and Viet-Nam
has old traditions.
That friendship
has been shown throughout
the
lengthy struggle of the Vietnamese people for national
liberation
and against aggression. This friendship
and brotherly
co-operation
will develop further
during the process of rebuilding their countries.
97. The people of Czechoslovakia
are side by side
with the Vietnamese people. They rejoice in their
historic
victory
against the imperialist
forces.
Czechoslovakia
is proud that the Observers for the
two Vietnamese States are here with us. We sincerely
extend our cordial greetings to Mr. Dinh Ba Thi
and Mr. Nguyen Van Luu, who are here with us
and have been waging a struggle which is supported
by the overwhelming
majority of the States Members of the United Nations.
98. My delegation wishes to express its profound
satisfaction and complete support for the declaration
which was issued on 7 August by the Co-ordinating
Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries,
containing a resolute condemnation
of all manceuvres
intended to prevent the admission of the Republic
of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam to the United Nations.
99. The admission of the two Vietnamese States,
after the liquidation
of the hotbeds of war in VietNam, will, in the opinion of my delegation, represent
a considerable
contribution
to the improvement
of the international
atmosphere and the strengthening
of peace, and will be a historic step towards the
universality
of the Organization.
My delegation is
resolutely opposed to any attempt to link the admission of the two Vietnamese
States to a question
totally different in nature. My delegation
firmly
believes that the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and
the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
will be
admitted
to the United
Nations by the General
Assembly
at its thirtieth
session as full-fledged
Members, on the recommendation
of the Security
Council.

100. The PRESIDENT:
As there are no further
names on the list of speakers, I should like, in my
capacity as the representative of JAPAN, to explain
the vote of the delegation of Japan. I wish to state
that, having carefully
examined
the applications
and the declarations submitted by the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and by the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam,
my delegation has reached the conclusion that these two applicant States are qualified
for membership in the United Nations under Article 4
of the Charter. In the considered view of my delegation, they both meet the requirements laid down
in Article 4. We have taken note in particular of the
declarations
submitted
by each of the applicant
States stating that each accepts the obligations contained in the Charter and that each solemnly undertakes to carry out those obligations.
My delegation
has confidence in their willingness to carry them out.

We wish to co-operate with them in pursuing the
supreme goals of the United Nations: to maintain
international
peace and security and to develop
friendly relations among all States throughout
the
world.
104. As regards the application
of the Republic
of Korea for membership
in the United Nations,
which the Security Council could not consider at
this time,’ it is the sincere hope of my delegation
that the Council will be able to address itself to the
application of that country at the earliest appropriate
occasion.
105.. Now, in my capacity as PRESIDENT
of the
Council, I shall proceed to put to the vote the two
draft resolutions before the Council. First, I shall
put to the vote the nine-Power draft resolution contained in document S/l 1795, relating to the application of the Republic of South Viet-Nam.

101. My delegation therefore supports the applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam for admission to
the United Nations and will vote in favour of the
nine-Power draft resolutions, in which the Security
Council would recommend to the General Assembly
that the Republic of South Vie&Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
be admitted, respectiin the Organization.
The
vely, to membership
Government of Japan believes that the admission of
these two States would assuredly constitute a significant step towards the strengthening of the United
Nations and contribute in a significant way to the
restoration of friendly relations among the nations
in the area as well as to the stability of the area. My
Government
is confident that this would prove a
positive element in enhancing international
peace
and security.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania, Sweden, Union of. Soviet Socialist Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great Britain
and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania.
Against:
Abstaining:

United

States of America.

Costa Rica.

The result of the vote was 13 in favour,
and I abstention.
The draft resolution
negative votes being
of the Council.

102. Japan, as an Asian nation, attaches great
importance to the admission of the two Viet-Nams
to the United Nations.
In view of its ties with
other Asian countries, Japan welcomed the end of
the long and tragic war in Viet-Nam and the restoration of peace in the area, which enabled the
Vietnamese States to seek membership in the United
Nations. The Government
of Japan, in accordance
with one of the basic principles of its foreign policy,
which is to develop friendly relations with all States,
established on 12 September 1973 diplomatic relations
with the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam.
On
7 May 1975, Japan recognized the Provisional Revolutionary
Government
of the Republic
of South
Viet-Nam.

I egainst,

was not adopted, one of the
that of a permanent
member

106. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to’ the vote the
nine-Power draft resolution in document S/l 1796,
relating to the application of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great Britain
and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania.

103. We are confident that, with the diligence and
hard work of their peoples, both of these States will
be able to overcome difficulties in the task reconstruction and development
of their countries and
that they will soon be able to make important contributions
to the international
community.
The
Government
and the people of Japan look forward
to increasingly friendly relations with the two States.

Against:
Abstaining:

United

States of America.

Costa Rica.

The result of the vote was 13 in favour,
and I abstention.

12

I against,

ship come before us, other members of the Security
Council might do so as well. I believe it is fair to
say that we did not change this judgement precipitously. In truth, an impartial observer might wonder
that our practice persisted through a quarter-century
of vetoes by others.

The draft resolution was not adopted, one of the
negative votes being that of a permanent
member
of the Council.
107. The PRESIDENT:
As the Security Council has
failed to adopt either of the draft resolutions before
it, I should like to remind members of the Council
that, in accordance with the provisions of the third
paragraph of rule 60 of the provisional
rules of
procedure,
the Council
must submit a speciai
report to the General Assembly on this matter. Therefore, before calling upon the next speaker, I would
request the Secretariat to proceed at once with the
preparation of a brief factual report, which I would
venture to hope could be approved by the members
of the Council in the course of the present meeting.
Thus the Council would be in a position to act
speedily in reporting to the General Assembly on
the matter.

112. What ;in the end changed our mind was the
decisions of the Security Council taken on 6 August
[1834th meeting]. It became absolutely clear on that
occasion that the Council, far from being prepared to
support the principle of universal membership,
was
denying to one applicant even the right to have its
case considered. Never before has the Council gone
so far as to refuse even to consider the application
of an entity so widely regarded as a State as to
have been accepted as a member of numerous
specialized agencies and also, on four separate occasions in the past, to have been proposed for
membership by a clear majority of this same Council.

108. A number of representatives are inscribed on
my list to speak after the vote on the two draft
resolutions. I shall now call upon them.

113. The Council may recall what I said speaking
for my Government,
on 6 August [ibid.]. I said that
the United States had made it clear that we were
prepared to vote for the admission of each and all
of the three applicants then before us, which is to
say that the United States would have voted for the
admission of the Republic of South Korea, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Provisional
Revolutionary
Government of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam,
and I should like to take this occasion
to welcome the representatives
of those countries
to this Council chamber.

109. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Mr. President, in a happy display of unanimity today,
I am only the most recent representative to express
to you congratulations
on your assumption of the
important
and distinguished
position of President
of the Security Council and gratitude for the distinction with which you have carried forth your difficult
duties in this present affair. Also I should like to
join my predecessors
in expressing
admiration,
bordering at times on awe, at the durability
and
energy and flexibility of your predecessors, Mr..Plaja
and Mr. Cavaglieri.

114. Earlier that day, 6 August, a State Department spokesman had indicated that the United States
would be equally willing to vote for the admission
of North Korea as well. We would have done so in
plain pursuit of the principle of universality.
But the
State Department spokesman said then, and I repeat
it now, that we would have and we will have nothing
to do with selective universality,
a principle which
in practice admits only new members acceptable
to the totalitarian
States. I said on that day that
the action of the Security Council that day foreclosed the admission of these new applicants for the
coming session of the General Assembly.

110. Mr. President the United States today has,
for the first time, vetoed the admission of a new
member to the United
Nations.
The veto was
repeated a second time. This is an action my country
had hoped it would never take. As far back as 1948,
in a draft resolution sponsored by the United States
representative
Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, who
had served as a United States representative to the
first session of the General Assembly, the United
States Senate especially called on our Executive
to forswear use of the veto in all questions involving
the admission of new members. In 1949, the Executive Branch undertook to do just that. And so it is
no small matter for us that we have felt forced
to break with our practice of 30 years. The American
people, and possibly peoples and Governments elsewhere, will desire an explanation.

115. We clearly stated that we were prepared, to
act in favour of the admission of all three States
were the Council prepared to adhere to the principle
of universality.
The Council was not so prepared;
indeed, the principle of universality ?seems gravely
imperilled by what took place here on 6 August.

111. This is not difficult to provide. If our specific
actions today are at variance with 30 years’ practice,
we none the less continue to act in support of the
same principle-that
of universal membership
in
the United
Nations.
What has changed is our
judgement that if the United States acts in an open
and accepting manner as applications for member-

116. The United Nations should be as near as DOSsible to universal in membership.
As new nations
are formed, they should be seen as having a presumed
right to membership, given their fealty to the Charter.
It is just that principle that has brought us from
an original membership
of 51 to the present membership of 138. It is just that principle that will take
13

us still higher, for there are more than a half-dozen
new nations waiting in the wings. But we must not
apply partisan political
tests to membership.
The
United Nations cannot work if we do. It is because
the United States desires that it should work that
we have today made the hard decision to break with
our practice of 30 years and block the membership
of two nations whose sponsors have refused to act
equitably towards the application of another nation.

privilege to do that. The struggle of the Vietnamese
people for independence and against foreign aggression has been one of the most glorious epics in the
history of the struggle of peoples for justice and
human dignity.
120. The United Republic of Tanzania has been
privileged to identify ‘itself with this struggle, and
in fact we considered it our own. But our active
support for the admission of the two Viet-Nams is not
merely a logical extension of our identification
with
the noble cause of the heroic Vietnamese people.
It is more than that. It stems from our conviction
that the international
community
urgently needs
their membership in the United Nations so that the
Vietnamese
can impart to us their great and rich
experience in the search for a better and just intemational order.

117. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, permit me also, before explaining
our position, to join those of our colleagues who
have preceded me in offering our congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. It is in no way a
mere formality if I take the liberty to say that my
delegation considers that, with you as its President,
the Council has very promising leadership. All of us
who have known you have great confidence and
respect for your rich experience
in diplomacy.
The sense of impartiality
and dedication with which
you have impressed us have indeed clearly been
demonstrated in the course of the important informal
consultations
that have taken place preceding the
Security
Council’s
formal
consideration
of the
questions before us. Your faithful reflection of the
result of these consultations
at the meeting of the
Council last Wednesday [ibid.] is a further testimony
to your impartiality
and has served to reinforce
our confidence and respect for your presidency.
May I also add that my delegation, whose country
enjoys very warm relations with yours, wishes to
continue in the same spirit of friendship and cooperation with your delegation in the Council, and
to work closely with you for the successful discharge of your duties.

121. Thus, depriving the two Viet-Nams of membership in the Organization is not only doing serious
injury to the sacred principle of universality
which
is so essential for the over-all effectiveness of the
United Nations, but above all, taking into account
the special circumstances
of the Vietnamese people’s struggle, its untold sacrifices and indomitable
resistance, such a denial of membership
robs the
Organization
of an extraordinary
contribution
which
could in more ways than one enrich the United
Nations in its quest for freedom, justice, peace
and security, international
understanding
and cooperation.
122. No words are sufficient to recount and do
justice to the struggle and accomplishments
of that
valiant people who for 20 years have been wrongly
subjected to the mightiest
military
Power in the
world, and yet managed not only to survive-no
mean feat in itself-but
indeed to emerge victorious. For 20 years an attempt was made to deny
the Vietnamese people permanently
the rights and
just aspirations to which it was entitled, and which
are cherished by the United Nations. That was an
attempt which, if successful, would have doomed
the hope of any other peoples ot be free and live
in peace. It would have imposed on all of us the
bizarre rule of the jungle that might is right and that
might overrides any right no matter how firmly held
by the world community.
It would in practice have
nullified
all our efforts to fulfil the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. No
Member of the United Nations could consider itself
free if that happened.

118. Allow me also to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Plaja of Italy, on his successful fulfilment
of his responsibilities
during the month of July. His
was also one of the difficult months when the
Council, under his presidency, was threatened with
the possible dramatic deterioration
of the Middle
East situation. Through his tact, diplomatic
skill,
and selfless devotion to the search for the neces-.
sary solution to that situation, he made it possible
for the Council to achieve successful results. Our
gratitude also goes to Mr. Cavaglieri for the active
role he himself has played.
119. My delegation, like those of other non-aligned
States members of the Council, has been actively
involved in support of the admission to membership in the Organization
of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.
We were also sponsors, together with eight other
members of the Council, of the two draft resolutions
so eloquently
introduced
this morning
by the
representative
of Guyana,
Mr.
Jackson-draft
resolutions
which have just been vetoed by the
United States. For us it was both an honour and a

123. By sheer determination
and conviction of the
justice of its cause, the Vietnamese people exposed
the illusion of military might and forced the most
powerful imperialist
forces out of Viet-Nam.
In so
doing, the Vietnamese people has not only retrieved
its freedom from the claws of imperialism,
but also
inspired all peace-loving peoples and strengthened
their faith in the ultimate triumph of the ideals and
goals of the Organization.
14

129. The Co-ordinating
Committee
of the NonAligned Countries, meeting in New York on 7 August,
articulated the collective will of the overwhelming
majority
of international
opinion and had this in
mind when it declared:

124. Speaking at a press conference in Jamaica,
immediately
after the liberation of Saigon, my President, Mwalimu
Julius Nyerere, observed that the
victory of the Vietnamese people is the victory of
every freedom-loving
people. It is the greatest
contemporary example of valiance in the struggle for
a people’s liberation. He added that if Africa, which
is struggling to liberate itself from foreign and racist
forces, emulated the Vietnamese determination,
no
part of our continent would be under colonial or
racist domination today.

“The Co-ordinating
Committee
condemns
all
manceuvres aimed at preventing the admission to
the United Nations of the Republic of South VietNam and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.
“In this connexion,
the Co-ordinating
Commitee protests the position of the United States
Government,
which aims to impede the admission
to the United Nations of the Republic of South
Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of VietNam. Such an action runs counter to the clearly
expressed will of the great majority
of world
opinion.”
[S/11793.]

125. The Vietnamese
victory,
inspiration
and
example are an inestimable contribution
to the aspirations and efforts of the Organization.
What the
Vietnamese fought for it is the very duty of the
United Nations to work for. It is the total realization
of the right of all people on our planet to enjoy
peace, security and prosperity in dignity and equality.

.

130. Members of the. Council are only too aware
extraneous
and erroneous
of the many flimsy,
excuses that have been made in an effort to rationalize the manmuvres
calculated to frustrate the
admission to the United Nations of the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam.
An attempt has been made to introduce
an extraneous condition for the admission of the two
Vietnamese
States. The “out of the blue” application fo the regime in South Korea for membership soon after it was learned that the Vietnamese
States had made their application was part of this
scheme. This application
was to be used as an
obstacle to the applications of the two Vietnamese
States. It was flimsily sought to tie the admission
of the two Vietnamese States to that of the regime
of South Korea-knowing
very well that, for very
legitimate
and obvious reasons, the Council could
not accept the application of that regime.

126. It was, therefore, the great hope and indeed
the expectation of all peace-loving Members of the
Organization
that the victorious Vietnamese States
would this year be welcome among us to bring into
the United Nations their wealth of experience, the
torch of inspiration
and symbol of hope for the
Organization.
For the Vietnamese
are a shining
contemporary
example of love for peace, freedom
and the other ideals of the Charter of the United
Nations. Thus-and
I wish to emphasize this-it
is not surprising that not a single Member of the
United Nations,
indeed not a single member of
the Security Council, has even attempted to find
fault with the qualifications
of the Vietnamese
States for membership
in the United Nations. Yet,
the will and expectations
of the overwhelming
majority of the world community
have already been
trampled underfoot. The mighty veto has once again
been used to sustain the position of a minority-and
in this case a rather absolute minority.

131. The Charter is very clear on the conditions
for admission of new Members;
those conditions
are exhaustive. The exhaustive nature of the conditions laid down in the Charter was unequivocally
affirmed by two organs of the United Nations. First,
the International
Court of Justice in 1948 gave an
advisory opinion4 to the effect that the conditions
laid down in Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter
for admission of new Members are exhaustive and
that therefore the admission of an applicant could
not be conditional
upon the admission of another
the General
Assembly
on
applicant.
Secondly,
8 December
1948 adopted resolution
197 (III),
calling for the strict application
of Article.4,
paragraph 1, of the Charter and the advisory opinion
of the International
Court of Justice in all subsequent cases.

127. We have in the past expressed our serious
concern at the continued
misuse of the veto by
some permanent members of the Security Council to
defend injustice and sustain lost causes. The most
recent example was the triple veto, last June, on the
question of Namibia. Now once again the veto has
been cast, thereby confounding the clearly expressed
wishes of the international
community,
wishes that
transcend political
and ideological
affiliation-as
has been so eloquently expressed during the debate
in the Council-wishes
to welcome at last those two
members of the world community
into the United
Nations family.
128. The veto has thus run roughshod over the
legitimate right of two sovereign States to join the
United Nations. The veto has been utilized effectively to defy the principle of universality
of the
Organization.
This improper and arbitrary use of the
veto cannot but attract the dismay of all peaceloving Members of the Organization.

132. In the light of attempts to make the admission
of the two Viet-Nams
dependent on the admission
of the regime in South Korea, it is pertinent to recapitulate what the advisory opinion, endorsed by the
General Assembly, stipulated the following:
15

“a Member of the United Nations which is called
upon, in virtue of Article 4 of the Charter, to
pronounce itself by its vote, either in the Security
Council or in the General Assembly, on the admission of a State to membership in the United Nations,
is not juridically entitled to make its consent to the
admission dependent on conditions not expressly
provided by paragraph 1 of the said Article;”

ciple in order to prevent its very application.
If the
rejection of the admission of the two Vietnamese
States which have fully qualified for membership
-and
nobody has denied that-constitutes
the
implementation
of that principle,. then I must admit
words have assumed totally different meanings.
lj7.
The issue of Korea is a totally ‘extraneous
and different problem.
That problem is currently
under consideration
in the General Assembly. South
Korea, as the Organization
knows and recognizes,
is an entity carved out of what the Korean people
know and maintain is one Korea. Neither the Korean
people nor the Organization
has accepted the
permanency of two Koreas, artificially
divided by
external forces. Indeed, in spite of the adverse situation, the two sides of -Korea affirmed the inadmissibility of two Korea when they jointly stated in
their communique
of 4 July 1972 that they would
both work peacefully towards the reunification of their
country. That communique was warmly welcomed by
the Organization in a General Assembly decision of
19732 and in General Assembly
resolution
3333
(XXIX). The resolution and the decision are not only
a recognition
of the need to respect the wishes of
the Korean people for the reunification
of Korea,
but also actions intended to promote and assist the
efforts at reunification.

and that
“in particular,
a Member
of the Organization
cannot, while it recognizes the conditions
set
forth in that provision to be fulfilled by the State
concerned, subject its affirmative vote to the additional condition that other States be admitted to
membership
in the United Nations together with
that State.“4
133. It has been said that the Security Council has
nevertheless on a number of occasions departed from
the Charter and relevant resolutions of ‘the General
Assembly. In the first place, all those departures
were illegal-and
no illegal act can justify subsequent illegal acts. Whoever were parties to such
illegal practices, those of us who joined the United
Nations later cannot be subjected to such extraordinarily bad precedents. We entirely reject practices
which lead to the denial of rights of prospective
members and so undermine the Charter of the United
Nations.
We unequivocally
reject the so-called
package deals concept.

138. Consequently,
the act of the South Korean
regime in applying for membership in the Organization-which,
in effect, is an attempt to ask the Organization to recognize the existence of two separate
Korean States-is clearly contrary to the spirit of the
decisions adopted by the General Assembly in 1973
and 1974; these were decisions which were adopted
by consensus and which can certainly be considered
as promoting the just struggle of the Korean people
for national reunification.
It would have been highly
irresponsible
for the Security Council to entertain
such an application.
While of course every member
of the Council is free to act in accordance with its
Government’s
directives,
the Council
certainly
demands an explanation
as to why it should so
suddenly defy the General Assembly and disregard
the joint communique
and the wishes of the Korean
people. We have not received that explanation,
and
there can be none that. would justify such an act
by the Council.

134. Secondly, the era in which such practice took
place was during the so-called coldest days of the
cold war. A lot has been and is currently being said
about detente and its implications.
We are told that
gone are the days of the cold war. How can one
interpret
attempts
to reintroduce
the discredited
methods and practices of the cold war in an era
when detente is so prominently
emphasized? What
have the applications
of the Vietnamese States to
do with that of the regime in South Korea?
135. Some of our colleagues here have used the
expression “non-discrimination”
in an attempt to
rationalize the manmuvres against the admission the
Vietnamese States. This is a totally fallacious application of that principle.
Have the two Vietnamese
States discriminated
against anybody to deserve a
veto of their applications?
Where is the justice?
Is it not a fact that the Vietnamese States are now
the subject of gross discrimination?
The invoking
of the principle of non-discrimination
by those who
have determinedly
sought to frustrate the admission
of the two Viet-Nams is, to say the least, a desperate
distortion of that principle. We submit that no amount
of word juggling can provide the slightest smokescreen for such unfortunate manoeuvres.

139. An explanation
for the championship
of the
South Korean application
by those of our Council
colleagues who have tried to link this with the applications of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam does exist, and it is
conspicuous. It is simply an excuse, and a lame one,
to prevent the two Vietnamese States from joining the
United Nations. It is indeed a deplorable tactic which
is devoid of even the semblance of logic.

136. Similarly,
it is a ridicule
universality of the,Organization

140. This has ‘not .been a moment of triumph for
the United Nations. The absolute disregard of what

of the principle of
to invoke that prin16

initiated at the meeting when the Council had before
it the applications for membership
of three nations
[1834th meeting].
My delegation considers, as we
have stated, that equal treatment should be given to
each one of the applications,
without differentiating
between them, and we were prepared to continue *.
support all three.

clearly constitutes the general will of the Members of
the Organization is another painful reminder of how
far we have to go to improve the effectiveness of
the Organization.
We are on the verge of commencing very important
sessions of the General
Assembly. Since the last session-and,
in fact, in the
course of the last session-we heard a lot of sermons,
some well-meaning,
some cynical, and some hypocritical, on the need to work together and avoid
confrontations.

145. Nevertheless, a majority of the Council agreed
to reject ad portas the application
of one nation,
which, in our opinion, at least had the right to the same
treatment as the other two until at the present meeting
of the Council we had completed
the procedure
indicated in the Charter and the provisional
rules
of procedure. Here, at this final stage we are not
disputing the right of every member of the Council
to approve or reject a given application.

141. There has been a lot of misrepresentation
-more
often than not, deliberately
contrivedregarding the so-called tyranny of the majority. We
have maintained,
and continue to do so, that such
allegations are as unfounded as they are mischievous.
We have always argued, and we shall continue to do
so, in favour of co-operation and accommodation.
But
the sine qua non for that is that the minority, which
has often in the past wanted to impose its way,
should change that attitude. That remains our firm
position, and it is a matter of profound regret to my
delegation that in the veto cast by the United States,
thus blocking the membership of the two Viet-Nams,
we have what we can consider a classic example
of the perpetuation of the tyranny of the minority in
the Organization. And we submit that this imposition
is in total defiance of all logic and legality. We
fervently hope that the United States will reconsider
its attitude on this question, as we certainly hope
that this is not a preview of things to come.

146. In other words, without passing judgement
on what the tinal result should be, my delegation felt
itself committed
from the start to promoting
the
three applications
for membership,
as long as the
same procedural treatment was afforded each of them.
But since the Council refused to consider one
application, we felt that we were no longer committed to the other two applications
because, may I
repeat, we can never go along with a one-sided
discriminatory
approach to universality which distorts
its very essence.
147. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (translation from
Chinese):
At the Security
Council
meeting
of
6 August [ibid.], the Chinese delegation made a
statement in explanation of our vote on the question
of the agenda. In view of the result of the vote
on the substantive question at today’s meeting, and in
view of the fact that the representatives
of certain
countries have again spoken in defence of the socalled application
of South Korea and a so called
package deal, we deem it necessary to reiterate our
position on the related questions.

142. Mr. SALAZAR
(Costa Rica) (interpretation
from Spanish): My delegation deems it appropriate
to.explain the reasons why we abstained in the votes
just held. What is known as the principle of universality of .the Organization
has always had the warm
support of Costa Rica. My delegation’s
policy has
been to have an open mind towards any application
by a nation -that considers itself qualified for United
Nations membership. If a nation believes that it meets
the requirements laid down by the Charter and submits
an application
to be admitted as a Member of the
Organization,
the least that may be expected is that
its request will be submitted to all the procedures
established in the Charter and in the provisional rules
of procedure of the Council, up to the final stage.

148. We have consistently
held that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the sole legal
sovereign State of the Korean nation. The Park
Chung Hee clique of South Korea is not qualified
at all to apply for membership in the United Nations.

143. Without prejudice to an examination
of the
merits of each applicant, we consider that the principle of universality
must be applied even-handedly
and equally in any given situation, such as the one
which arose recently in the Council when several
applications, for membership
were simultaneously
submitted to it. A correct understanding of the facts
is rendered impossible when, instead, in such a situation, the principle of universality
is interpreted as
favouring some nations and not others. My delegation
does not feel that it can give its support to this type
of interpretation.

149. Meanwhile, it is known to all that, in the case
of the applications
of the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South Viet-Nam
for
membership
in the United Nations, the two sides
had prior agreement between t’:emselves. The same
is true of the admission of the two German States
to membership in the United Nations.
150. The case of Korea, however, is completely
different. It is the common aspiration of the entire
Korean people to realize the peaceful reunification
of their fatherland
at an early date. The North
and South joint communique
agreed upon in 1972
affirmed the three principles
for the independent

144.. We cannot overlook the fact that the matter
before the Council today originated with a procedure
17
,..’

and peaceful reunification of Korea. The decision on
the Korean question adopted by, consensus at the
twenty-eighth
session of the General Assembly’
also clearly affirmed the need to promote the independent and peaceful reunification
of Korea on the
basis of the three principles.
And the presence of
the “United
Nations Command”
and the continued
stationing of foreign troops in South Korea constitute
precisely the “interference”
of “outside
force”
which should be done away with as provided for in the
aforementioned
three principles.
To honour the
joint agreement between the North and South of
Korea and to implement
the decision adopted by
consensus at the twenty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, the so-called United Nations Command
should have long been dissolved and all the foreign
troops withdrawn from South Korea, so that the entire
Korean
people might resolve independently
the
question
of the peaceful reunification
of their
country without interference of outside force.

154. After the Security Council rejected the inclusion
in the agenda of an item on the so-c&d
application of the Park Chung Hee cli$te of South Korea,
the representative of the United States, in continued
disregard pf the Charter of the United Nations,
General
Assembly
resolution
3333 (XXIX)
and
the will of the overwhelming
majority of the States
members of the Council, has used the Council’s
legitimate rejection of its proposed “package deal”
as. a pretext for resorting to the veto to obstruct the
admission of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
into the United
Nations. Such a practice is most unreasonable. The
Chinese delegation cannot but express deep regret at
that act, and we deem it necessary to point out that,
by such an unreasonable act, the United States, far
from doing any harm to the Vietnamese people, can
only find itself in greater isolation before the people
of the world. We are convinced that the Vietnamese
people will certainly win greater victories in their
just cause.

151. This time, when the Security Council is considering the application of the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam and the application of the Republic of
South Viet-Nam,
the United States Government,
brushing aside all this, has arbitrarily
tried to link
them up with the completely irrelevant question of
the admission of South Korea into the United Nations
for a so-called package deal. This is not only in
complete violation of the explicit provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolution
of the General Assembly,
but also in
glaring contradiction
with the principle agreed upon
between North and South Korea that “great national
unity should be promoted “first of all as one nation,
transcending the differences of ideology, ideal and
system. This is simply designed to consolidate and
perpetuate the division. of Korea. That of course
is absolutely unacceptable to the entire Korean people
and all the justice-upholding
countries and peoples
throughout
the world. It is only natural that the
unreasonable idea of a so-called package deal has
been rejected by the Council.

155. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
$0,
Russian): The Soviet delegation cannot fail to express its deepest regret at the
fact that a negative vote has been cast by a permanent
member of the Security Council and, therefore, the
draft resolutions sponsored by the nine States members
of the Security Council on the admission to the
United Nations of the Republic of South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam,
which
received 13 votes, were not adopted. Those who
today blocked the admission to the United Nations of
the two new States failed to heed the majority of the
members of the Security Council and the United
Nations membership
and have ignored the realities
of the present-day world; It is to be regretted that
by their negative .vote they. showed their scorn and
lack of respect for the people of Viet-Nam and their
courage ,and the tremendous sacrifices paid by that
people in the struggle for their national independence
and liberty.
156. .,In order to justify to the outside world this
negattve position on the question of the admission to
membership
of. these fw.o States, they invented an
invalid and completely~baseless pretext-that
is, trying
to link. the question of the admission of these two
Vietnamese
peoples with the Korean matter, the
question of.the possible admission of South Korea
to membership in the Organization.

152. In his five-point
proposition
put forward in
June 1973, President Kim I1 Sung pointed out that
the North and the,South should not enter the United
Nations separately and that if they want to enter
the United Nations before, reunification of the country
is achieved, they should. enter it as one State at
least under the name of. the Confederal Republic of
Koryo after the, confederation
is enforced. The
Chinese Government
firnily supports this just and
reasonable position.

157. As our delegation stated at the meeting held
on 6 ,August [183&h meeting]-and
this is a position
that was also echoed by a number o other members
of the Security Council-the
admission of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam
to membership
in the. United Nations
has absolutely no relation to the Korean problem
or the question of the possible admission of South
Korea to membership in the United Nations.

153. The 3000-1-i expanse of Korean territory is an
integral whole. The Korean people’s determination
to
reunify their fatherland is firm and unshakable. We
are deeply convinced that the Korean people wilI
certainly triumph in their just struggle for the independent peaceful reunification of their fatherland.
18

of that impeccable
principle
and are in practice
opposed to a selective approach in implementing
it.
Unfortunately,
it must be noted that their actions are
completely discordant with their words. In this connexion, we might recall the history of the admission
to the United Nations of many States, when it was
precisely a selective approach to the principle of
universality that closed the door in the face of many
States, and primarily the socialist States.

158. In this connexion, we must once again point
out and emphasize, as a number of those who have
spoken at this meeting have done, that the practice
which has arisen of admitting to membership in the
United Nations States whose territories are divided
consists of the fact that they are admitted only-and
I
if both have expressed the wish
emphasize “only”and mutual agreement to become Members of the
United Nations. Between the two Vietnamese peoples
there is complete agreement on this point. Unlike the
South and North Vietnamese peoples, North and South
Korea do not have concordant views about being
Members of the United -Nations. It is quite obvious
that to link the question of the admission to membership in the United Nations of North and South
Viet-Nam with a completely extraneous matter cannot
but be regarded as a deliberate attempt to complicate
and frustrate a positive decision on the admission
of the two Vietnamese States to the United Nations.

163. We all know that, because of such a policy
and practice, for almost 10 years after the founding
of the United Nations hardly a single new Member was
admitted.
It has been recalled here that the party
that used the veto had never done so before when
voting on draft resolutions on the admission of new
Members to the United Nations. But back in those
days there was no need for them to use their veto.
At that time I myself was in the Security Council,
representing’ my country, and the situation was ,as
follows. There were 18 applications
for membership before the Council. The first came from Albania.
I alone voted in favour of that application,
whereas
10 members abstained. And so there was no need to
use the veto. It was enough to abstain, and the
necessary number of votes for the admission of a
socialist State were not to be found. So the veto was
not used. Now, of course, the situation has changed.
A new majority has emerged in the United Nations
that assumes a correct posture on questions of admission to membership
in the United Nations. Therefore those who were against the admission of socialist
States to the United Nations-in
this case, the two
Vietnamese States-now have to apply the veto for the
first time in the history of the United Nations.

159. We all know what the differences are between
the two Koreas on becoming Members of the United
Nations. North Korea is in favour of the further
relaxation of international
tensions on the Korean
peninsula and of ensuring that the necessary conditions
are brought about for the democratic development of
the country so that a united Korea can become part
of the international
community and a Member of the
United Nations.
160. Nor can we fail to note the fact that those
who today blocked the admission of the Republic of
South Viet-Nam
and the Democratic
Republic of
Viet-Nam
to membership
in the United Nations
have in fact, in their words, spoken out in favour
of dialogue between North and South Korea in order
to bring about a peaceful reunification.
That is, at
least, what appears in the official joint communiquC
of the President of the United States and the Prime
Minister of Japan published recently in the American
press subsequent to the visit of the Prime Minister
of Japan to the United States. But in reality, insistence
upon the separate admission of Korea to the United
Nations has the single aim of furthering the dismemberment of Korea. One thing is being said while
another is being done.

164. In those days, our country was willing to find
a way out of the deadlock, and an attempt was made
to get out of the situation that had arisen. There
arose the idea of admitting
to membership
in a
package deal those who wanted to become Members
of the United Nations. I happen to have some notes
here on one such meeting in the Security Council.
In 1948, at the 204th meeting of the Council, the
representative of Poland submitted a draft resolution
for the simultaneous
admission of five States-Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, Italy and Romania. What
did Australia,
the United States and the United
Kingdom
do? They voted against it, and the main
argument put forward in their statements at the time
was that the question of their admission should be
taken up separately for each State, one at a time,
and not in a “package”.

161. The nosition of the Soviet Union on this auestion is weliknown.
It has frequently been expouhded
at sessions of the General Assembly and at meetings
of the Security Council, including the last meeting
of the Council. We shall not repeat it here. We shall
say only one thing: that linking questions that are
essentially different is a deliberate step that does
not strengthen the United Nations but on the contrary
helps to undermine it.

165. Here is a second example. In 1949, at the
428th meeting of the Council, the representative
of the Soviet Union submitted
a draft resolution
for the joint admission of 12 States, which seemed
at the time to be the only answer to the problem
facing the Council. When it came to the vote on a
socialist State being accepted for membership
in
the United Nations, we witnessed a conspiracy of

162. Those who put barriers in the way of the
admission of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
to the United
Nations speak a great deal about the universality
of the United Nations. They allege they are in favour
19

abstentions. The necessary number of votes could
not be mustered. In reply to the proposal of the
Soviet Union on the admission of 12 States, the
representative of the United States made a counter
proposal that the Council should consider and vote
individually each of the requests of those countries.
That was the actual picture. So why should we
change the position now and insist that a package
deal be accepted? If one is consistent, there is absolutely no reason to link the admission of the two
Vietnamese States with the Korean question and the
possibility of admitting South Korea as a Member.
166. However, with the passage of time, actually,
with the passage of 10 years’ time, justice has finally
triumphed and reigns supreme. History shows that
obstructionist policy does not yield the desired
results. In the final analysis, it simply damages those
who uphold such a policy. We are certain that the just
cause of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam will triumph,
and in the end the Security Council will recommend
to the General Assembly that it admit to membership in the United Nations these two sovereign
socialist States. The sooner that is done, the better
it will be for the good name of the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole.

special report which the Security Council must, in
accordance with the third paragraph of rule 60 of its
provisional rules of procedure, submit to the General
Assembly when it does not recommend an applicant
State for membership. In the meantime, the draft
text of an appropriate report has been circulated
around the Council table. That text has been prepared
by the Secretariat in accordance with the request- I
made earlier at this meeting.
168. Does any member of the Council wish to make
any comment or observation on the draft special report
to the General rAssembly? If not there being no
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
approves the special report to the General Assembly
called for in rule 60 of the. provisional rules of
procedure.s
It was so decided.
The meeting

rose at 6.20 p.m.
Notes

’ See Offlciai Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 27, annex I.
2ibid., Twenty-eighth Sessioti, Supplement No. 30. p. 24,
item 41.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 935, p. 16.
’ Admission of a State to the United Nations,(Charter,
Art. 4).
Advisory Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1948. p. 57.
5 Offcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 22, document A/10179.

167. The PRESIDENT: The list of speakers has
now been exhausted. I should therefore like to
revert to the subject I mentioned earlier relating to the

20

HOW

TO OBTAIN

Ilnited
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATTONS

UNIES

Les publications
dcs Nations Units sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences dipositaires
du
mondc entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gcneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Gmebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00400

82-61202-November

1983-2,200
