S/20007/412

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 July 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 25 June 2007 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my report of 5 June 2007 (S/2007/330) pursuant
to paragraph 30 of resolution 1546 (2004), and specifically action V, concerning
security and operational issues related to the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
As indicated in my report, the security situation in Iraq remains complex and
unpredictable. Security continues to present a major challenge for United Nations
activities in the country. This is particularly the case in the international zone in
Baghdad, where a wide range of mitigation measures to address the growing risk of
indirect fire and other threats are required. United Nations staff members working in
Baghdad were recently moved to accommodation facilities with hardened overhead
protection, and the three operating locations of UNAMI inside the international zone
require strict curfews and limitations on travel.
Despite ongoing efforts to ensure the security and safety of United Nations
personnel in the international zone, current UNAMI facilities in the international
zone fall far short of adequate long-term requirements to ensure secure working and
accommodation conditions for United Nations staff. Only the expeditious
construction of a hardened integrated compound would address the growing longterm security and logistic challenges faced by the Mission in Baghdad and allow it
to carry out its mandate effectively. Consequently, it is of the utmost urgency that
planning for the construction of a new United Nations compound in Baghdad starts
immediately. The high level of specification for security features and the paucity of
suitable construction contractors will inevitably lead to relatively high construction
costs.
Further to the Security Council statement to the press of 13 June 2007
welcoming the planning for the construction of a new UNAMI compound in
Baghdad, I should be grateful if you could confirm that the above-mentioned project
is acceptable to the Security Council. It would then be my intention to proceed to
request the necessary funds within the context of the budgeting provisions for
special political missions. That would permit the prompt initiation of the necessary
studies and construction work for a new United Nations building in Baghdad.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-41715 (E) 090707

*0741715*
