United Nations

S/PV.6587

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6587th meeting
Wednesday, 20 July 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Impact of climate change
Letter dated 1 July 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/408)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-42259 (E)

*1142259*

S/PV.6587

Germany to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

I now give the floor to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon.

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security

The Secretary-General: I thank the German
presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this very important meeting at this juncture.

Impact of climate change
Letter dated 1 July 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Germany
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/408)
The President: I wish to welcome the
Secretary-General, the President of the Republic of
Nauru and the Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific
Island Affairs of Australia. Their presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject being
discussed.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, Ghana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Kuwait, Luxembourg, Mexico, Nauru, New Zealand,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Pakistan, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, the Republic of Korea, Singapore,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Turkey, the United
Republic of Tanzania and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Achim
Steiner, Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/408, which contains a letter dated
1 July 2011 from the Permanent Representative of

2

When the Security Council first took up the issue
of climate change in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), the debate
was preceded by a vigorous exchange about whether
such consideration was appropriate. I argued then, and
do so again today, that it is not only appropriate, it is
essential. I welcome the fact that we have moved
forward and are having the right debate today, about
what the Council and all Member States can do to
confront the double-barrelled challenge of climate
change and international security.
We must make no mistake. The facts are clear.
Climate change is real, and it is accelerating in a
dangerous manner. It not only exacerbates threats to
international peace and security, it is a threat to
international peace and security.
Extreme weather events continue to grow more
frequent and intense, in rich and poor countries alike,
not only devastating lives but also infrastructure,
institutions and budgets — an unholy brew that can
create dangerous security vacuums. Pakistan, the
Pacific islands, Russia, Western Europe, the
Philippines, Colombia, Australia, Brazil, the United
States, China, the Horn of Africa are examples that
should remind us of the urgency of what we face.
Just today, the United Nations declared a state of
famine in two regions of southern Somalia. Around the
world, hundreds of millions of people are in danger of
going short of food and water. That undermines the
most essential foundations of local, national and global
stability. Competition between communities and
countries for scarce resources, especially water, is
increasing, exacerbating old security dilemmas and
creating new ones. Environmental refugees are
reshaping the human geography of the planet, a trend
that will only increase as deserts advance, forests are
felled and sea-levels rise. Mega-crises may well
become the new normal. Those are all threats to human
security, as well as to international peace and security.

11-42259

S/PV.6587

Since I delivered my report (A/64/350) to the
General Assembly in 2009, the international
community has reached certain agreements, in
Copenhagen and Cancún, in the context of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Those agreements provide an important, but
incomplete, foundation for action on reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and enabling all countries to
adapt. We now need accelerated operationalization of
all the agreements made at Cancún, including on
protecting forests, adaptation and technology.
Climate finance, the sine qua non for progress,
must move from a conceptual discussion to concrete
delivery of fast-start financing and agreement on
sources of long-term financing. The next Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Durban
in December, must be decisive in that regard.
Minimalist steps will not do.
Negotiations cannot stop there. We need
ambitious targets that ensure that any increase in global
average temperature remains below 2° C. The Durban
meeting must provide a clear step forward on
mitigation commitments and actions by all parties
according to their responsibilities and capabilities.
Developed countries must lead, while at the same time
emerging economies must shoulder their fair share. We
cannot ignore history. But we must clearly recognize
that there can be no spectators when it comes to
securing the future of our planet.
Given that the first commitment period of the
Kyoto Protocol expires next year, a political formula
must be found without delay to ensure that existing
commitments and needed future commitments and
actions are not delayed by negotiating gamesmanship.
The Security Council can play a vital role in
making clear the link between climate change, peace
and security. The members of the Council bear a
unique responsibility to mobilize national and
international action to confront the very real threat of
climate change and the specific threats to international
peace and security that derive from it. Of course,
nothing would build a more lasting foundation for a
peaceful world than securing sustainable development
for all of our citizens.
In this regard, I urge all United Nations Member
States to fully utilize the opportunity provided by next
year’s United Nations Conference on Sustainable

11-42259

Development. In Rio, we need to close the gaps
between energy security, food and nutrition security,
water security, climate security and development so
that all our peoples can enjoy prosperity, peace and
international security.
I thank you again, Sir, for having organized this
debate and for lending the political weight of the
Security Council to raising awareness of this important
issue. I have called climate change the defining issue
of our time. Indeed, we must go even further. We must
make sustainable development for all the defining issue
of our time, because it is only in that broader
framework that we can address climate change and the
needs of our citizens. Rewriting this history falls to us
all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Steiner.
Mr. Steiner: It is my privilege this morning to
address the Security Council from the perspective of
the knowledge, the science and the expertise we have
acquired over a period of roughly 30 years in terms of
understanding
the
significant
and
profound
implications of climate change. What do we know
today and what do we not know yet about the
implications and impacts of climate change and how
the world needs to prepare for changes that are now on
the horizon and which, perhaps, to modern civilization
are of an unprecedented nature in terms of the time, the
scale and the implications across the planet?
For
the
international
community,
the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
remains the first point of reference in terms of
determining what it is that science can tell us today and
what it is that science cannot yet tell us. I want to
reassure the Council once again that, despite some of
the discussions that occurred around some of the IPCC
reports, what remains without contest is that the
IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report is a document that is
uncontested in terms of the international peer review,
and that it speaks very clearly, first, to the fact that
climate change is happening. Not only is it happening;
it is also accelerating. Not only is it accelerating, but
indeed the latest science being published by scientific
institutions across the planet is in many respects
overtaking the rather conservative scenarios,
predictions and models that the IPCC brought to our
attention four years ago.

3

S/PV.6587

Whether we look at the linear warming trend over
the past 50 years — on average, 0.13°C warming per
decade, which is nearly twice the temperature increase
we have seen over the past 100 years; whether we look
at the increase in terms of extreme weather events,
such as storms and cyclones; whether we look at the
thermal expansion of oceans; or whether we look at the
melting of the Arctic summer ice, none of these are
speculative data about the fact that a changing climate
is a reality today. These are proven trends.
The limitations of our knowledge still lie today in
interpreting, first of all, the implications of these
changes for our weather systems, ecosystems and,
indeed, atmospheric response mechanisms. Science
cannot yet tell us everything about these factors.
Indeed, where the IPCC found itself in more
challenging territory — as all science does, because
perfect knowledge has rarely been the foundation of
human understanding — is in trying to understand the
future. Clearly, here science is far from being able to
capture the complexity of how our climate systems
work, how the atmosphere and the biosphere interact,
or how ocean, marine and terrestrial ecosystems will
respond to these different trends.
But as we have seen, and as almost every day that
passes brings new consolidation of our science, there is
no question in the minds of those who have studied this
subject with great intensity — across institutions north
and south, east and west; whether from a natural
science perspective, an economic science perspective
or a social science perspective — the nature and scale
of these changes are of such a degree that we cannot
simply view them as a challenge of changing our
energy systems or adjusting our transport economy. It
is in fact a series of developments that are triggering
responses and impacts far beyond any single sector of
our economies and societies.
Let me just point out that, while we are still
struggling with finding a way in which we can stay
within the 2ºC realm — which was an emerging
consensus in the international community around the
climate change negotiations — the latest projections
that we are receiving from scientists for certain parts of
the world are talking about 3ºC and 4ºC scenarios this
century. This means that the world is confronting a
global warming scenario that is already well beyond
where we believe we might be able to manage these
changes and trends if we are able to conclude our

4

negotiations under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.
The Arctic Monitoring and Assessment
Programme has also predicted that sea-level rise is
likely to reach 1 metre by the end of this century. The
IPCC erred on the conservative side in its Fourth
Assessment Report when it spoke about 0.18 to
0.59 metres — roughly half a metre maximum — in
sea-level rise. We are now talking about a 1-metre sealevel rise possibly occurring this century.
If we look at a world map and we realize how
many tens of thousands of kilometres of coastline will
be affected by this, and how in a sense we will redraw
the world map not only in geographical terms but also
in terms of exclusive economic zones and many other
implications, we begin to realize that we are now truly
confronted with a level of scientific knowledge that is
sufficient for us to begin to realize that we are talking
about major implications, not only in a territorial
sense, but also from a geopolitical perspective. Indeed,
not long ago the Royal Society of the United Kingdom
published another report that stated that the worst-case
scenario under current conditions could be a 4ºC
warming by 2060.
I do not want to delve further into the science; I
have cited many other examples in my written
statement. I simply wanted to tell the Council that
when we talk about the changing climate today, it is
already a fact. We know enough about what is
happening, but we do not yet know enough about how
fast and in how many different domains it will manifest
itself. Perhaps most important, we have not yet well
understood the implications of these changes for our
societies, our economies and the Earth’s life-support
systems.
That is why I believe that the term “threat
multiplier”, which perhaps has a strong connotation for
defence establishments and analyses, is not irrelevant
to a review of the implications of a changing climate
upon the international peace and security context. As
the Secretary-General just said, as we in the
international community and as nation States seek to
move forward on the path towards sustainable
development, what we are confronted with today is the
fact that there are a number of threats that are
beginning to undermine the tenuous gains we have
made in terms of sustainable development. As a global
economy and a global community, we are confronted

11-42259

S/PV.6587

with scenarios of natural resource scarcities, droughts
and floods, and corresponding instabilities in global
markets for food and other commodities that are
putting into question some of the gains that we have
achieved in sustainable development in recent decades.
In fact, natural disasters are fundamentally
disruptive events, and if some of the scenarios that the
IPCC and many scientists have drawn up hold true,
then the scale, number and nature of these natural
disasters will increase exponentially. If we go back to
Hurricane Mitch in Honduras, the President of that
country at that time called it the biggest disaster in the
history of the nation, with 50 years of development lost
literally in a matter of hours. Some 70 per cent of the
country’s infrastructure was destroyed, and therefore
the maps that the country used for settlements, towns
and roads had to be basically redrawn.
We are all familiar with the natural disasters that
are occurring across the planet — be they floods in
Pakistan or the drought to which the Secretary-General
just referred — and that are occurring in ever-faster
patterns in regions such as the Horn of Africa. We can
see that their impact in terms of the number of people
affected and the ability of societies to cope with these
natural disasters is increasing every day. The
Norwegian Refugee Council has estimated that, in the
year 2010, 42 million people were displaced by natural
disasters and that 90 per cent of those disasters were in
fact related to weather-related extremes, such as floods
and droughts. These are just the officially captured
numbers. They do not give even a sense of the human
tragedy or the rebuilding efforts that are required in
that context.
I would also like to refer to the notion of food
security as not just being a matter of having food
available. We know today that an extreme weather
event in one part of the world can change the global
commodity markets overnight and literally price tens
of millions of people out of the market for food. This is
how interconnected our global economy is today. Food
insecurity is predicted to increase in prevalence and
magnitude in the coming decades. Clearly, if we are
unable to feed ourselves and to have food available
where it is needed at an affordable price, the result will
be major social instability and disruption.
Climate science is advancing by the day.
Recently, a report was published that analysed 20,000
African maize trials from recent decades. The results

11-42259

were that in a 1˚C warming scenario, roughly 65 per
cent of Africa’s existing growing areas would suffer
yield losses within this century. Viewing the
ramifications and implications from any angle, we have
to recognize that such trends are disruptive to the
sustainable development paths of nations and to the
economic, social and environmental stability of our
societies, our economies and our planet. Moreover,
they are disruptive in part because we cannot predict
their magnitude.
On that subject, I want to recall two very
important concepts in the science emerging in climate
change: the notions of tipping points and feedback
mechanisms. One of the most unsettling aspects of
trying to understand these planetary systems is that we
cannot assume linear developments. We cannot assume
that with a certain number of years passing with a
certain degree of global warming certain things will
occur.
In our Earth’s natural systems, there are tipping
points. Brazil’s environmental protection agency
published a study about two years ago that looked at
the implications of 2˚C, 3˚C and 4˚C warming
scenarios for the Amazon. Ecologically speaking, what
emerged from that research is that, at a certain point of
warming, an entire ecosystem ceases functioning in the
way that is functions today, not only in terms of the
biodiversity of the ecosystem itself. In the case of the
Amazon, it is the world’s largest water pump. The
entire hydrological cycles of significant parts of South
America depend on how the systems of the Amazon
function.
The second concept I want to recall is feedback
mechanisms. If indeed Arctic melt continues to occur
and if permafrost continues to melt in the tundra, old
carbon will be released that is currently stored in those
soils. According to one report, there is evidence that an
amount of carbon equivalent to 270 years of emissions
at today’s level could be released by the end the
century — a secondary effect of the increase in
temperatures leading to the melting of the permafrost.
Another example is glacial melt. Across the
globe, whether it is in the Hindu Kush, the Andes or
Central Asia, glacial melt occurring as a result of
climate change and global warming has the effect of
disrupting the hydrological cycles and the flows around
which societies have developed their agriculture,
infrastructure and settlements. It also calls into

5

S/PV.6587

question the arrangements that nations have developed
about how to share water resources. There are 145
countries with more that one trans-boundary river that
they share. Scarcity of access to water resources is
already beginning to be an issue of tension between
communities within nations and internationally
between nations. The research on glacial melt done at
Beijing University and other institutions in China
indicates that, in the headwaters of the Yangtze basin,
there is a significant reduction in the area covered by
glaciers, which will determine future water flows and
availability.
The implications of what I am describing are so
profound that the recognition of climate change as a
factor in the future stability, cooperation and security
of our planet is not an academic matter. I say this fully
aware of the debate that Member States have had on
the role of the Security Council. I do not wish to
pronounce myself on that issue because it is not my
place to do so. I do, however, want to speak today for
an entity within the international system and the United
Nations.
I hope that historians in 50 years looking back at
the decisions we are making today will see an
international community using the knowledge available —
including unavoidable uncertainties — to address
cooperatively a phenomenon that, as I said earlier, is
unprecedented in its implications for civilization. The
simultaneous nature and the degree and scale of the
changes that we will have to accommodate, adapt to
and deal with represent a great threat on many fronts.
However, if addressed by the international community
with appropriate measures, they also represent an
opportunity to transition not only towards a low-carbon
economy, but also towards a more stable mechanism
for international cooperation.
The sustainable development paths of individual
nations are today predicated on the ability of the
international community to act collectively. Many of
the sustainable development objectives, ambitions and
pathways that nations have pursued are under threat
beyond what traditionally have been the means of a
national sovereign State to determine policies within its
territory. If we take into account food insecurity,
natural disasters and the potential for conflict and
tensions over ever more scarce resources, together with
displacement and the potential disappearance of entire
nation States from our world map — including their
culture, identity and sovereignty — within a time span

6

of 50 to 100 years, we have to recognize that climate
change is an issue that needs to be viewed not just from
a scientific and technological perspective of managing
carbon emissions, but truly from a geopolitical and
security perspective. Our response will either unite us
in cooperative action or divide us and lead us into
chaos, tension and potential conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Steiner for his
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Longer versions of statements may of
course be distributed in writing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
thank the Secretary-General and Executive Director
Steiner for their excellent and very important
statements this morning.
The United States welcomes today’s debate, and
we are grateful to Germany for its leadership in
convening this critical and timely discussion, which
aims to place climate change squarely on the global
security agenda.
President
Obama
was
clear
at
the
Secretary-General’s summit on climate change nearly
two years ago when he said that the security and
stability of every nation and every people are in
jeopardy. Our prosperity, health and safety are in peril.
Time is not just moving ahead; time is running out.
Climate change has very real implications for peace
and security. Its effects are as powerful as they are
complex, and many of them are already upon us. In
many regions, climate change is already reducing the
availability of food and water, threatening biodiversity
and disrupting sea levels and weather patterns. As more
powerful and frequent storms and floods lash
coastlines and uproot populations, climatic changes can
put even more pressure on scarce resources and expose
vulnerable communities to greater instability.
As too often happens, the most vulnerable will be
the hardest hit. Post-conflict countries already struggle
to rebuild their infrastructure, strengthen their
institutions and overcome instability. Now, they must
often grapple with extreme weather and protracted

11-42259

S/PV.6587

drought, which can drive already strained systems to
buckle. Climate change can also slow or even reverse
crucial development gains for ordinary citizens trying
to break free of the shackles of poverty.
Climate change can further erode State capacity,
especially in fragile States already vulnerable from past
conflict, poverty, upheaval or disaster. As sea levels
rise, small island States may well see their territory
quite literally drowned, raising the spectre of new and
previously unimagined forms of statelessness.
We have just witnessed the birth of the world’s
newest nation, the Republic of South Sudan. South
Sudanese leaders now tell us that agricultural
production is one of their highest priorities as they
work to consolidate peace. Yet that challenge is
magnified by the unfolding humanitarian disaster
caused by severe drought in the wider Horn of Africa.
Let us remember that in the Sudan a decade ago,
drought and rapid desertification are widely thought to
have contributed to the conflict and the humanitarian
crisis in Darfur, as they did a decade earlier in Somalia,
where drought contributed to the crisis that eventually
prompted the deployment of United Nations forces,
with results that we all recall.
To be sure, the mechanisms are complex and
some effects of climate change are long-term, but the
Security Council needs to start now, today, and in the
days to come to act on the understanding that climate
change exacerbates the risks and dynamics of conflict.
And we need to sharpen and adapt our instruments to
prevent and respond to such conflicts. The United
States itself is taking important steps through a range
of initiatives to work with our partners to confront the
growing challenges of global poverty, food insecurity,
disease, water scarcity and depleted natural resources,
helping lay the foundation for a more peaceful and
prosperous future for all.

we have been unable to reach consensus on even a
simple draft presidential statement that climate change
has the potential to impact peace and security in the
face of the manifest evidence that it does. We have
dozens of countries represented in this body and in this
very Chamber whose very existence is threatened.
They have asked the Council to demonstrate our
understanding that their security is profoundly
threatened. Instead, because of the refusal of a few to
accept our responsibility, by its silence the Council is
saying in effect “tough luck”. That is more than
disappointing; it is pathetic, short-sighted and, frankly,
a dereliction of duty.
The Council needs to keep pace with the
emerging threats of the twenty-first century. Old
threats have not disappeared, but new threats are upon
us, and they demand more of us than business as usual.
The Council has shown an impressive ability in the
past to embrace its responsibilities to combat new
peace and security threats, as it has done over the past
20 years in adapting traditional peacekeeping tools to
address new and more complex political and security
crises around the world.
Climate change is no different and demands
nothing less. We need improved early warning systems
to increase our lead time to take action. We need
greater collaboration on the effects of climate change,
especially at the local and regional levels, and better
information about basic human needs — water, food,
livelihood and energy — so that we can anticipate and
prevent resource-driven conflicts. We also need to
become better equipped to anticipate and prevent the
risk of conflict, including by building local and
national capacities to respond to climate-related threats
and to prevent them through diplomacy that helps
Governments manage potential disputes over scarce
resources.

Let me now address the role of the Security
Council in this issue. While we recognize the essential
work of the wider United Nations system and other
partners in tackling the broader dimensions of climate
change around the world, we also strongly believe that
the Council has an essential responsibility to address
the clear-cut peace and security implications of a
changing climate.

Our goal is clear. The Council needs to be
prepared for the full range of crises that may be
deepened or widened by the effects of climate change.
The question is not whether we will be faced with
climate-related threats, but when and how to respond.
We need to be much better prepared to tackle one of
the central threats of our age. It is past time for the
Security Council to come into the twenty-first century
and to assume our core responsibilities.

In the Council, we have discussed and addressed
many emerging security issues, from the links between
development and security to HIV/AIDS. Yet, this week

Mrs.
Viotti
(Brazil):
I
thank
the
Secretary-General for being with us today and for his

11-42259

7

S/PV.6587

remarks. I would like to welcome Mr. Achim Steiner
and to thank him for his very interesting briefing.
Brazil associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Argentina on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.

United Nations, under the UNFCCC, must work to
strengthen prevention and to build resilience through
adaptation. Humanitarian instruments need to be
further developed in order to address the specific
nature of the impacts of sea-level rise on populations.

Brazil has a deep and long-standing commitment
to combating climate change. We have translated that
firm commitment into concrete actions and
constructive proposals. Climate change is a complex
and difficult issue. There are no shortcuts or easy
solutions. The only effective way forward is to achieve
an ambitious result under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and its Kyoto Protocol. Our efforts for mitigation and
adaptation must be based on the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities. That is crucial to ensuring an equitable,
balanced and effective solution.

In that context, I recognize and welcome the
presence of His Excellency the President of Nauru,
Mr. Marcus Stephen. We acknowledge his concerns
and the untiring efforts of his country and of the other
small island developing States in bringing the issue of
sea-level rise to the forefront of the international
agenda. Brazil expresses its full solidarity with them.
We agree with them that expressions of concern or
political declarations are no substitute for concrete
action. We need to do more, and to do it faster. Climate
change negotiations must yield significant results to
curb emissions in a balanced and fair manner.
Adaptation programmes must be prioritized and
sufficiently funded.

The Security Council must take a holistic view of
conflict. Violence is born not only of ethnic or
religious disputes, but also of hunger, poverty and the
competition for scarce resources. In some cases, the
adverse effects of climate change may aggravate those
disputes. However, when they do, it is not a function of
climate change alone. It is usually a result of
underdevelopment and lack of access to resources and
technology for adaptation.
We firmly acknowledge the interdependence of
development, security and human rights. The links
between climate change and development and between
security and development are clear and have been
explicitly recognized by the United Nations. The
possible security implications of climate change,
however, are far less obvious. Environmental impacts
do not threaten international peace and security on
their own. In certain circumstances, the adverse effects
of climate change may contribute to aggravating
existing threats to international peace and security.
The rather indirect relationship between security
and climate change in no way diminishes the urgency
of supporting countries and populations that are most
vulnerable to climate change, in particular small island
developing States, many of which face truly existential
challenges. Such challenges require political, economic
and humanitarian approaches, and not necessarily a
security response.
The grave consequences of sea-level rise may
lead to humanitarian catastrophes if unchecked. The

8

The issue of food security is high on Brazil’s
agenda. At the international level, we must all support
the leading role of the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Food Programme. We must
redouble our efforts to eliminate the scourge of hunger.
Effective political will is needed to improve market
access to food products from developing countries by
reducing agricultural subsidies and bringing the Doha
Round to a successful conclusion. Efforts must also be
made to boost productivity in developing countries,
particularly in Africa. Where food insecurity
contributes to aggravating instability in conflict or
post-conflict situations, the Council should coordinate
its efforts with the work of other relevant actors within
the United Nations system and the World Bank.
The United Nations system has the necessary
tools to deal with the challenges associated with
fighting climate change. The wealth of knowledge,
experience, political leverage and legal instruments
that the system possesses must be used to its full
capacity.
Security tools are appropriate to deal with
concrete threats to international peace and security, but
they are inadequate to address complex and
multidimensional issues such as climate change.
Effectively fighting climate change and dealing with its
myriad implications must be a priority for the
international community. To do so, we must take full
advantage of all of the tools that the United Nations

11-42259

S/PV.6587

system has to offer, especially in the area of
sustainable development, and redouble our efforts to
achieve ambitious results in the international
negotiations on climate change.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, Mr. Steiner, for his
briefing. China supports the statement to be made by
the representative of Argentina on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
Global climate change is a common challenge of
all countries that is profoundly affecting human
survival and development. In recent years, all countries
have made efforts towards protecting the global
environment and responding to climate change, with
notable results. But resolving climate change and
achieving sustainable development remain pressing and
long-term tasks that require all countries to continue
their mitigating efforts.
Responding to climate change is in the interest of
all countries worldwide, in particular of the majority of
developing countries and for the well-being of their
peoples. The United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol
have been commonly accepted as major channels for
responding to climate change. The principle of
common but differentiated responsibility has become a
basis for all parties to strengthen cooperation.
Sustainable development and harmony between human
beings and nature have common goals for all parties.
Climate change may affect security, but it is
fundamentally a sustainable development issue. The
Security Council lacks expertise in climate change and
the necessary means and resources. Moreover, the
Council is not a forum for decision-making with
universal representation. Its discussions are not aimed
at putting together a broadly accepted programme, nor
can they take the place of the UNFCCC negotiations
among the 193 United Nations Member States.
It is the general belief of the majority of
developing countries that the Council’s discussion on
climate change will neither contribute to the mitigation
efforts of countries nor assist affected countries in
effectively responding to climate change. This
reasonable concern should be fully understood and
respected.

11-42259

In responding to climate change, the international
community should give full consideration to the
developing countries’ stages of development and their
basic needs and take note of their difficult situations. It
should listen to their voices, respect their demands and
effectively carry out its own commitments relating to
capital, technology and capacity-building.
China attaches great importance to the concerns
of the small island developing States on climate
change. As a country with many islands, China has
compassion for the difficulties encountered by small
island developing States in their efforts towards
sustainable development. The international community
should adopt effective measures to assist small island
developing States in responding to the challenges of
climate change. Developed countries should especially
carry out their commitments on capital, technology and
capacity-building.
China would like to work together with small
island developing States to continue to actively
implement the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States in order to facilitate sustainable development
around the world.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the German
delegation for organizing this important and timely
debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Achim Steiner, Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, for their briefings today.
In
an
increasingly
interdependent
and
interconnected world, changes due to growing
populations or increasing demands for natural
resources have the potential to aggravate social
tensions, political unrest and conflict. The Council’s
main responsibility, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security, clearly entails the
prevention of conflict. Recognizing the imperative of
security, we cannot neglect to address possible climate
change security risks, whose implications are certainly
a factor that should be taken into consideration.
Moreover, it is likely that the negative effects of
climate change will adversely affect the most
vulnerable regions and populations. It is possible that
additional pressures caused by climate change will
increase the risk of fragile States lapsing into conflict

9

S/PV.6587

or will disrupt efforts towards conflict prevention,
peacebuilding or post-conflict stabilization.
In certain circumstances the adverse impact of
climate change may contribute to aggravating existing
threats to international peace and security. In that
regard, the Security Council must be aware of the
potential security implications that climate change may
entail, including possible humanitarian crises,
migration pressures or external shocks for States most
heavily affected by climate change. As well, the
mandates and responsibilities of relevant United
Nations bodies addressing the issue of climate change
must be respected, specifically of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
The importance of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as a key
instrument for addressing climate change cannot be
overemphasized. In the same vein, the global nature of
climate change calls for the widest possible
cooperation by all countries on an effective and
appropriate international response based on the
principle of common but differentiated responsibility
while respecting existing institutional arrangements.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that a
coherent, integrated and holistic response by the
United Nations is the only way to meaningfully
contribute towards a response to this issue. In the same
vein, we believe that the Secretary-General, when
appropriate, should alert the Security Council to
climate-related crisis situations that may imperil peace
and security. It is crucial that relevant United Nations
bodies strengthen their capacities to deal with different
crises, including those resulting from climate change.
Their efforts should be focused on predicting,
preventing or handling climate change-related issues.
In that context, assisting countries to manage external
stresses and low adaptive capacity is vital.
We consider that stronger support for climate
change adaptation in developing countries, including
through investment in capacity-building at all levels, is
necessary. When national capacities are insufficient,
underdeveloped or overstretched by natural disasters or
other hazardous events, the international community’s
response must be unwavering and adequately
supported. Developed countries must also do more to
meet their international commitments to development
assistance. We believe that mainstreaming climate
change within the relevant bodies of the United

10

Nations and their activities should be continued and
strengthened. Furthermore, improving the flow of
information, sharing early warning assessments and
exchanging data between regional and international
organizations are essential.
In conclusion, climate change is a global
challenge that can be tackled only at the global level.
No country can deal with this problem alone. All actors
must therefore work in a concerted manner and fully
implement their commitments and responsibilities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a party to the UNFCCC
and as a country that has ratified the Kyoto Protocol,
stands ready to contribute to that endeavour.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and for
the
concept
paper
circulated
by
your
delegation(S/2011/408, annex). I also thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Achim Steiner for their
perceptive and inspiring statements. This debate is
timely in that it affords us the opportunity to evaluate
progress in implementing the internationally agreed
development goals, conventions and protocols that
frame our response to climate change. Through this
discussion, we can also contribute effectively to
preparations for the 2012 United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development.
The challenges posed by climate change are
immense and the consequences for peace and security
wide-ranging. Every aspect of our lives, from food
security to resource management, is threatened by this
phenomenon. As we have witnessed in the current food
crisis in the Horn of Africa, threats to water
management, animal health and crop production are
magnified by political instability and insecurity.
Scarcity breeds fear, which in turn fuels conflict. This
chain reaction demands vigilance on the part of the
Security Council. Unless we take concerted action to
mitigate and adapt, the risks will only increase. For
example, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change has estimated that a 1-metre sea-level rise
could flood 18,000 square kilometres of Nigeria’s
coastal land, damage assets valued at $89 billion, and
force the relocation of up to 5 million Nigerians. The
cost of protecting Nigeria from such a rise in sea levels
is estimated at $3 billion.
On the basis of those facts, we are gravely
concerned about the potential impact of changing
climate conditions. Nigeria is working with bilateral

11-42259

S/PV.6587

and multilateral partners at the regional and
international levels to identify solutions to these
challenges. My Government has also sought to
mainstream its mitigation and adaptation strategies
with development policies aimed at significantly
reducing carbon emissions and sustaining its campaign
against desertification.
Nigeria remains committed to the Millennium
Development Goals and the Green Wall Sahara
(Nigeria) Programme, which seeks to ensure
sustainable consumption and production. We have
initiated mechanisms to address the issue of gas
flaring, firmly determined to progressively transform it
into liquefied gas processing. We are engaging in
research on methods of carbon-dioxide reduction in
petroleum products.
While we recognize that not every nation is
equipped to implement root-and-branch policy change,
it is important that every nation, no matter how small,
play a small part. My delegation is concerned about the
slow rate of progress in achieving agreement on
implementing international climate change mitigation
agreements. Nations have too often failed to honour
their commitments to such frameworks, and such
failures have reverberations everywhere. In many
cases, the efforts of developing countries and small
island developing States to adapt to the negative
impacts of climate change are undermined by natural
disasters and often by conflict. Our struggle to protect
our climate should therefore reflect the additional
challenges faced by such nations, and should feature in
our wider peacebuilding frameworks.

capacity-building programming, as well as promotion
of the Global Environment Facility programme steered
by the United Nations Development Programme.
Our response to climate change must be rooted in
political and technological innovation. Our response to
climate change should not be any less strong in the
field of sustainable development. The General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission on Sustainable Development and the
United Nations Environment Programme are credible
and concrete platforms for effectively discussing and
adopting appropriate measures for dealing with climate
change. I want to reiterate my Government’s
commitment to relentlessly supporting, promoting and
fulfilling all regional and international obligations for
mitigating climate change in a collective effort that
seeks to ensure the well-being of present and future
generations. We will be steadfast in the collective
effort that seeks to ensure that peace and stability are
maintained in the world.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
impacts of climate change are keenly felt around the
world. Today, we are discussing the implications of
climate change for international peace and security. We
are grateful to the German presidency for bringing this
important question to the Council. The number of
countries speaking in this debate is a graphic
demonstration of its significance, and I particularly
want to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Achim
Steiner for their powerful contributions to our
discussion.

I firmly believe that if we can support political
stability, we can create the space for long-term
capacity-building and the embedding of best practices
and national policies for climate change. The United
Nations system is uniquely placed to guide the
implementation of the existing commitments in the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and its Kyoto Protocol, the Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation and the Mauritius Declaration.

Scientific evidence suggests that the effects of
climate change will include more droughts, shorter
growing seasons and more frequent extreme weather
events. Those will be felt most keenly in areas of the
world already experiencing stress from shortages of
food, water and energy. It is just those areas where
Governments do not always have the capacity to
respond. It is in that context that climate change must
be seen as a threat multiplier, exacerbating existing
tensions and increasing the likelihood of conflict.

Seated around this table are those who could
encourage developed countries to implement their
commitments to reducing emissions and supporting
developing countries with the requisite technological
and financial assistance to address climate change
effectively. Nigeria therefore calls for enhanced efforts
for the equitable distribution of adaptation funds and

As a result of climate change, crop yields are
predicted to fall in the long term. This will have
serious repercussions for communities dependent on
agriculture. At the same time, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations has estimated that
global demand for food will increase by up to 70 per
cent by 2050. Weaker production coupled with greater

11-42259

11

S/PV.6587

demand will affect all countries. In areas where food
security is already a source of instability, this impact of
climate change has the obvious potential to fuel
tension.
We have also heard this morning about the
impacts of the rise of sea levels caused by climate
change. These will be felt most acutely in low-lying
and small island developing States. I welcome the fact
that representatives of so many of those countries
affected in the Pacific will participate in today’s
debate.
Resource scarcity, flooding and drought all are
likely to result in significant movements of people, in
some cases across national boundaries, as we are
seeing today in the Horn of Africa. Where people move
to areas that do not themselves have sufficient
resources or infrastructure to accommodate them, the
risk of tension and conflict is increased.
Some delegations have voiced concerns over the
Council’s mandate to discuss this issue. We agree that
it is important that the different roles, functions and
mandates of the various United Nations bodies dealing
with climate change are fully respected. But like the
Secretary-General and Mr. Steiner, we do not believe
that this debate in any way undermines them.
The Council is tasked with the maintenance of
international peace and security. It can and indeed
should, therefore, consider emerging threats. Conflict
prevention is a key element in the Council’s work. The
United Kingdom believes that it is through discussion
and better awareness of new and cross-cutting security
challenges, including the effects of climate change, that
the Council can best fulfill its responsibility to prevent
future conflict.
We therefore hope that even at this late stage we
can reach agreement on the presidential statement
drafted by the German presidency. This would send a
powerful signal of the importance that the Security
Council places on mitigating the security risks posed
by climate change. History will not judge us kindly if,
through complacency or ideology, we duck this
important responsibility.
There are three key areas on which we should
focus if we are to be effective in mitigating the security
implications of climate change.
First, and pre-eminently, the United Nations must
continue to work to achieve a comprehensive, globally

12

binding agreement on climate change. Ongoing efforts
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change are crucial. The United Kingdom will
do everything in our power to support preparations for
the 17th Conference of the Parties in Durban, to be
held later this year, including by supporting the South
African presidency.
Secondly, we need to build up a deeper
understanding of the interface between the impacts of
climate change on the one hand and conflict drivers on
the other. We then need to capture this understanding
as we build the tools and take the action necessary to
prevent conflict.
Finally, we need better sharing of analysis and
experience among the various United Nations agencies,
bodies and programmes that are already considering
these issues. As food, water, energy and climate
security are interlinked, they demand a coordinated
response.
Left unchecked, climate change increases the
likelihood of instability, resource conflict and poverty.
That is why the United Kingdom first brought this
issue to the Council for debate in 2007. It is ever more
relevant and valuable for the Council to consider these
impacts, and I thank Germany once again for having
convened this debate today.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his statement, and to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, Mr. Steiner, for his assessment.
Russia has always viewed combating global
climate change as a priority area for international
cooperation. We have consistently advocated, and
continue to advocate, the drafting and implementation
of a global instrument covering all countries,
particularly the largest emitters, and that greater
account be taken of the potential of Russian forests to
act as a carbon sink. The constructive nature of
Russia’s policy in this area is reflected in its
announcement that it would reduce, by 2020,
greenhouse-gas emissions by 10 to 25 per cent
compared to 1990, within the framework of a new
universal climate agreement.
However, we also believe that a particular role in
humankind’s transition to a non-carbon economy
should be played by nuclear energy, on whose

11-42259

S/PV.6587

development Russia will continue to focus, while, of
course, improving safety systems at nuclear reactors
and power stations. We would suggest that the review
now under way within the United Nations on the issue
of climate change allows us to respond to emerging
threats in this area.
We are also convinced that the priority role in
this area lies, and should continue to lie, with the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, as the universal mechanism for combating
global climate change. The Convention has the
necessary and sufficient mechanisms to develop both
an effective international climate regime over the
longer term and specific measures to respond
effectively to new threats in this area.
We share the concern of small island developing
States, in particular those situated in the Pacific Ocean,
about the continuing rise in sea levels. We welcome the
participation in this meeting of the President of Nauru,
Mr. Stephen, whose country is faced with such a
challenge. We believe that in order to properly address
this problem, we must effectively use the existing
potential of the Convention on Climate Change, the
most fundamental area of which is that of adaptation,
including through the Adaptation Fund. We call on all
interested donor countries to consider the possibility of
providing, on an urgent and targeted basis, aid to the
countries concerned for the purpose of adaptation.
Given this, Russia is sceptical about the repeated
attempts that have been made to place on the agenda of
the Security Council the issue of the threat posed by
climate change to international peace and security. As a
compromise, we agreed to join the consensus when
General Assembly resolution 63/281, on climate
change and its possible security implications, was
adopted. While we recognize the Security Council’s
prerogatives as the body that has primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
we believe that referring to that resolution to justify
consideration of this issue in the Council is not right.
The resolution was the outcome of months of difficult
negotiations in which all States Members of the United
Nations participated and reflects the fact that many
countries are not prepared to see the issue of climate
placed on the agenda of the Council.
We would also suggest that the report of the
General Assembly (A/64/350) bearing the same title
and drafted pursuant to that resolution does not contain

11-42259

serious arguments to support the position of those
States advocating that this issue be placed on the
Council’s agenda. The report refers only to
hypothetical impacts of climate change on security and
is not able to precisely predict them. It fails to provide
empirical data establishing any correlation between
these phenomena. Although it contains very balanced
conclusions and recommendations on further work in
this area, it is very telling that the Security Council is
not once referred to in the report.
On that basis, we believe that involving the
Security Council in a regular review of the issue of
climate change would bring no added value whatsoever
and would merely lead to a further politicization of the
issue and increased disagreements among countries,
which would be an extremely undesirable outcome,
particularly in the wake of the successful conclusion of
the Conference of Parties held in Cancún and before
the Durban Conference.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, and
Germany for having convened this open debate and for
your great efforts and work to underscore and promote
the importance of this topic. I also wish to welcome the
President of Nauru, His Excellency Mr. Marcus
Stephen, and to express our solidarity with him and his
concerns.
The statements made by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Achim Steiner, Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme, were
very illuminating and important, and underscored the
scale of the issues we must address when it comes to
climate change.
Climate change as a global phenomenon affecting
present and future generations is undoubtedly one of
the greatest challenges in the history of humankind. Its
impact today has consequences for almost all activities
around the world, from life itself, desertification and
rising sea level to the food supply, migration and the
destruction of biodiversity. It is clear that action must
be taken through the appropriate bodies and contexts,
among which the reduction of man-made gas emissions
is crucial. There are no excuses for the leading
producers of man-made gas emissions failing to
assume their responsibility before the world. There is
also a need to provide for the transmission and transfer
of clean new technologies and for access to markets on
equal terms, as well as to protect biodiversity. These

13

S/PV.6587

are concepts related to the debate on the right to
development, which is a legitimate aspiration that
cannot be renounced.
The increase in temperature, the severe variations
in historical patterns of rainfall, the increase in the
intensity and frequency of extreme weather events,
such as hurricanes and typhoons, are forcing serious
discussion in the appropriate forums on the measures
to be taken to adapt our societies to climate change.
Against that backdrop, Colombia believes that
there are immediate challenges that must be considered
in the Security Council. While the responses needed to
minimize the effects of climate change are not within
the mandate of the Council, we believe that this organ
does have a responsibility to play a role in cases and
conflict situations on its agenda when those are
exacerbated by the effects of climate change, with a
view to providing humanitarian protection measures,
which we believe should not extend to other issues.
Moreover, the Security Council should help to address
this problem in a context of trust among countries,
based on respect for the mandates of the respective
bodies of the international system.
Several decades ago, we aspired to an integrated
vision of progress, which we called sustainable
development. That goal has proved elusive because our
societies and economies are based on short-term,
sector-specific and immediate approaches. The
problems resulting from climate change must, in our
view, be addressed in a comprehensive way,
encompassing all the spheres and structures of human
activity and the need to adopt new behaviours. It is a
challenge for which most countries, which have only
barely made progress on various fronts of
development, are not prepared.
How should we prioritize resources and efforts?
How should we address the problems of disappearing
coastlines, overflowing rivers, melting glaciers,
expanding deserts and successive freezes and
droughts? No single country, group of countries or
specific body has the answers. Just as curbing and
reducing greenhouse gas emissions will require
coordinated action at the global level, responding to
the impacts of climate change will also require
concerted international action.
Colombia has just suffered two atypical cold
spells, unprecedented in our history, whose destruction
experts estimate at 10 times that wrought by Hurricane

14

Katrina. We had to mobilize extra resources and turn to
international assistance to mitigate the damage and
destruction and ensure the well-being of the population
affected. The integrity of natural ecosystems we
depend on was seriously affected.
The problem is therefore not only a matter for
future generations; it is a reality facing us today. The
survival of millions of people depends on action based
on international solidarity to reduce gas emissions, to
ensure access to food, to positively respond to
migration forced by climate impacts, disease and pest
vectors, infrastructure investment, the disappearance of
thousands of species, ocean acidification and the
inequitable distribution of fresh water worldwide,
among many other serious situations.
Colombia clearly has the political will to work
together to safeguard our planet. We believe that
collective commitment is needed to achieve sustainable
development in peace and prosperity.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union.
Since the last debate in the Council on climate
change was in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), science has
progressed, the facts have been confirmed and the risks
have been further analysed, as Mr. Steiner set out in his
statement. I therefore pay tribute to the German
presidency of the Security Council for the initiative to
hold a debate on the impact of climate change on
international peace and security.
The climate threat concerns us all. It is, in
particular, a threat for our small island Pacific State
partners, whose very existence is in peril, as is the
survival of their territory, culture and identity. The
President of the Republic of Nauru, Mr. Marcus
Stephen, whose presence I welcome in the Council
today, is better placed than I to speak about the
immense challenges affecting the islands of his region.
I regret enormously that we cannot respond to his
appeal.
In addition, agricultural productivity is under
threat. My country has made food security a priority of
its presidency of the Group of 20. How can we
maintain international peace and security if a situation
of chronic food shortages sets in?
It is also a threat in terms of water resources in
regions where these are rare, and generates tension.

11-42259

S/PV.6587

How can we ensure appropriate management if they
become yet scarcer?
It is also a menace for the viability of coastal
regions, where more than one third of the world
population lives.
The facts are clear: climate change has an
immense destabilizing potential and could multiply the
threats to peace and security in the most fragile regions
and States.
The international community is mobilizing to
tackle the various challenges posed by climate change.
There is still time to avoid its worst effects, but we
must act fast. There is only one way to do this, namely,
international cooperation.
We must begin a new stage in formulating an
ambitious multilateral response at the Durban
Conference. We must give operational impetus to the
agreements negotiated at Cancún. We must also
safeguard the Kyoto Protocol and move towards a
broader legal instrument.
We must also work to respond to sector-specific
threats and promote partnerships. This is the objective
of the World Water Forum, to be held in Marseille in
March 2012.
Access to clean energy for all is another major
priority, because development is itself a way of
responding to climate change and can contribute to
preventing and reducing conflicts. It is in this context
that France and Kenya together launched the ParisNairobi Initiative last April.
Lastly, we must reinvigorate global partnerships
for sustainable development and adopt, in Rio in June
2012, an ambitious road map for a global transition
towards a green economy supported by solid,
financially strong and effective institutions.
The international community has seen the
diversity of risks related to climate change and is
taking measures in various forums. In this context, the
implications of climate change for maintaining
international peace and security should be taken into
account. In conformity with its mandate, the Security
Council must therefore assume its responsibilities.
The Council is not infringing on the competence
of other United Nations bodies and does not want to
replace other forums, in particular that under the
Convention on Climate Change. The Council today is

11-42259

simply facing up to a new type of threats that are
multiform, complex and diffuse. In that spirit we are
exploring today the implications of these threats and
the Council’s capacity to deal with them. Thus last
February the Security Council, under the presidency of
Brazil, held a useful debate on peace, security and
development (see S/PV.6479). It is in the same spirit
that today the Council is considering climate change —
while strictly respecting its mandate and the Charter —
in particular in the area of preventing conflicts.
My delegation therefore regrets that the Security
Council is not responding in the same way as it did in
the debate on security and development. Despite the
efforts by the presidency, the Council is not ready to
make a collective statement today on the implications
of climate change for the maintenance of international
peace and security. To oppose with bureaucratic
concerns the anguished appeals by our partners
threatened by climate change does not rise to the issues
at stake. It is not dignified.
Nevertheless, we are faced with reality. The need
will remain for the Security Council to endeavour to
analyze the threats and to better know the causes of
conflict on which climate change will have the most
immediate effects. The Council must also take account
of the impact of its own decisions. For example, it
must, as of today, take measures to ensure that
peacekeeping operations reduce their carbon emissions
and their impact on the environment. I therefore
welcome the fact that the Secretariat has already taken
measures in that regard.
Today’s debate is just a first stage. It must be for
all of us in the United Nations a call for action. The
climate threat means that we must mobilize ourselves:
first in the short term, to ensure the success of the
Climate Conference in Durban and the Climate Change
Conference in Rio; in the medium term, to prevent
conflicts that could emerge; and in the long term to
save the planet. My delegation is convinced that the
Security Council must come back to this and in the
future must express itself in a single voice. This is not
over-ambitious; it is just taking account of the sad
realities that we face.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to thank
Secretary-General Ban for his important introductory
remarks, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, Mr. Steiner, for his
stimulating briefing. I also wish to thank you,

15

S/PV.6587

Mr. President, for organizing this debate in the Security
Council on the impact of climate change in the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
At the outset, allow me to stress, along with my
partners in the Arab Group, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77 and China, that we
consider, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 63/281, that in the United Nations system
the responsibility for sustainable development issues,
including climate change, is conferred upon the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council and that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the key instrument
for addressing climate change.
Yet, focusing our discussion today on the
potential security implications of climate change will
not constitute an encroachment by the Security Council
on the functions and powers of other United Nations
organs, for the same General Assembly resolution,
63/281, also
“Invites the relevant organs of the United
Nations, as appropriate and within their
respective mandates, to intensify their efforts in
considering and addressing climate change,
including its possible security implications”.
In this same vein, in addition to increasing awareness
about the potential security impact of climate change,
our debate today should be viewed as an expression of
complementarity in the work of the different organs of
the United Nations.
There is broad agreement within the scientific
community that our planet has been warming, due
largely to human activities at least since the eighteenth
century, and that the rate of warming in the last century
was historically high. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change confirmed in 2007 the historic
magnitude of these changes and warned of their
potential impacts on the future of the Earth and its
inhabitants.
As to the relationship between climate change
and conflict, including armed conflict, the 2009 report
of the Secretary-General (A/64/350) identified climate
change as a threat multiplier exacerbating threats
caused by persistent poverty and weak institutions for
resource management and conflict resolution.
Emerging threats related to climate change include sealevel rise, which could result in the loss of entire

16

countries such as the small island States; accelerated
desertification and erosion of agricultural land, which
could lead to food insecurity, increased poverty and
reverse development; migratory and displacement
flows, which could become a source of social and
political tensions in the neighbouring areas; and water
scarcity, which could exacerbate competition over
natural resources.
No region on the surface of the globe is immune.
But it is important to underline that the impact of
climate change will be greater where factors of
fragility already exist. This is the case of the least
developed countries.
The global nature of climate change requires the
cooperation of all countries, in accordance with their
common but differentiated responsibilities and their
respective capabilities. It is also important to keep in
mind that the international community cannot win the
battle against the detrimental consequences of climate
change without putting into action all the relevant
instruments in its possession.
In this context, United Nations organs should,
within their respective mandates, mobilize all their
resources in the fields of mitigation, adaptation,
finance, technology development and transfer, and
capacity-building in order to address and reduce the
negative effects of global warming. Here, the Security
Council should, inter alia, play a critical role of
conflict prevention in addressing, as early as possible,
the potential security implications of climate change.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement this
morning. Equally, we wish to express our sincere
gratitude to Mr. Achim Steiner, Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme, for his
extensive briefing. We welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the
Republic of Nauru, in this room. His presence here
today can only be a demonstration of the real challenge
that sea-level rise presents to his country and to other
low-lying areas.
At the outset I wish to associate my delegation
with the statements to be made by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

11-42259

S/PV.6587

South Africa reaffirms General Assembly
resolution 63/281, which invites the relevant organs of
the United Nations, as appropriate and within their
respective mandates, to intensify their efforts in
considering and addressing climate change, including
its possible security implications. In that regard, the
convening of this debate is timely and opportune to
highlight the reality of climate change and the threat it
poses to African and developing countries in general
and to the small island developing States (SIDS) and
least developing countries (LDCs) in particular. It is
those countries who bear the disproportionate impact
of climate change.
We would like to reiterate the well-known
principled position of the Group of 77 and China that
climate change threatens not only development
prospects and the achievement of sustainable
development, but also the very existence and survival
of societies.
The Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change makes it
clear that if no action on climate change is taken in the
next few years, there will be dire consequences, in
particular for the small island developing States that
are already experiencing slow onset effects of this
phenomenon. This enjoins us to deal with this global
problem in an equitable manner. In that regard, we join
other delegations in calling for the full and effective
implementation of the commitments under the
Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States and
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme.
Developing countries are working hard to
eradicate poverty and underdevelopment and to
improve quality of life for our people. However, we
continue to be confronted by a lack of resources and
are relatively less prepared to deal with the
consequences of climate change. Least developed
countries, especially in Africa and Asia, as well as
small island developing States, cannot shoulder those
costs. It is for that reason that we continue to call for,
first, the scaling up of resources; secondly, the transfer
of technology and, thirdly, capacity-building to help
developing countries to deal with the grave
consequences of climate change.
South Africa firmly believes that the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

11-42259

(UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol remain the best
instruments to deal with the broader challenges of
climate change. It is important that we all continue
honour our obligations under the UNFCCC and the
Kyoto Protocol if we are to effectively deal with the
challenges precipitated by climate change. That has to
be in accordance with the fundamental principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities. The
UNFCCC affords all Member States, including small
island developing States and LDCs, an opportunity to
advance their cause while ensuring robust engagement
with the partners.
The contribution that the members of the Security
Council can make to these UNFCCC processes is to
ensure that the architecture of the climate change
regime is strengthened and not fragmented. Such a
global challenge can be effectively dealt with only
through a strong rules-based international system. The
UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol should be
strengthened, and a second commitment period should
be finalized as soon as possible.
Finally, for South Africa, as President of the
seventeenth Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC,
this debate provides an opportunity to raise awareness
and exchange views in order to intensify global efforts
to address climate change, first as a sustainable
development issue and, secondly, to re-emphasize the
need to retain the climate change debate within the
UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol.
For our part, we will spare no effort in ensuring
that the parties strive for a balanced and credible
outcome in Durban that is party-driven. In that regard,
we will rely on the bureau, work optimally with the
secretariat of the UNFCCC and consult with the parties
and their regional groups in an inclusive and
transparent manner.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Combating climate change is one of the main
thrusts of His Excellency President Ali Bongo
Ondimba’s L’avenir en confiance project. My
delegation therefore fully supports Germany’s initiative
to have the Security Council consider, for the second
time, the security implications of climate change,
which is a phenomenon that has been at the heart of the
international community’s concerns for many years.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme for their detailed statements.

17

S/PV.6587

As members are aware, on 17 April 2007, under
the presidency of the United Kingdom, the Council
held a historic debate on this important issue, focused
on the issues of energy, security and climate. As
witnessed by the negotiations on the draft presidential
statement, which unfortunately did not enjoy
consensus, many continue to express strong
reservations as to the relevancy of the Security Council
taking up this issue. My delegation remains convinced
of the contrary.
It is increasingly clear that climate change leads
to water scarcity, which is a source of tensions among
riparian countries, such as those in Central Asia, and
among communities in those countries. This also
happens in numerous African countries. In other cases,
climate change helps to exacerbate conflicts and
imbalances in the world’s ecosystems. Without
effective cooperation, climate change could not only
lead to cross-border population movements; it could
also significantly contribute to making energy,
biological, forest and aquatic resources even more
scarce. It is precisely because of the cross-cutting
nature of this phenomenon that greater involvement by
the Security Council is required.
Given developments on the international stage,
the maintenance of international peace and security is
no longer unidimensional. The military perspective
continues to be important, but it alone cannot be how
we define the convergence of threats that today impact
our collective security. Faced with new threats to
international peace and security, the Council should
have the tools to allow it to assess both the scope and
gravity of a situation, and therefore to act in advance.
In our view, preventive diplomacy is a tool that can
help States, as part of a synergistic effort, to reduce the
effects of new threats. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the considerable assistance provided to
States by United Nations regional offices in developing
and implementing prevention strategies.
Beyond our differences of opinion on this central
issue, it is crucial that the Security Council define, in
cooperation with other relevant United Nations bodies,
a framework for cooperation aimed at more effectively
combating this phenomenon. The effects of climate
change are real and are already having an impact on
our daily lives. Temperatures are rising, and extreme
weather events are becoming more frequent.

18

Owing to its low adaptation capacity, Africa is
one of the continents that is most vulnerable to climate
change. We draw the international community’s
attention to the need to help Africa to address this
phenomenon. The same goes for island States, which
are increasingly exposed to the devastating effects of
climate change and whose survival depends upon our
commitment to act with the greatest urgency. The
concerns of those States will be set out in the statement
to be made later by His Excellency Mr. Marcus
Stephen, President of the Republic of Nauru, whose
presence at this debate I would like to welcome.
Lastly, I would like to assure the Council that, for
its part, Gabon will continue to closely associate itself
with international efforts aimed at reducing the
negative effects of climate change.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General and
Executive Director Achim Steiner of the United
Nations Environment Programme for their statements.
The interest and participation that today’s open debate
has evoked testifies to the importance that we all attach
to the subject of climate change. I would therefore like
to particularly acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency the President of Nauru and of other
dignitaries in our midst today. I look forward to
hearing their views on the issue under our
consideration. It is a challenge that lies at the forefront
of the global development agenda and that is close to
the hearts of small island States, for which it poses an
existential threat.
Climate change, in an overarching sense, is
beginning to impact the security of the global
community in the same way as poverty, food security
and underdevelopment continue to undermine
international well-being. Sweeping generalizations
about climate change leading to droughts, floods,
changes in weather patterns, water and food scarcity,
and violent conflicts are, however, yet to be fully tested
against empirical and scientific analyses.
The Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and other
scientific authorities unequivocally speak of this
uncertainty. This is also corroborated by the
Secretary-General’s report entitled “Climate Change
and its possible security implications”, which
concludes that

11-42259

S/PV.6587

“[w]hile
climate
modelling
has
made
considerable advances in forecasting the future
behaviour of natural systems over long time
spans, the science of climate change and its
physical impacts still confronts a number of
uncertainties” (A/64/350, para. 8).
Sea-level rise, on the other hand, is happening.
There is verifiable evidence to suggest sea-level
increases of a metre or more by 2100, which could lead
to the disappearance of several small island States and
the submergence of low-lying coastal areas in many
littoral States. We are particularly aware of its gravity,
given the vulnerability of our own people living on
island chains and in coastal areas. There are also issues
of statelessness and the displacement of people that are
deeply worrisome.
Faced with these challenges, what must the global
community do? The answer quite clearly lies first and
foremost in taking remedial action today rather than in
focusing on the implications of such climate-induced
disasters in the distant future.
The concept paper for this debate (S/2011/408,
annex) states that the purpose of today’s engagement is
to allow the Council to deliberate the security
implications of climate change, consistent with its
mandate, and to advance the dialogue on this issue
from the security perspective. In this context, it is
worth keeping in mind that while the Security Council
can debate the issue and may recognize the
vulnerabilities and threats induced by climate change,
it does not have the wherewithal to address the
situation. The existential threat to island States or the
emergence of food insecurity as a result of climate
change cannot be resolved or remedied by the Council
under Article 39 of the United Nations Charter. Clearly,
these issues need a broader approach anchored in
development, adaptive capacity, risk assessment and
institutional build-up. We therefore have some
difficulty in accepting the assertion that the effects of
climate change go beyond the mandate of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).
If we are serious about addressing the
vulnerabilities arising out of climate change, then our
deliberations on climate change must focus on
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and strengthening
the adaptive capacities of vulnerable countries. Our
agreed global goal for climate stabilization by limiting

11-42259

the increase in global average temperature below 2ºC
above preindustrial levels needs to be backed by
mitigation commitments based on the principles of
common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities and equity. Preserving the
structure of the Kyoto Protocol and its second
commitment period, the early disbursement of the Fast
Start Finance agreed at Cancún and the
operationalization of the Green Climate Fund, the
Technology Mechanism and the Adaptation Committee
are vital to imparting a renewed momentum to the
UNFCCC process.
Those who are historically responsible for
climate change must come forward with firm
greenhouse gas commitments and ensure that there is
adequate resource and technology flow to developing
countries, in particular the small island States, to allow
them to adapt to climate change. If we are successful in
undertaking the necessary mitigation and adaptation
measures, our preoccupations about the security
implications of climate change, which in any case are
yet to be fully established, would to a large extent be
put to rest. This would also lighten the burden of
preventive diplomacy, which has been so passionately
argued for by some delegations.
In our view, what constitutes a bigger concern for
international peace and security today is the threat that
developing countries face from possible conflicts
arising out of inadequate resources for development
and poverty eradication. Sustained economic growth
and development must therefore be pursued in order to
allow developing countries to alleviate poverty and
meet basic standards of living for all. This in itself will
make them more resilient to climate change
vulnerabilities.
The concept paper also highlights the
vulnerability of food security while postulating its
veritable nexus with climate change impact. That may
well be the case. However, our recent experience of
food scarcity, as arose in 2008, and high inflation this
year point to the preponderance of factors far removed
from climate change that are holding global food
security to ransom. Agricultural protectionism,
excessive speculation in food commodity trading and
the diversion of crops to non-food purposes are leading
us to an unsustainable global food situation. This calls
for urgent global attention.

19

S/PV.6587

Our efforts to deliberate the possible security
implications of climate change will bear fruit only if
we realize where the centre of gravity on this issue lies.
We must not confuse political motion with action.
Climate change needs the collective understanding and
support of all Member States. Action must therefore lie
in the UNFCCC. When confronted with the question of
an existential threat to the small island States, I am
reminded of the words of Mahatma Gandhi that “all
compromise is based on give and take, but there can be
no give and take on fundamentals”. Let us do our best
for the small island States and for humankind.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like you, Sir, I
wish to warmly His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Nauru to the Council. His presence does
indeed illustrate the seriousness of the challenges
facing his country and other small island developing
States (SIDS).
I thank the German presidency and you yourself,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate on the
security implications of climate change, an issue to
which Portugal has been strongly attached for many
years. I thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement, and I also wish to thank Mr. Steiner for his
very useful presentation. These are indeed serious
threats to some regions of our planet, as Mr. Steiner
eloquently illustrated.
As I have repeatedly stated, Portugal does not see
the Security Council as the forum for climate change
negotiations or even for discussions on measures to
mitigate and adapt to environmental vulnerabilities.
These issues belong to other contexts that have the
legitimacy and the appropriate tools to address them. It
is, however, the Council’s role to recognize and deal
with new challenges and to ensure that such challenges
do not lead to tensions and ultimately to conflict.
Therefore, there is, in our view, an added value in the
Security Council discussing the impact that certain
consequences of climate change may have for
international stability, peace and security. For the same
reason, Portugal hopes that we may still be able to find
a consensus on an outcome for our discussions today.
We strongly believe that we should be able to
develop concrete strategies for coherent, integrated and
comprehensive
responses
of
United
Nations
institutions, including the Security Council, to address
these risks. The case for such an approach is
particularly relevant when it is called for by those

20

Members of the United Nations particularly affected by
climate change and whose very existence is at risk. I
would like to mention again the particular case of the
Pacific SIDS, for which the negative effects of climate
change are no longer a possible scenario but a very
concrete reality. Sea-level rise may, in time, lead to the
loss of entire territories, but those island States may
become uninhabitable long before that.
When that occurs, there are a number of issues
that need to be answered and that have clear
international implications. How do we deal with
populations that need to be resettled? Where do they
go? How do they get there? How does one manage and
defuse the tensions that resettlement entails? How do
we address the legal consequences of the loss of
territory, such as the definition of borders, economic
zones and continental shelf rights? Our failure to deal
collectively with such questions may lead not only to
humanitarian disaster but also to a surge of serious
tensions in a vast region, threatening peace. I am sure
that President Marcus Stephen will give us a very vivid
analysis of those problems in all their complexity.
Desertification and its effects on food production
and water availability should also merit our attention in
this debate, since its consequences are often felt across
national borders. Let us remember that 47 per cent of
all land area falls within international river basins and
that over 200 river basins are multinational. As water
demands increase, tensions or even conflict over water
resources will also increase.
Desertification and increasing food scarcity as an
effect of climate change are also reasons for the
involuntary displacement of populations, a link
recently recognized by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. António Guterres, in
his report on climate change, natural disasters and
human displacement. This is first and foremost a
humanitarian and development issue but, as we are all
aware, the strongest impact of desertification is felt in
countries with social and economic vulnerabilities,
some of them emerging from long periods of conflict
and instability. If the movement of populations due to
desertification has a cross-border or even a regional
dimension, then it is very likely that its security
implications will go beyond the borders of a particular
State and may derail progress in post-conflict
stabilization and peacebuilding efforts.

11-42259

S/PV.6587

If properly addressed, the security challenges
whose effects are amplified by climate change do not
necessarily lead to conflict. As with many other issues
that the Security Council discusses on a regular basis,
we believe that in this domain we should likewise give
priority to a preventive approach and to the
development of early-warning mechanisms. We should
also actively discuss the security impact of climate
change with other international organizations that are
already addressing the issue from a security
perspective, including the European Union and the
African Union. We must consider how our actions may
complement and reinforce each other for a more
effective response. In that context, Portugal, as a
member of the European Union, naturally shares the
position that will be later expressed by Ambassador
Pedro Serrano on these issues. Indeed, global problems
call for collective responses, and this is particularly
important when resources are scarce.
In conclusion, the effects of climate change are
likely to increase in the near future. What we are
discussing here today as possible security implications
will likely become increasingly evident. That is why
we believe that today’s debate should not be a one-off
event, but rather a step towards a consistent and regular
consideration of the issue by the Security Council,
based on reliable information on specific situations
where climate-related phenomena are negatively
affecting peace and security. That would allow us to
have a more complete understanding of the complex
links between climate, development and security, and
therefore strengthen our capacity to prevent conflict
and promote international cooperation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
At the outset, I would like to join others in
thanking the Secretary-General for participating in
today’s debate. His remarks and his presence are a
strong signal of the engagement of the United Nations
in the debate on climate change and its security
implications. Let me also join my colleagues in
thanking the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme, Mr. Steiner, for his insightful
and very instructive briefing.
Over one year ago, the Pacific small island States
urged the Security Council to consider the security

11-42259

implications of climate change. They appealed to the
Security Council to fulfil its mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
reason why those countries urged the Security Council
to act is clear: already today they suffer from the
security implications of climate change. They have to
deal with rising sea levels, loss of land and increasing
scarcity of resources. The Governments of those
countries have to resettle their people and ensure that
the distribution of basic commodities does not turn into
violent fights for survival. For them the security
dimension of climate change is crystal clear. It is their
daily challenge.
The situation of the small island States is a
compelling reason in and of itself to discuss today’s
matter in the Security Council. At this point, it might
be useful to remember that the United Nations has
always drawn its unique legitimacy from the equality
of States. Big or small, rich or poor, each State has the
same right for its existential fears and threats to be
addressed.
There is, however, even more reason for the
Council to debate the security dimension of climate
change, because what happens to some small island
States today might well happen to other countries
tomorrow. Most national security establishments
consider the threat of global warming as one of the
biggest challenges of the twenty-first century. If we
take a look at the conflicts on the agenda of the
Council, we will easily see that quite a few of these
conflicts are, already today, driven by desertification,
lack of water and increased trans-border migration. We
have no doubt that the environmental degradation due
to climate change very often acts as a driver of
conflict. We all know that conflicts of this sort do not
remain isolated within a single country but, on the
contrary, tend to destabilize whole regions. We should
also keep in mind that not all States and societies have
the same capacity to adapt to the dramatic changes in
their environment.
The mandate of the Security Council is the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
are convinced that it is the Council’s duty to act with
foresight and to do its best to prevent crises before they
become acute. We therefore welcome the fact that the
Council has successfully debated structural aspects of
conflicts before, such as the interrelatedness of
development or HIV/AIDS with security.

21

S/PV.6587

Keeping in mind the mandate of the Security
Council, we suggested that today’s debate be focussed
strictly on the security implications of climate change.
Let me be very clear: Germany does not want the
Council to infringe upon the competences of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change or
other United Nations organs. We did not, and do not,
intend to advance any kind of encroachment.
We regret that it was not possible, at least up to
now, to find agreement on an outcome document for
today’s meeting. I would like to reiterate that Germany
has a keen interest in a Security Council that rises
beyond the day-to-day management of acute crises but
takes into consideration the underlying causes of
conflict. It was our intention to ask the
Secretary-General for a sound basis for these
discussions. While we would have preferred, and still
prefer, that the Council find common ground on this
request, the strong interest of the membership in
today’s debate makes one thing clear, namely, that the
Members want to see this topic on the agenda of the
Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the
Republic of Nauru, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the Republic of
Nauru, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the
Republic of Nauru.
President Stephen: I would like to begin by
thanking Germany for hosting this important debate on
climate change and its implication for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Pacific small island developing States — the region
most vulnerable to climate change — namely, Fiji, the
Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga,
Vanuatu and my country, the Republic of Nauru — as
well as the countries of Maldives, Seychelles and
Timor-Leste.

22

Last month, the International Energy Agency
announced that in 2010 carbon dioxide emissions
reached their highest level in history. Last year also
tied as the hottest year on record, and the volume of
Arctic sea ice dropped to its lowest level since
measurements began, while catastrophic droughts,
forest fires and floods wreaked havoc on countries
around the world. Scientists now project that seas will
rise by a metre or more by the end of the century — a
level that could wipe out many small islands in the
Pacific and elsewhere. All this happened despite 20
years of negotiations to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions to a safe level.
We must now come to terms with an unsettling
reality: there is so much carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere that serious impacts are now unavoidable,
and we must prepare.
In my frustration, I often wonder where we would
be if the roles were reversed. What if the pollution
coming from our island nations was threatening the
very existence of the major emitters? What would be
the nature of today’s debate be under those
circumstances? But that is not the world that we live
in, and this is not a hypothetical exercise for us. Many
of our countries face the single greatest security
challenge of all, that is, our survival. For that reason,
we have come to the Security Council today.
Because of climate change, our islands face
dangerous and potentially catastrophic impacts that
threaten to destabilize our societies and political
institutions. Our food security, water security and
public safety are already being undermined. Sea-level
rise is eroding our coastlines and in some cases is
damaging critical infrastructure. Loss of territory could
disrupt traditional systems of land ownership and spark
conflicts over land and other increasingly scarce
resources. Eventually, some islands may disappear
altogether, and with them thousands of years of
cultural heritage. That would force large numbers of
our citizens to relocate, first internally, then across
borders. Even with an ambitious new agreement to
address climate change, many of these impacts are now
unavoidable.
The Security Council has recognized that it has a
role in preventing conflict before it occurs, not just in
facilitating its resolution afterwards. For that reason, it
has recognized the necessity of addressing the root
causes of conflict, unconventional security threats that

11-42259

S/PV.6587

can give rise to social tension and civil unrest, such as
poverty, underdevelopment, competition over natural
resources and HIV/AIDS. For such issues and others,
the Security Council has evaluated the problems and,
in concert with other organs of the United Nations, has
deployed a variety of tools to address them.
Today, we ask no less of the Council. The
international response to climate change must be
comprehensive, particularly given its global nature and
implications for every aspect of society.
Make no mistake: the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change — the UNFCCC — is
and must remain the primary forum for developing an
international strategy to mitigate climate change,
mobilize financial resources, and facilitate adaptation,
planning and project implementation. The General
Assembly must continue to address the links between
climate change and sustainable development.
Likewise, the Security Council has a clear role in
coordinating a response to the security implications of
climate change. In the 2009 General Assembly
resolution on climate change and its possible security
implications (resolution 63/281), we agreed that all
relevant organs of the United Nations, within their
respective mandates, should intensify their efforts to
address climate change, including its possible security
implication. An effective international response
requires disaster planning and preparedness, detailed
assessments of vulnerability and risk, more effective
multilateral coordination and preventive diplomacy.
In our conversations with Security Council
members, we have heard loud and clear that they
understand the security challenges faced by the Pacific
and other island nations and that they stand in
solidarity with us. However, solidarity demands more
than sympathetic words demonstrated by formally
recognizing that climate change is a threat to
international peace and security. It is a threat as great
as nuclear proliferation or terrorism, and it carries the
potential to destabilize Governments and ignite
conflict. Neither nuclear proliferation nor terrorism has
ever led to the disappearance of an entire nation,
though that is what we are confronted with today.
The Security Council has also asked us what
concrete steps it can take to address the issue. Allow
me to tell it.

11-42259

The Council should start by requesting the
immediate appointment of a special representative on
climate and security. That individual’s primary
responsibility should be to analyse the projected
security impacts of climate change so that the Council
and all Member States can understand what lies ahead.
The Council should also request an assessment of the
capacity of the United Nations system to respond to
such impacts so that vulnerable countries can be
assured that it is up to the task.
These proposals are the absolute minimum
required to move the international community from a
culture of reaction to one of preparedness. As the
Secretary-General concluded in his report on climate
change and its possible security implications, “the
international community must anticipate and prepare
itself to address a number of largely unprecedented
challenges posed by climate change for which existing
mechanisms may prove inadequate” (see A/64/350,
p.28).
Many countries have expressed concerns about
the Security Council encroaching on the mandate of the
General Assembly and the UNFCCC. We understand
and share this concern, which is why our proposals
have been narrowly tailored to address the security
implications of climate change. However, we are more
concerned about the physical encroachment of the
rising seas on our island nations.
We are deeply disappointed that there will be no
formal outcome to this debate. Let history recall that
once again we have sounded the alarm and the world
chose not to act. The Security Council must reflect
current geopolitical realities if it is to remain relevant,
both in its membership and in the substance of its
work. We applaud its recent decision to explore the
security implications of such divergent topics as
development; cultural and religious tolerance;
HIV/AIDS; and women, peace and security. Yet the
Council would render itself irrelevant if it chose to
ignore the biggest security threat of our time.
Let me be absolutely clear: The security risks of
climate change are all the more reason to urgently
reach a legally binding agreement under the UNFCCC.
The international community must work towards more
ambitious emissions reductions from all major
emitters. The current pledges are grossly inadequate
and would condemn many small Pacific States,
Members of the United Nations that belong to the

23

S/PV.6587

Alliance of Small Island States, and the world to a
future marked by widespread conflict and unrest.
The Security Council is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security under
the United Nations Charter. Representative of many of
the world’s current and aspiring Powers sit before me
today. I urge them not to bury their heads in the sand
and to seize this opportunity to lead. I implore them to
fulfil their mandate by dealing responsibly with the
security implications of climate change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Marles (Australia): May I start by thanking
Germany for the opportunity to address the Council on
the security implications of climate change. May I also
say what an honour it is for me to follow, in addressing
the Council, my colleague and good friend, His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of Nauru.
Climate change is a global threat, not an abstract
concern. It is already seriously affecting the planet.
Carbon dioxide levels are at their highest point in more
than a million years. It is an existential threat to many
small island developing States and low-lying countries.
The effects of climate change could reshape the future
global security environment by affecting the political
and social stability and economic security of
vulnerable countries. Increased extreme weather events
could further worsen food and water security
challenges, undermine community development,
compromise critical infrastructure, weaken State
governance and strain social cohesion. All countries
will face the adverse impacts of climate change, but the
most vulnerable peoples worldwide, who are least
responsible for the global challenges we are now
facing, will suffer the most.
As the Australian Parliamentary Secretary for
Pacific Island Affairs, I have travelled to some of the
countries that will be most affected by climate change.
Indeed, 20 of Australia’s 22 closest neighbours are
developing countries, most of them small island
developing States.
In our region, one of the most significant impacts
of climate change will likely be sea-level rise caused
by a thermal expansion of the world’s oceans and
melting glaciers and ice caps. Sea levels may rise by up
to 1 metre by the end of this century, resulting in more
severe storm surges, coastal inundation and loss of

24

territory. Never before has the international community
had to grapple with the reality that islands and lowlying territories might become uninhabitable as a result
of sea-level rise. For low-lying island States such as
the Marshall Islands, a 1-metre rise in sea level could
result in the erosion and loss of as much as 80 per cent
of the nation’s capital, the Marshall Islands Majuro
Atoll.
When one stands on Majuro as I have, with
nowhere else to go, and sees the sea on either side of
that thin and flat strip of land, there is a sense of the
intense vulnerability felt by those living on small
islands. The sea, which is everywhere and has long
been a source of food, sustenance and comfort, is being
transformed into a source of anxiety and threat. In the
short-to-medium term, a combination of sea-level rise,
storms of greater intensity and inundation will put
greater pressure on coastal settlements and may lead to
further local displacements of populations. In the
longer term, if internal resettlement is no longer an
option, climate change could cause destabilizing
population movements as peoples’ lives and
livelihoods are increasingly subject to risk.
Vulnerability to climate change is not limited, of
course, to island countries. Drought, flooding and soil
erosion exacerbated by climate change pose significant
threats to agricultural productivity and food and water
security in Africa and elsewhere. Desertification has
already consumed significant areas of land and will
continue to reduce the amount of arable land as climate
change worsens.
The only way to tackle the global challenge of
climate change is through robust global cooperation
and strong domestic action. Both are indispensable.
Both are complementary. We know that there has been
some concern about where responsibility for
addressing climate change lies within the United
Nations system. First, let me reaffirm that, in
Australia’s view, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the
primary intergovernmental instrument for addressing
climate change. Australia’s commitment to that process
was demonstrated by our domestic policy reform
inspired by the UNFCCC. On 10 July, Australian Prime
Minister Gillard announced that we will legislate a
carbon price to take effect from 1 July 2012. This has
been a difficult political debate in Australia but a
fundamentally critical piece of public policy reform. In
2020, our carbon price will have reduced Australia’s

11-42259

S/PV.6587

carbon pollution by 160 million tons — the equivalent
of taking 45 million cars off the road by 2020.
Secondly, let me equally reaffirm our
commitment to the fundamental role of the General
Assembly. Its unique and indisputable legitimacy
reflects the voice of its 193 members. Our commitment
to that role of the General Assembly is why Australia
was such a strong proponent of its resolution 63/281 in
June 2009, which specifically stated that the
overarching responsibility for sustainable development
issues, including climate change, rests with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. We
considered it right and essential that this matter be first
addressed by the General Assembly. It was the General
Assembly that then invited all the relevant organs of
the United Nations to intensify their efforts in order to
consider all aspects of climate change, including its
possible security implications.
In this process, it seems to us that the Security
Council has a role to play as the principal organ
directly responsible for maintaining international peace
and security. That role includes consideration of the
root causes of conflict and political and social crises.
The Council addresses those issues through many
topics, including, for example, poverty and HIV/AIDS.
A focus on the potential security implications of
climate change is therefore relevant to its mandate and
does not — and should not — compete with the
mandates of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council or the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.
But ultimately, the question as to where the
responsibility for the issue of climate change lies is an
easy one. The overwhelming nature of the challenge of
climate change means that the responsibility lies with
all of us, in every forum. Australia remains seriously
committed to helping developing countries tackle
climate change. Least developed countries, small
island developing States and Africa have been given
the highest priority in the allocation of Australia’s faststart package because they need it most urgently. These
are not the countries most responsible for the current
crisis we face, but they are the countries that will bear
the greatest burden. Of our $599 million fast-start
funding commitment made at Copenhagen, Australia
has so far allocated $498 million, more than 80
per cent.

11-42259

In conclusion, Australia recognizes that climate
change is a threat to the stability of individual
countries and regions and has broad implications for
future global security. That is why we have supported
this debate. We also support calls for a report from the
Secretary-General on the capacity of the United
Nations system to respond to those impacts and on how
that capacity can be improved. Failure to act now on
the potential security implications of climate change
will exacerbate risks in the future. Improving
resilience, integrating climate risk into vulnerable
sectors of our economies, and strengthening our
disaster management capabilities are just some of the
urgent responses we must make to address these
security challenges. No serious Member State can deny
that climate change is a primordial threat to our planet.
We owe it to ourselves, to future generations, and to
the future of the planet itself to anticipate and act to
reduce that threat.
The President: Once again, let me remind all
speakers that, in accordance with the understanding
reached among Council members, statements should be
limited to no more than four minutes in order to enable
the Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Longer
versions of statements can be distributed in writing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
deliver this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in the open
debate on the impact of climate change on the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
would like to begin by expressing the Movement’s
appreciation to the Secretary-General and Mr. Steiner
for their statements to the Council today.
The Movement’s position regarding the Security
Council’s repeated attempts to deal with climate
change issues is reflected in a letter dated 12 April
2007 from the Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2007/203); in the statement
delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Movement at the 2007 meeting (S/PV.5663
(Resumption 1)); and in a letter dated 14 July
addressed to the President from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt in his capacity as current
Chair of the Coordinating Board of the NAM

25

S/PV.6587

(S/2011/427), as well as my statement today on behalf
of the Movement.
The Movement also takes note of the concerns
expressed in the letter dated 1 July from the Permanent
Representative of Nauru in her capacity as Chair of the
group of Pacific Small Island Developing States
(SIDS), addressed to the Member States of the United
Nations, and expresses its appreciation for the presence
of His Excellency President Stephen of the Republic of
Nauru, and for his statement on this issue on behalf of
the Pacific SIDS.
General Assembly resolution 63/281 on climate
change and its possible security implications
recognizes the respective responsibilities of the
principal organs of the United Nations, including the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security conferred on the Security Council,
and the responsibility for sustainable development
issues, including climate change, conferred on the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. The final document of the Sixteenth
Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in Bali from 23 to 27 May, and General Assembly
resolution 63/281 both stress that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
is the key instrument and central multilateral
framework for addressing all aspects of climate
change, and the primary forum for considering the
risks associated with and the actions needed to address
climate change, in accordance with the principles
enshrined in the Convention.
In this context, the Security Council’s continued
encroachment on the functions and powers of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the relevant subsidiary organs, by addressing
issues that traditionally fall within the competence of
those organs, remains a source of deep concern for the
Movement. The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that
the Security Council must fully observe all provisions
of the Charter establishing the delicate balance among
the competencies of all principal organs. The
Movement also stresses that close cooperation and
coordination among the principal organs is
indispensable to enabling the United Nations to remain
effective and capable of meeting existing, new and
emerging threats and challenges.
The Movement also stresses that climate change
and its adverse impacts must be addressed from the

26

perspective of sustainable development, promoting a
comprehensive approach to addressing the root causes
of the problem. This can happen only in the relevant
frameworks, which are the UNFCCC, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Sustainable Development. Those
bodies are the most competent to address climate
change and its related issues in a substantive way
through due and harmonious cooperation in dealing
with situations arising from the consequences of
climate change.
The Movement is fully aware of the severity and
urgency of the issue of climate change and its adverse
impacts, and acknowledges the challenges faced by
developing countries — including but not limited to
least developed countries, SIDS and Africa — and the
enormous pressure those impacts put on developing
countries’ national capacities and institutions.
The Movement stresses the importance of
fulfilling the international commitments undertaken
according to the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol.
Action must be taken by all, in accordance with the
principles of common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capacities. Developed countries have a
historical and particular responsibility to reduce
emissions and support developing countries’ actions to
adapt to and mitigate climate change by providing new,
additional and predictable financing, as well as
technology transfer and capacity-building.
The
Non-Aligned
Movement
therefore
emphasizes that the Council’s decision to hold this
debate should not be considered a precedent, and that
this debate should not result in any form of outcome
that undermines the authority or mandate of the
relevant bodies, processes and instruments of wider
membership that already address climate change.
The President: I give
representative of Argentina.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Argüello (Argentina): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and Mr. Steiner for their
statements. I also particularly welcome the presence
here today of His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Nauru, Mr. Marcus Stephen.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China in the context of
today’s open debate, held in accordance with the letter
dated l July from the Permanent Representative of

11-42259

S/PV.6587

Germany to the Council (S/2011/408), on the subject of
the impact of climate change on the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Group of 77 and
China wishes to reaffirm its position on this subject.
The Council’s primary responsibility is the
maintenance of international peace and security, as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations. Other issues,
including those related to economic and social
development, are assigned by the Charter to the
Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly. The ever-increasing encroachment by the
Security Council on the roles and responsibilities of
other principal entities of the United Nations represents
a distortion of the principles and purposes of the
Charter, infringes on their authority and compromises
the rights of the general membership of the United
Nations.
The Group of 77 and China underlines how
important it is that the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council work
within their respective mandates, as set out in the
Charter.
General Assembly resolution 63/281 recognized
the respective responsibilities of the principal organs of
the United Nations, including the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security conferred upon the Security Council
and the responsibility for sustainable development
issues, including climate change, conferred upon the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, and invited the relevant organs of the United
Nations, as appropriate and within their respective
mandates, to intensify their efforts in considering and
addressing climate change, including its possible
security implications. The relevant bodies in the field
of sustainable development are the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the relevant
subsidiary bodies, including the Commission on
Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme.
The Group of 77 and China is of the view that it
is vital for all Member States to promote sustainable
development in accordance with the Rio Principles, in
particular the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, and fully implement Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of other relevant United Nations
conferences in the economic, environmental and social
fields, including the Millennium Declaration.

11-42259

We further emphasize the critical role of the
international community in the provision of adequate,
predictable, new and additional financial resources, the
transfer of technology and capacity-building to
developing countries.
We maintain that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the
primary international intergovernmental forum for
negotiating the global response to climate change. In
that context, we would recall that an appropriate
response to this challenge should address not only the
consequences but also the roots of the problem. Let me
emphasize that there is a strong case for emission
reductions and mitigation actions on the part of
developed countries so as to avert the adverse impacts
of climate change.
In this context, we are extremely concerned that
under current climate change negotiations, there has
not yet been any clear indication on the part of the
developed countries that they will adopt a second
commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol.
Moreover, current mitigation pledges from developed
countries participating in the UNFCCC negotiations
are not sufficient to reduce global greenhouse-gas
emissions enough to hold the increase in global
average temperature at a level that would accord with
what is required by science. Developed countries must
be more ambitious in this respect.
We reiterate the need to coordinate international
efforts and mobilize partners to assist the observation
networks through regional initiatives such as the South
Pacific Sea Level and Climate Monitoring Project and
the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre. In
this regard, we call on the relevant agencies and organs
of the United Nations, including the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to reinforce
regional broadcasting systems to help island
communities during a disaster and increase the
effectiveness of observation in those regions. Any
measures taken in this context must ensure that an
integrated approach is adopted in responding to
environmental emergencies.
The response to the impacts of climate change
and disasters must include the strengthening of the
Hyogo Framework for Action for disaster risk
reduction, as well as an increase in assistance to
developing countries and affected States, including by
supporting efforts to enhance their national and

27

S/PV.6587

regional capacities for the implementation of plans and
strategies for preparedness, rapid response, recovery
and development.
The Group would like to underline the fact that
developing countries continue to suffer from the
adverse impacts of climate change and the increasing
frequency and intensity of extreme weather events.
Developing countries are the most vulnerable to
climate change, and support for their efforts needs to
be stepped up. In this regard, we call for the full and
effective implementation of the commitments under the
Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, the
Mauritius Declaration and the Mauritius Strategy for
the Further Implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States.
We reiterate that sea-level rise continues to pose a
significant risk to small island developing States and to
their efforts to achieve sustainable development and
that, for some, it represents the gravest of threats to
their survival and viability.
The Group of 77 and China will continue to
pursue the achievement of sustainable development
and the eradication of poverty, which are our first and
overriding priorities, as well as the fulfilment of the
commitments made by developed countries in all
relevant bodies.
We strongly reiterate our expectation that the
initiative of the Council to hold this debate will not
create a precedent that undermines the authority or
mandate of the relevant bodies, processes and
instruments that already address these issues in all their
complexity.

livestock and fisheries, particularly in countries located
in tropical and subtropical regions. This had had
negative consequences for small-scale rural subsistence
economies in marginalized areas of Africa, Asia and
Latin America.
El Salvador and the other Central American
countries, owing both to their geographical location
and natural environment and to their poverty levels and
social deficit, are among the regions that are most
vulnerable to and threatened by climate change. Our
country is experiencing heavy rainfall, storms, drought
and extreme weather events, which are having a
negative impact on public resources, the social and
economic base of the country and its democratic
governance.
Just as serious is the situation of small island
developing States (SIDS), which are suffering as a
result of the direct impacts of climate change. They are
affected mainly by problems that include coastal
flooding, the disappearance of some islands into the
sea, a reduction in freshwater resources, severe
drought, crop losses and an increased incidence of
disease, as well as threats to fish stocks, which
represent the main food source for many communities
in those States. All of the foregoing was stated by His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of the
Republic of Nauru, speaking on behalf of the SIDS.
My country aligns itself fully with his statement.
In the face of such a situation, a greater
commitment is necessary on the part of developed
countries so as to make progress on negotiations to
adopt a second commitment period under the Kyoto
Protocol and hence to achieve its objective of reducing
greenhouse gases.

Mr. García González (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, we welcome your initiative to
convene this open debate of the Security Council on
the impact of climate change on the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Developing countries are the most affected by the
adverse effects of climate change, and they are the
least responsible for creating this problem. One
example of this, according to scientific studies, is the
estimate that by 2030, Central America will produce
less than 0.5 per cent of greenhouse gases; however, it
is already one of the regions that is most vulnerable to
the effects of this phenomenon.

The world is now facing one of the greatest
challenges in its entire history. Climate change is
directly affecting millions of people, all species and
ecosystems in general. Various international forums
and organizations have been warning us for many years
about the impact of climate change on agriculture,

Here we should recall the commitment made by
the developed countries to provide technical and
financial assistance to developing countries to enable
them to fulfil their commitments in terms of adaptation
to climate change and with respect to the adoption of
low-carbon development models.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.

28

11-42259

S/PV.6587

One of the principles of international law is that
no State can exercise its rights if doing so harms
another State. International environmental law
establishes limits on sovereignty in the sense that no
State can use its territory in such a way that causes
serious environmental damage to other States. The
Framework Convention on Climate Change goes
beyond this principle, declaring the change in the
Earth’s climate a common concern of humanity.
In this context, we welcome the appeal made by
the Chair of the Group of 77 and China, Ambassador
Argüello of Argentina, for the main bodies of the
United Nations, within their mandates as accorded by
the Charter of the United Nations, to devote greater
efforts to addressing the impact of climate change and
its security implications.
In this case, there is a crucial need for the
Security Council to clearly recognize the threat that
climate change poses for international peace and
security and thus be able to respond with appropriate
actions to the impacts of this phenomenon in this
specific area. Climate change conditions and reduces
economic growth and social progress, multiplies and
magnifies territorial vulnerability and exacerbates
environmental degradation, and thus constitutes a
human security problem.
El Salvador is participating in various projects
and initiatives at the regional level aimed at reducing
vulnerability and adapting to climate change. The
Regional Climate Change Strategy is a reflection of the
common objective and the position of the Central
American countries to tackle head on the challenge
posed by climate change and its impact on the
population of the region. We appreciate the initiative of
the Security Council to debate this important topic,
which will require a great deal of political will in
multilateral negotiations for positive results to be seen
in the medium and long terms.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of Delegation the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me to floor to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States and for
organizing this important debate.
The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the

11-42259

countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Serbia; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.
At the outset, I wish to welcome the participation
in this meeting of the President of the Republic of
Nauru and to thank him for his important statement. I
also thank the Secretary-General and the representative
of the United Nations Environment Programme for
their presentations.
The European Union and its member States
believe that climate change has important security
implications, since it acts as a threat multiplier. The
scarcity of natural resources, economic damage, sealevel rise, desertification, migratory pressures and
energy supply tensions may increase instability in
fragile States and pressures on international
governance. The European Union and its member
States are examining these issues jointly with the
United Nations, notably through the United Nations
Interagency Framework Team for Preventive Action.
I would like to focus on two issues for our debate
today: sea-level rise and food security.
The European Union fully shares the view that
small island developing States are among the world’s
countries hardest hit by climate change. In particular,
Pacific islands face unique structural constraints due to
the combination of their remoteness, small size, limited
natural resources and vulnerability to natural hazards.
Adaptation to climate impact is indeed vital for the
future of Pacific islanders, but the Pacific Ocean also
represents a vital resource for the future of our planet.
In the Pacific area, the European Union has a
longstanding development partnership, with 15
countries and 4 overseas countries and territories
associated with the European Union. Climate-targeted
activities
have
been
addressed
through
a
comprehensive mix of EU policies and instruments. We
are currently reflecting on how to further enhance the
EU-Pacific development partnership.
Long before any island might be submerged,
progressive deterioration may render some islands
uninhabitable. We should reflect on a common strategy
for the region while considering actions tailored to
meet specific needs. Coordination between international

29

S/PV.6587

donors and regional bodies will be crucial to ensure
efficient implementation.

assistance is based on environmentally sustainable practices
is a crucial step to achieve success.

Increasing global temperatures will multiply extreme
weather events such as drought, flooding and tropical
cyclones, and their effects will become more intense and
destructive. Coastal areas, where urban centres, economic
activity, population and critical infrastructure are often
located, are particularly vulnerable.

As it is clear that the effects of climate change will hit
the most vulnerable the hardest, particular attention should
be devoted to the empowerment of people and communities
facing poverty and hunger with limited resilience, as well
as of countries and regions exposed to multiple stress
factors and fragile States characterized by weak institutions
and vulnerability to conflict.

While moving forward towards a global agreement
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, meaningful measures can already be
taken. Support to the poorest and most vulnerable countries
should come first. Disaster preparedness should be
enhanced, as the economic impact of natural disasters
significantly curtails sustainable development and thus
increases instability and can lead to conflict. Close links
between countries’ national adaptation plans and their
disaster preparedness plans are necessary, and investment
in technology and innovation should be promoted.
I move next to food security. Ensuring food security
for the world’s growing population is one of the major
challenges we must address as a global community. The
impact of food insecurity is both local and global. It results
in the erosion of individual and family livelihoods, breaks
up communities and causes malnutrition. It undermines
children’s and nations’ abilities to reach their full potential.
Climate change stands at the centre of a confluence
of pressures that will have an impact on food security over
the coming decades. It is already having a dramatic impact
on crop yields, livestock production and the availability of
water. These trends are predicted to worsen in the future
and make it ever more unlikely that we will achieve the
increase in food production needed to feed the world’s
growing population.
The cost of not addressing climate change is further
instability of food supplies, increased volatility of food
prices, additional pressure on water resources and greater
migratory pressures — all of which threaten the political
stability of already fragile States and risk undermining
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals.
The European Union and its member States actively
support food security through development and
humanitarian policies. In March 2010, we adopted a policy
framework aimed at strengthening coordination between
the EU and its member States in the fight against world
hunger and malnutrition. Ensuring that all food security

30

Work on security implications must proceed in
tandem with action to address climate change itself. The
EU will continue to do so in the context of its policies for
global climate action, development, humanitarian aid,
conflict prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
reconstruction.
Just two days ago, on 18 July, the EU Foreign Affairs
Council recognized the need to act to reduce systemic risks
resulting from climate change before they trigger systemic
crises. The Council also noted that climate change and
environmental deterioration should be monitored by EU
early-warning mechanisms, particularly in vulnerable
regions, and called for the work undertaken on climate
change and international security to be built upon.
Climate-induced risks are numerous and straddle
development and security. Much more analysis remains to
be done. We could suggest two issues that merit deeper
research: water security and deforestation. Access to water
and water availability may be both a great human security
threat and a threat to regional stability, which may lead to
serious disputes. Forests are a major source of food and
subsistence for those who live in forest areas and their
surroundings and are an essential means to combat climate
change. Unsustainable deforestation may lead not only to
displacement of population and environmental degradation,
but also to damage to indigenous civilizations and their
cultural and spiritual heritage.
In closing, I would like to underscore that the EU
remains committed to broadening its understanding and
mainstreaming climate change and its security implications
in its foreign and security policies.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I therefore intend,
with the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

11-42259
