18

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

ately to start negotiations for elaborating a treaty designed to achieve the objective of a comprehensive test
ban;
6. Requests the Confe.rence of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue, as a matter of highest priority, its deliberations on ,this treaty, taking into full account the suggestions already made in the Committee,
as well as the views expressed at the current session of
the Gene·ral Assembly and at previous sessions, and to
submi,t to the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session a
special report on its deliberations on ,this vitally important matter, including the areas of agreement on the
achievement of a draft treaty;
7. Decides ,to include in the provisional agenda of its
twenty-ninth session an item entitled "Urgent need
for cessation of nuclear ,and thermonuclear tests and
conclusion of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban" in place of ,the item entitled "Urgent
need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests"
which appears on the agenda 'of the twenty-eighth
session.
2 I 92 nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

3079 (XXVffl). Implementation of General Assembly resolution 2935 (XXVII) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol H of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971 and 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, in
five of which there have been appeals to the nuclearweapon States regarding the signature and ratification
of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco),
Reiterating its conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or
protocol,
1. Notes with sati~faction that Additional Protocol
II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), which
entered into force for the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America in 1969 and 1971, respectively, has been
signed in 1973 by France and by the People's Republic of China and that the Governments of both
countries have already decided to take the necessary
measures for its ratification;
2. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
to sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), in conformity with
the repeated appeals of the General Assembly;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session an item entitled "Implementa-

tion of General Assembly resolution 3079 (XXVIII)
concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tiatelolco)";
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the nuclear-weapon States and
to inform the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session of any measure adopted by them in order to
implement it.
2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

3080 (XXVIII). Declaration of the Indian O('ean
as a zone of peace

The Genera[ Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2832 ( XXV I) of 16 December 1971, entitled "Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a zone of peace",
Reaffirming its conviction that action in furtherance
of the objectives of the Declaration would be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Noting the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the
Indian Ocean, 16 established by General Assembly
resolution 2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972 to
study the implications of the proposal, with special
reference to the practical measures that may he taken
in furtherance of the objectives of Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), having due regard to the security
interests of the littoral and hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean and the interests of any other State
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Noting with satisfaction the progress made by the
Ad Hoe Committee in fulfilling its mandate,
I. Urges all States to accept the principles and
objectives contained in General Assembly resolution
2832 (XXVI), entitled ''Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a zone of peace", as a comtructive contribution to the strengthening of regional and international
security;
2. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian
Ocean to continue its work, to carry out consultations
in accordance with its mandate and to report with
recommendations to the (icneral As,cmhly at its
twenty-ninth session;
3. Urges all States, especially the major Powers, to
extend their co-operation to the Ad Hoe Committee in
the discharge of its functions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render aH necessary assistance to the Ad floe Committee;
.5. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall he
provided with summary records of its proceedings;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
factual statement of the great Powers' milit;1ry presence
in all its aspects, in thr Indian Occ:-n, with special
reference to their naval deployments, conceived in the
context of great Power rivalry:
7. Recommends that the statement should he based
on available material and prepared wi,h the assistance
1e Official Records of the Grnaal As,rembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/9029).
