General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

150

(j) Non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as indicated in the annex to the present resolution;
6. Authorizes the allocation from the regular budget of the United Nations of the costs involved in holding the Conference;
7. Decides to include Arabic as a language of the
Conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, as part of the
preparatory process, to take adequate steps to ensure
that maximum publicity shall be given to the Conference and, to that end, to allocate the necessary resources from the regular budget;
9. Calls upon all States to contribute to the success
of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, in particular by their active participation
in the Conference;
10. Urges all States to co-operate with the Secretary-General of the Conference in the preparatory work;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on
the work of the Conference;
12. Decides to consider at its thirty-third session,
as a matter of high priority, the item entitled "World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
ANNEX
Non-governmental organizations invited to participate in
the World Conference to (:ombat Racism and Racial
Discrimination

The following non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council shall be invited
by the Secretary-General to attend the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination: all non-governmental organizations in category I consultative status and nongovernmental or,ganizations in category II consultative status
and on the Roster which have, by 30 September 1977, submitted information on activities undertaken or contemplated
in connexion with the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, in accordance with paragraph 18
(/) (iv) of the Programme for the Decade. 6 8 Their participation shall be effected through their presence at the Conference
as observers and through the submission of written statements
to the secretariat of the Conference.

32/130.

Alternative approaches and ways and
means within the United Nations system
for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedo1ns

The General A.1,1cmbly,
Convinced that the obligation of all States to observe
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations is fundamental for the promotion and respect
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and for the
realization of the full dignity and worth of the human
person,
Conscious that it is the duty of the United Nations
and of all Member States to achieve international co-

operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and
in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and for fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Convinced that such co-operation should be based
on a profound understanding of the variety of problems
existing in different societies and on the full respect
for their economic, social and cultural realities,
Bearing in mind the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 611
Acknowledging the progress achieved by the international community in the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly
with respect to the standard-setting work within the
United Nations system,
Noting with satisfaction the entry into force of the
International Covenants on Human Rights 70 and of a
large number of other important international instruments in the field of human rights,
Considering that the acceptance by Member States
of the obligations contained in those instruments is an
important element for the universal realization and
respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human
beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can only
be achieved if conditions are created whereby everyone
may enjoy his economic, social and cultural rights, as
well as his civil and political rights,
Profoundly convinced that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are interrelated and indivisible,
Recognizing that apartheid, all forms of racial discrimination, colonialism, foreign domination and occupation, aggression and threats against national sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity, as well as
the refusal to recognize the fundamental rights of all
peoples to self-determination and of every nation to
exercise full sovereignty over its natural wealth and
resources, constitute situations which in themselves arc
and generate mass and flagrant violations of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms of peoples as well as
of individuals,
Deeply concerned at the continuing existence of an
unjust international economic order which constitutes
a major obstacle to the realization of the economic,
social and cultural rights in developing countries,
Considering that the approach to the future work
within the United Nations system in the field of human
rights should take into due account the experiences
and the general situation of, as well as the efforts made
by, the developing countries to implement human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights should be marked
by an over-all analysis of existing problems in the field
of human rights and by increased efforts in finding
appropriate solutions for the effective promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
taking into account the experiences and contributions of
both developed and developing countries,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on this item, 71
on Resolution 217 A (Ill).
2200 A (XXI). annex.
7 1 A/10235, A/32/178, A/32/179.

70 Resolution

os Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), annex.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Decides that the approach to the future work
within the United Nations system with respect to human
rights questions should take into account the following
concepts:
(a) All human rights and fundamental freedoms
are indivisible and interdependent; equal attention and
urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion and protection of both civil and political, and economic, social and cultural rights;
( b) "The full realization of civil and political
rights without the enjoyment of economic, social and
cultural rights is impossible; the achievement of lasting
progress in the implementation of human rights is dependent upon sound and effective national and international policies of economic and social development",
as recognized by the Proclamation of Teheran of 1968;72
( c) All human rights and fundamental freedoms
of the human person and of peoples arc inalienable;
( d) Consequently, human rights questions should
be examined globally, taking into account both the overall context of the various societies in which they present
themselves, as well as the need for the promotion of the
full dignity of the human person and the development
and well-being of the society;
( e) In approaching human rights questions within
the United Nations system, the international community
should accord, or continue to accord, priority to the
search for solutions to the mass and flagrant violations
of human rights of peoples and persons affected by
situations such as those resulting from apartheid, from
all forms of racial discrimination, from colonialism,
from foreign domination and occupation, from aggression and threats against national sovereignty, national
unity and territorial integrity. as well as from the refusal
to recognize the fundamental rights of peoples to selfdetermination and of every nation to the exercise of
full sovereignty over its wealth and natural resources;
(f) The realization of the new international economic order is an essential element for the effective
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and should also be accorded priority;
(g) It is of paramount importance for the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms that
Member States undertake specific obligations through
accession to or ratification of international instruments
in this field; consequently, the standard-setting work
within the United Nations system in the field of human
rights and the universal acceptance and implementation
of the relevant international instruments should be
encouraged;
(h) The experience and contribution of both developed and developing countries should be taken into
account by all organs of the United Nations system
in their work related to human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights:
(a) To undertake at its thirty-fourth session, as a
matter of priority, an over-all analysis of the alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations sys_tem for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the light
of the above concepts;
72 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.68.XIV.2),
p. 3.

151

( b) To comply with the mandate established by
the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1992
(LX) of 12 May 1976 and the Commission in its
decision 4 (XXXIII) of 21 February 1977,n and in
the light of the present resolution;
( c) To submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session. through the Economic and Social
Council, a report with its conclusions and recommendations on the work done with respect to subparagraphs
(a) and ( b) above, and to submit a progress report to
the Assemblv at its thirty-third session, through the
Council;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to all United Nations organs and
specialized agencies concerned;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
105th plenary meeting
16 Decemhcr 1977

32/131.

Question of the elderly and the aged

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3137 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 on the question of the elderly and the
aged,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 2077
(LXII) of 13 May 1977 on the elderly, and the views
expressed during the debate on the question at the
twenty-fifth session of the Commission for Social Development, 74
Emphasizing that in the Declaration on Social Progress and Development 75 the General Assembly has
proclaimed the necessity of protecting the rights and
assuring the welfare of the aged,
Noting also that in the World Population Plan of
Action all Governments were urged, when formulating
their development policies and programmes, to take
fully into ac~ount the implicatioris of changing numbers
and proportions of the aged. particularly where such
changes are rapid, 76
Bearing in mind that people all over the world now
can expect a longer life and that more people reach
old age, thus changing the population structure in many
countries,
Recognizing the growing interest for developing and
developed societies in the fuller participation of the
elderly in the maimtream of national societies,
Noting the need for old people to be included in the
general social welfare and social security system, where
such systems exist, and to provide for their special
needs of security, service and care,
Bearing in mind the need to develop policies and
programmes for the aging sector of society as an
n See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXJ'.
sect. B.
74 Ibid., Supplement No. 5 (E/5915).
7 ~• Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
76 Report of the World Po{'ulation C'onfert'nce, ]974 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.XIII.3), para. 63.
