pour aider a la mise en reuvre de la presente
resolution;
15. Prie le Secretaire general de lourmr le
personnel et les facilites necessaires et de
prendre toutes les dispositions requises pour
fournir les fonds necessaires a l'execution des
dispositions de la presente resolution.
Cent quatre-vingt-sixibne Janee plenim,
le J.1dkembre 1948.

to assist in the implementation of the present
resolution;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide
the necessary staff and facilities and to make
appropriate arrangements to provide the necessary funds required in carryrng out the terms
of the present resolution.
Hundred and ei.ghty-trixth plenary meeting,

11 December 1948.

•

* * ..

Attli, 186th plenary meeting on 11 Decem~ 1948,
a rommittee of the A,1embly cuniistin9 of the fif)(! States
daipated in paracraph 3 of the abOWJ ~aolution pro~ that thefollowin9 three State, should conltitute tli,
C(Yllciliation Commiuion :

A la 186• ,ianee pllmim, tenue :, 11 Jkeml,,-, 1948,
un comite de l' A,mnbl# compou de, eifllJ Etat, tluigni,

••

au pr,rasraplil 3 de la ruolution ei--duiu, a pr"!""' k,
troi, Ettrt, ci-apru eomme - ~ ,le la Commiawn de
to'Miliation :
FuNcE, TURQnlE et ETArs-UN1s »'Ads1Qu1.

Fu.NCE, TURKEY, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

tht'61l State,.

La proposition ~ u comitJ ayanl AtJ ,u/opth, a. eour,
de la mAme •ance, par l'A,,e,nblk pih-ak, la Cnmmiuion de conciliation e,t, en eonuquenai, con,titide de,
troi, Etat, ,ruditi.

195 (Ill). The problem of the independence of Korea

195 (III). Question de l'independance
de la Coree

The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolution 112 (II) of
14 November 1947 concerning the problem of
the independence of Korea,
Having comidered the report1 of the United
Nations Temporary Commission on Korea (hereinafter referred to as the tt Temporary Commission"), and the report2 of the Interim Committee
of the General Assembly regarding its consultation with the Temporary Commission,
Mindful of the fact that, due to difficulties
referred to in the report of the Temporary
Commission, the objectives set forth in the
resolution of 14 November 1947 have not
hEien fully accomplished, and in particular that
unification of Korea has not yet been achieved,

L'Assemblee genbale,
Contriderant sa resolution 112 (II) du 14 no-

7'he proposal of the Committee havin9 been adopted by
,Ju, General A,sembly at the ,ame meetin9, the Conciliation

Commission ia therefore compo,ed of the abm,e-mention-1

vembre 1947 relative ala question de l'independance de la Coree,
Ayant examine le rapport 1 de la Commission
temporaire des Nations Unies pour la Coree (ciapres denommee "Commission temporaire "), et
le rapport 2 de la Commission interimaire de l'Assemblee generale relatif a la consultation demandee par la Commission temporaire,
Consciente du fait q u' en raison des difficultes
mentionnees dans le rapport de la Commission
temporaire, les objectifs enonces dans la resolution du 14 novembre 1947 n'ont pas encore ete
completement atteints, et, notamment, du fait
que !'unification de la Coree n'a pas encore ete
re:ilisee,

1. Approves tne conclusions of the reports of
the TAmnorary Commission;
2. Declares that there has been established a
lawful government (the Government of te Republic of Korea) having effective controland juris-

1. Approuve les conclusions des rapports de
la Commission temporaire;
2. DAclare qu'il a ete etabli un gouvernement
legitime (le Gonvernement de la Republique de
Coree) qui exerce effectivcment son autorite et
sa juridiction sur la partie de la Coree ou la
Commission temporaire a ete en mesure de proceder a des observations et a des consultations
et clans laquelle reside la grande majorite de la
population de I' ensemble de la Coree; que ce
Gouvernement est ne cl' elections qui ont ete I' expression valable de la libre volonte du corps
electoral de cette partie de la Coree et qui ont
ete observees par la Commission temporaire; et
que ledit Gouvernement est le seul qui, en Coree,
possede cette qualite;

diction over that part of Korea where the Temporary Commission was able to observe and
consult and in which the great majority of the
people of all Korea reside; that this Government
is based on elections which were a valid expression of the free will of the electorate of that part
of Korea and which were observed by the Temporary Commission; and that this is the only
such Government in Korea ;

1 Voir les Document, o.lJu;wh d. la iroitiem. u,non ,u I' A , bUe ginsra!., supplement n• 9.
1 /Lid., supplement n• 10,. pages 18 ii 21.

I See OJ!u:ial Record, of 1he third ieuion of eh, GBMTal Awmbly,
Supplement No. 9.
1 Ibid., Supplement No. 10, pages 18 to 21.

25

3. ~ that the occupying Powers
should withdraw their occupation forces from
lorea as early as practicable ;

1/11('(1,P''YMtuh aux Puissances oceupantes -le

4. Re,ol., that, as a means to the full accomplishment of the objectives set forth in the resolution of 14 November 1947, a Commission on
lorea consisting of Australia, China, El Salvador,
France, India, the Philippines and Syria, shall
be established to continue the work of the Temporary Commission and carry out the provisions
of the present resolution, having in mind the
status of the Government of Korea as herein
defined, and in particular to :

4. Decide de creer une Commission pour ta
Coree, composee de l'Australie, de la Chine, du
S~lvador, de la France, de l'lnde, des Philippines et de la Syrie, pour pdrmettre d'atteindre
completement les ohjectifs enonces dans la resolution du 14 novemhre 1947; cette Commission
sera chargee de poursuivre les travaux de la Commission temporaire et de mettre en reuvre les
dispositions de la presente resolution en tenant
compte du statut du Gouvernement de la Republique de Coree tel qu'il est defini ci-dessus; eHe
devra notamment :
a) P~ter ses bons offices pour amener !'unification de la Coree et !'integration de toutes les
forces de securite coreennes conformement aux
principes enonces par l'Assemblee generale dans
sa resolution du 14 novcmbre 1947;
b) S'efforcer de faciliter l'elimination des obstacles que la division de la Coree oppose aux
relations economiques et sociales et aux autres
relations amicales;
c) Se tenir pr~te a proceder a des observations
et. a des consultations portant sur l' extension
d'un regime representatif fonde sur la volonte
librement exprimee du peuple;
d) Observer le retrait effectif des forces d'occupation et yerifier la materialite de ce retrait
lorsqu'il aura ete efl'ectue; et, a cette fin, demander, si elle le desire, le concours d'experts militaires des deux Puissances occupantes;

·. ,ssit6t que possible leurs troupes d'ocJn de Coree;

(a) Lend its good offices to bring about the
unification of Korea and the integration of all
Korean security forces in accordance with the
principles laid down by the General Assembly
in the resolution of 14 November 1947;
(b) Seek to facilit.lte the removal of barriers to
economic, social and other friendly intercourse
caused by the division of Korea ;

(c) Be available for observation and consultation in the further development of representative
government based on the freely-expressed will
of the people;
(d) Observe the actual withdrawal of the
occupying forces and verify the fact of withdrawal
when such has occurred; and for this purpose, if
it so desires, request the assistance of military
experts of the two occupying Powers ➔
5. Decide& that the Commission :
(a) Shall, within thirty days of the adoption of

5. Dea.de ce qui suit :
a} La Commission se rendra en Coree dans
les trente jours qui suivront l'adoption de la
presente resolution, et y etahlira son siege;
b) La Commission sera consideree comme rempla'illnt la Commission temporaire creee par la
resolution du 14 novembre 1947;
c) La Commission est autorisee a se deplacer,
a proceder a des consultations et a des observations dans l'ensemble de la Coree;
d) La Commission etahlira son propre reglement;
,) La Commission pourra consulter la Co~sion interimaire pour l'exercice de ses fonetions
a la lumiere des evenements et eonformement
aux dispositions de la presente resolution;
/) La Commission presentera un rapport a
l'Assemblee generale, lors de sa procha~e
session ordinaire, ainsi que lors de toute session
extraordinaire anterieure qui pourrait Mre C0!1voquee en vue d'examiner la question dont traJ.te
la presente resolution; elle adressera au Secretaire general, pour ~tre transmis aux Etats
Membres, tous rapports interimaires qu'elle
jugera bon de rediger;
6.
le Secretaire general de mettre a la
disposition de la Commission le personnel et les

the present resolution, proceed to Korea, where
it shall maintain its seat;
(b) Shall he regarded as having superseded the
Temporary Commission established by the resolution of 14 November 1947;
(c) Is authorized to travel, consul tand observe
throughout Korea ;

(d) Shall determine its own procedures;
(,) May consult with. the Interim Committee

with respect to the discharge of its duties in the
light of developments, and within the terms of
th~ yresent resolution;
U) Shall render a report to the next regular
session of the General Assembly and to any
prior special f?ession which might he called to
consider the subject-matter of the present resolution, and shall render such interim reports as
it may deem appropriate to the SecretaryGeneral for distribution to Members;

Prw

6. ReqU88ts that the Secretary-General shall
provide the Commission with adequate staff and

26

facilities, including technical advisers as required;
and authorizes the Secretary-General to pay the
expenses and per &m of a representative and an
alternate from each of the States members of the
Commission;

facilites appropries, et notamment les conseillers techniques necessaires; autorise le Secretaire general a regler les depenses ainsi
findemnite journaliere d'un representant et d un
suppleant. de chacun des Etats membres de la
Commission;

7. Calls upon the Member States concerned, the
Government of the Republic of Korea, and all
Koreans to afford every assistance and facility to
the Commission in the fulfilment of its responsibilities;

7. 1nm" les Etats Membres interesses, le Gouvernement de la Republique de Coree, ainsi que
tous les Coreens a p~ter toute assistance et tout
concours a la Commission dans l'accomplissement de sa tache;

8. Calls upon Member States to refrain from
any acts derogatory to the results achieved and
to be achieved by the United Nations in bringing
about the complete independence and unity of
Korea;

8. lmJite les Etats Membres a s'abstenir de
tout acte prejudiciable aux resultats obtenus ou
qui doivent ~tre obtenus par les Nations Unies
en vue de l'independancc et de l'unite complMea
de la Coree;

9. R.etxnnnumt1s that Member States and other
nations, in establishing their relations with the
Government of the Republic of Korea, take into
consideration the facts set out in paragraph 2
of the present resolution.

9. Recommande aux Etats Memhres et aulres
nations de tenir compte des faits ~on• au
paragraphe 2 de la presente resolution dans l'.stablissement de relations avec le Gouvernement de
la Republique de Coree.

Hunlred and eig~h ~ fflllBli"fJ,
12 l)ecember 19,8.

Cenl-fUatre-1'i"f~ - - , p"-w,
1. 12 Jk,nalrre 1948.

1ue

27
