A/69/230–S/2014/520

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
4 August 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Item 112 (c) of the provisional agenda*
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs: election of
five members of the International Court of Justice

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

Election of five members of the International Court
of Justice
Memorandum by the Secretary-General **

I. Introduction
1.
On 5 February 2015, the terms of office of the following five membe rs of the
International Court of Justice will expire:
Mr. Bernardo Sepúlveda-Amor (Mexico)
Mr. Kenneth Keith (New Zealand)
Mr. Mohamed Bennouna (Morocco)
Mr. Leonid Skotnikov (Russian Federation)
Ms. Joan E. Donoghue (United States of America)
It is therefore necessary for the General Assembly and the Security Council, during
the sixty-ninth session of the Assembly, to elect five judges for a term of office of
nine years, beginning on 6 February 2015.
2.
On 31 January 2014, the Legal Counsel of the United Nations, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, requested nominations from the national groups of States parties
to the Statute of the Court not later than 30 June 2014. The nominations received by
that date and the curricula vitae of the candidates are contained in separate
documents submitted to the General Assembly and to the Security Council
(A/69/253-S/2014/521 and A/69/254-S/2014/522). Furthermore, the list of
candidates will appear on the ballot papers distributed during the elections. The
object of the present memorandum is to set out the current composition of the
International Court of Justice and to describe the procedure in the General Assembly
and the Security Council with regard to the election.
* A/69/150.
** In accordance with the Statute of the International Court of Justice, the Secretary-General
requested States parties to the Statute to provide nominations to the Court from national groups
by 30 June 2014. The present document could therefore not be prepared earlier.

14-58180 (E)

060814

*1458180*

A/69/230
S/2014/520

II. Composition of the International Court of Justice
3.

The current composition of the International Court of Justice is as follows:

President:
Peter Tomka (Slovakia)***
Vice-President:
Bernardo Sepúlveda-Amor (Mexico)*
Judges:
Hisashi Owada (Japan)***
Ronny Abraham (France)**
Kenneth Keith (New Zealand)*
Mohamed Bennouna (Morocco)*
Leonid Skotnikov (Russian Federation)*
Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade (Brazil)**
Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf (Somalia)**
Christopher Greenwood (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)**
Xue Hanqin (China)***
Joan E. Donoghue (United States of America)*
Giorgio Gaja (Italy)***
Julia Sebutinde (Uganda)***
Dalveer Bhandari (India)**
* Term of office expires on 5 February 2015.
** Term of office expires on 5 February 2018.
*** Term of office expires on 5 February 2021.

III. Procedure in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council
4.

The election will be held in accordance with the following:
(a)

The Statute of the Court, in particular Articles 2 to 4 and 7 to 12;

(b)

Rules 150 and 151 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;

(c)
Council.

Rules 40 and 61 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security

5.
On the date of the election, the General Assembly and the Security Council
will proceed, independently of one another, to elect five members of the Court to fill
the vacancy (Article 8 of the Statute).
6.
According to Article 2 of the Statute, members of the Court are to be elected ,
regardless of their nationality, from among persons of high moral character, who
possess the qualifications required in their respective countries for appointment to
the highest judicial offices, or are jurisconsults of recognized competence in
international law. Article 9 requires electors to bear in mind not only that the person
to be elected should individually possess the qualifications required, but also that, in

2/4

14-58180

A/69/230
S/2014/520

the body as a whole, the representation of the main forms of civilization and of the
principal legal systems of the world should be assured.
7.
Those candidates who obtain an absolute majority of votes both in the General
Assembly and in the Security Council will be considered as elected (Article 10,
paragraph 1, of the Statute).
8.
The consistent practice of the United Nations has been to interpret the words
“absolute majority” as meaning a majority of all electors, whether or not they vote
or are allowed to vote. The electors in the General Assembly will be all 193 Member
States. Accordingly, 97 votes constitutes an absolute majority in the Assembly for
the purpose of the present elections.
9.
In the Security Council, eight votes constitutes an absolute majority and no
distinction is made between permanent and non-permanent members of the Council
(Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Statute).
10. Only those candidates whose names appear on the ballot papers are eligible for
election. The electors in the General Assembly and in the Security Council will
indicate the candidates for whom they wish to vote by placing crosses against their
names on the ballot papers. Each elector may vote for not more than five candidates
on the first ballot and, on subsequent ballots, if any, for five less the number of
candidates who have already obtained absolute majorities.
11. At the 915th plenary meeting of the General Assembly, on 16 November 1960,
a procedural discussion was held as to whether rule 94 (then rule 96) of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly should be applied in elections to the International Cour t
of Justice. That rule lays down a procedure for restricted ballots in the event that,
after the first ballot, the requisite number of candidates have not obtained the
required majority. By 47 votes to 27, with 25 abstentions, the Assembly decided that
the rule did not apply to elections to the Court and proceeded to elect the requisite
number of candidates by a series of unrestricted ballots. That decision has been
followed consistently.
12. Accordingly, if in the first ballot in either the General Assemb ly or the
Security Council, the number of candidates obtaining an absolute majority is less
than five, a second ballot will be held and balloting will continue at the same
meeting until five candidates have obtained the required majority (rule 151 of the
rules of procedure of the Assembly and rule 61 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Council).
13. Cases, however, have arisen in the Security Council in which more than the
required number of candidates have obtained an absolute majority on the same
ballot. The practice followed by the Council has been to hold a new vote on all the
candidates, and the President of the Council made no notification to the President of
the General Assembly until only the required number of candidates, and no more,
had obtained an absolute majority in the Council.
14. Only when five candidates have obtained the required majority in one of the
organs will the President of that organ notify the President of the other organ of the
names of the five candidates. The President of the latter should not communicate
such names to the members of that organ until that organ has itself given five
candidates the required majority of votes.

14-58180

3/4

A/69/230
S/2014/520

15. If, upon comparison of the respective lists of names that have obtained an
absolute majority in the General Assembly and in the Security Council, fewer than
five candidates have been thus elected pursuant to paragraph 7 above, the Assembly
and the Council will proceed, again independently of one another, at a second
meeting and, if necessary, a third meeting to elect candidates by further ballots for
seats remaining vacant (Article 11 of the Statute), the results again being compared
after the required number of candidates have obtained an absolute majority in each
organ.
16. If, however, after the third meeting, one or more seats still remain unfilled, the
General Assembly and the Security Council may at any time, at the request of either
organ, form a joint conference consisting of six members, three appointed by each
organ. This joint conference may, by an absolute majority, agree upon one name for
each seat still vacant and submit the name or names for the respective acceptance of
the Assembly and the Council. If the joint conference is unanimously agreed, it may
submit the name of a person not included in the list of nominations, provided that
candidate fulfils the required conditions (Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Statute).
17. If the joint conference is satisfied that it will not be successful in procuring an
election, those members of the Court who have already been elected shall, within a
period to be fixed by the Security Council, proceed to fill the vacant seat or seats by
selection from among those candidates who have obtained votes either in the
General Assembly or in the Security Council. In the event of an equality of votes
among the judges, the eldest shall have a casting vote (Article 12, paragraphs 3
and 4, of the Statute).

4/4

14-58180
