A/RES/69/116

United Nations

Distr.: General
18 December 2014

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 76

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2014
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/496)]

69/116. United Nations Convention on Transparency in
Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade in the interests of all peoples, in particular those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Recalling also its resolution 68/109 of 16 December 2013, in which it
recommended the use of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration 1 and Arbitration
Rules (as revised in 2010, with new article 1, paragraph 4, as adopted in 2013),2
Recognizing the need for provisions on transparency in the settlement of
treaty-based investor-State disputes to take account of the public interest involved in
such arbitrations,
Believing that the Rules on Transparency contribute significantly to the
establishment of a harmonized legal framework for a fair and efficient settlement of
international investment disputes, increase transparency and accountability and
promote good governance,
Recalling that, at its forty-sixth session, in 2013, the Commission recommended
that the Rules on Transparency be applied through appropriate mechanisms to
investor-State arbitration initiated pursuant to investment treaties concluded before
the coming into effect of the Rules on Transparency, to the extent that such
application is consistent with those investment treaties, and that the Commission
decided to prepare a convention that was intended to give those States that wished to
make the Rules on Transparency applicable to their existing investment treaties

_______________
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. III
and annex I.
2
Ibid., chap. III and annex II.

14-66937 (E)

*1466937*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/116

United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration

concluded before 1 April 2014 an efficient mechanism to do so, without creating any
expectation that other States would use the mechanism offered by the convention,3
Acknowledging that the Rules on Transparency might be made applicable to
investor-State arbitration initiated pursuant to investment treaties concluded before
1 April 2014, the date of coming into effect of the Rules on Transparency, by means
other than a convention,
Recognizing that all States and interested international organizations were
invited to participate in the preparation of the draft convention either as members or
as observers during the forty-seventh session of the Commission, with full
opportunity to speak and make proposals,
Noting that the preparation of the draft convention was the subject of due
deliberation in the Commission and that the draft convention benefited from
consultations with Governments and interested intergovernmental and international
non-governmental organizations,
Noting with satisfaction that the text of the draft convention was circulated for
comment to all States Members of the United Nations and intergovernmental
organizations invited to attend the meetings of the Commission as observers, and that
the comments received were before the Commission at its forty-seventh session,4
Taking note with satisfaction of the decision of the Commission at its fortyseventh session to submit the draft convention to the General Assembly for its
consideration,5
Taking note of the draft convention approved by the Commission,6
Expressing its appreciation to the Government of Mauritius for its offer to host
a signing ceremony for the Convention in Port Louis,
Commends the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
1.
for preparing the draft convention on transparency in treaty-based investor-State
arbitration;6
2.
Adopts the United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based
Investor-State Arbitration, contained in the annex to the present resolution;
3.
Authorizes a ceremony for the opening for signature of the Convention to
be held in Port Louis on 17 March 2015, and recommends that the Convention be
known as the “Mauritius Convention on Transparency”;
4.
Calls upon those Governments and regional economic integration
organizations that wish to make the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration1
applicable to arbitrations under their existing investment treaties to consider
becoming a party to the Convention.
68th plenary meeting
10 December 2014

_______________
3

Ibid., para. 127.
See A/CN.9/813 and Add.1.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/69/17), para. 106.
6
Ibid., annex I.
4

2/7

United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration

A/RES/69/116

Annex
United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based
Investor-State Arbitration
Preamble
The Parties to this Convention,
Recognizing the value of arbitration as a method of settling disputes that may
arise in the context of international relations, and the extensive and wide-ranging
use of arbitration for the settlement of investor-State disputes,
Also recognizing the need for provisions on transparency in the settlement of
treaty-based investor-State disputes to take account of the public interest involved in
such arbitrations,
Believing that the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on 11 July 2013 (“UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency”), effective as of 1 April
2014, would contribute significantly to the establishment of a harmonized legal
framework for a fair and efficient settlement of international investment disputes,
Noting the great number of treaties providing for the protection of investments
or investors already in force, and the practical importance of promoting the
application of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency to arbitration under those
already concluded investment treaties,
Noting also article 1(2) and (9) of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency,
Have agreed as follows:
Scope of application
Article 1
1.
This Convention applies to arbitration between an investor and a State or a
regional economic integration organization conducted on the basis of an investment
treaty concluded before 1 April 2014 (“investor-State arbitration”).
2.
The term “investment treaty” means any bilateral or multilateral treaty,
including any treaty commonly referred to as a free trade agreement, economic
integration agreement, trade and investment framework or cooperation agreement,
or bilateral investment treaty, which contains provisions on the protection of
investments or investors and a right for investors to resort to arbitration against
contracting parties to that investment treaty.
Application of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency
Article 2
Bilateral or multilateral application
1.
The UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency shall apply to any investor-State
arbitration, whether or not initiated under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, in
which the respondent is a Party that has not made a relevant reservation under
article 3(1)(a) or (b), and the claimant is of a State that is a Party that has not made
a relevant reservation under article 3(1)(a).

3/7

A/RES/69/116

United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration

Unilateral offer of application
2.
Where the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency do not apply pursuant to
paragraph 1, the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency shall apply to an investor-State
arbitration, whether or not initiated under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, in
which the respondent is a Party that has not made a reservation relevant to that
investor-State arbitration under article 3(1), and the claimant agrees to the
application of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency.
Applicable version of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency
3.
Where the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency apply pursuant to paragraph 1
or 2, the most recent version of those Rules as to which the respondent has not made
a reservation pursuant to article 3(2) shall apply.
Article 1(7) of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency
4.
The final sentence of article 1(7) of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency
shall not apply to investor-State arbitrations under paragraph 1.
Most favoured nation provision in an investment treaty
5.
The Parties to this Convention agree that a claimant may not invoke a most
favoured nation provision to seek to apply, or avoid the application of, the
UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency under this Convention.
Reservations
Article 3
1.

A Party may declare that:

(a) It shall not apply this Convention to investor-State arbitration under a
specific investment treaty, identified by title and name of the contracting parties to
that investment treaty;
(b) Article 2(1) and (2) shall not apply to investor-State arbitration
conducted using a specific set of arbitration rules or procedures other than the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and in which it is a respondent;
(c) Article 2(2) shall not apply in investor-State arbitration in which it is a
respondent.
2.
In the event of a revision of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency, a Party
may, within six months of the adoption of such revision, declare that it shall not
apply that revised version of the Rules.
3.
Parties may make multiple reservations in a single instrument. In such an
instrument, each declaration made:
(a)

In respect of a specific investment treaty under paragraph (1)(a);

(b) In respect of a specific set of arbitration rules or procedures under
paragraph (1)(b);
(c)

Under paragraph (1)(c); or

(d)

Under paragraph (2);

shall constitute a separate reservation capable of separate withdrawal under
article 4(6).
4.
4/7

No reservations are permitted except those expressly authorized in this article.

United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration

A/RES/69/116

Formulation of reservations
Article 4
1.
Reservations may be made by a Party at any time, save for a reservation under
article 3(2).
2.
Reservations made at the time of signature shall be subject to confirmation
upon ratification, acceptance or approval. Such reservations shall take effect
simultaneously with the entry into force of this Convention in respect of the Party
concerned.
3.
Reservations made at the time of ratification, acceptance or approval of this
Convention or accession thereto shall take effect simultaneously with the entry into
force of this Convention in respect of the Party concerned.
4.
Except for a reservation made by a Party under article 3(2), which shall take
effect immediately upon deposit, a reservation deposited after the entry into force of
the Convention for that Party shall take effect twelve months after the date of its
deposit.
5.

Reservations and their confirmations shall be deposited with the depositary.

6.
Any Party that makes a reservation under this Convention may withdraw it at
any time. Such withdrawals are to be deposited with the depositary, and shall take
effect upon deposit.
Application to investor-State arbitrations
Article 5
This Convention and any reservation, or withdrawal of a reservation, shall
apply only to investor-State arbitrations that are commenced after the date when the
Convention, reservation, or withdrawal of a reservation, enters into force or takes
effect in respect of each Party concerned.
Depositary
Article 6
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is hereby designated as the
depositary of this Convention.
Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval, accession
Article 7
1.
This Convention is open for signature in Port Louis, Mauritius, on 17 March
2015, and thereafter at United Nations Headquarters in New York by any (a) State;
or (b) regional economic integration organization that is constituted by States and is
a contracting party to an investment treaty.
2.
This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by the
signatories to this Convention.
3.
This Convention is open for accession by all States or regional economic
integration organizations referred to in paragraph 1 which are not signatories as
from the date it is open for signature.
4.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession are to be
deposited with the depositary.

5/7

A/RES/69/116

United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration

Participation by regional economic integration organizations
Article 8
1.
When depositing an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession, a regional economic integration organization shall inform the depositary
of a specific investment treaty to which it is a contracting party, identified by title
and name of the contracting parties to that investment treaty.
2.
When the number of Parties is relevant in this Convention, a regional
economic integration organization does not count as a Party in addition to its
member States which are Parties.
Entry into force
Article 9
1.
This Convention shall enter into force six months after the date of deposit of
the third instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
2.
When a State or a regional economic integration organization ratifies, accepts,
approves or accedes to this Convention after the deposit of the third instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, this Convention enters into force in
respect of that State or regional economic integration organization six months after
the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession.
Amendment
Article 10
1.
Any Party may propose an amendment to the present Convention by
submitting it to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The Secretary-General
shall thereupon communicate the proposed amendment to the Parties to this
Convention with a request that they indicate whether they favour a conference of
Parties for the purpose of considering and voting upon the proposal. In the event
that within four months from the date of such communication at least one third of
the Parties favour such a conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the
conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
2.
The conference of Parties shall make every effort to achieve consensus on each
amendment. If all efforts at consensus are exhausted and no consensus is reached,
the amendment shall, as a last resort, require for its adoption a two-thirds majority
vote of the Parties present and voting at the conference.
3.
An adopted amendment shall be submitted by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to all the Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval.
4.
An adopted amendment enters into force six months after the date of deposit of
the third instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval. When an amendment
enters into force, it shall be binding on those Parties which have expressed consent
to be bound by it.
5.
When a State or a regional economic integration organization ratifies, accepts
or approves an amendment that has already entered into force, the amendment enters
into force in respect of that State or that regional economic integration organization
six months after the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance
or approval.

6/7

United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration

A/RES/69/116

6.
Any State or regional economic integration organization which becomes a
Party to the Convention after the entry into force of the amendment shall be
considered as a Party to the Convention as amended.
Denunciation of this Convention
Article 11
1.
A Party may denounce this Convention at any time by means of a formal
notification addressed to the depositary. The denunciation shall take effect
twelve months after the notification is received by the depositary.
2.
This Convention shall continue to apply to investor-State arbitrations
commenced before the denunciation takes effect.
DONE in a single original, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized by their respective Governments, have signed the present Convention.

7/7
