A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/199
20 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 40
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.58 and Add.1)]
51/199.

United Nations Office of
Verification in El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the situation in Central America and, in
particular, resolution 50/226 of 10 May 1996, by which it, inter alia, decided
to establish the United Nations Office of Verification in El Salvador to
follow up implementation of pending aspects of the peace accords in El
Salvador through 31 December 1996 after the expiration of the mandate of the
Mission of the United Nations in El Salvador,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Office of Verification in El Salvador,1
Recognizing with satisfaction the efforts that continue to be made by
the Government, other parties to the peace accords and the people of
El Salvador to honour the commitments contained in the accords and to
consolidate the peace process,
Welcoming the progress made towards a society characterized by
democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights,
Paying tribute to those Member States which have contributed personnel
and voluntary funding to the Office and to technical assistance projects
undertaken in support of the peace process,

1

A/51/693.

97-76807

/...

A/RES/51/199
Page 2

1.
Welcomes the continuing commitment of the Government and people of
El Salvador to the consolidation of the peace process;
2.
Pays tribute to the accomplishments of the United Nations Office
of Verification in El Salvador, under the authority of the Secretary-General
and his Representative;
3.
Notes with satisfaction the commitment by the Government of
El Salvador and other parties to the peace accords to the full implementation
of the provisions of the peace accords, and urges them to work together to
complete this implementation without delay;
4.
Decides, in accordance with the recommendation contained in
paragraph 33 of the report of the Secretary-General,1 that:
(a)
The Representative of the Secretary-General in El Salvador should
be withdrawn at the conclusion of the mandate of the United Nations Office of
Verification in El Salvador on 31 December 1996;
(b)
The responsibilities of verification and good offices entrusted to
the United Nations should be executed through periodic visits to El Salvador
by a high-level envoy from Headquarters who will keep the Secretary-General
informed on a regular basis;
5.
Also decides that the envoy will be assisted for a period of six
months in the discharge of these responsibilities by a small support unit in
El Salvador, working with the administrative support of the United Nations
Development Programme;
6.
Emphasizes the importance of a continued and enhanced cooperation
of the various agencies, offices and programmes of the United Nations system
active in El Salvador with the efforts of the Organization as verification of
the peace accords approaches its conclusion and in the consolidation of the
peace process;
7.
Calls upon Member States and international institutions to
continue to provide assistance to the Government and people of El Salvador and
to lend support to the efforts of the United Nations in El Salvador for the
purposes of peace-building and development;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to it before the
end of June 1997 on the implementation of the present resolution, including an
assessment of the peace process in El Salvador.
87th plenary meeting
17 December 1996
