S/2009/60

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 January 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 30 January 2009 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter of 19 December 2008 (S/2008/804), in which I proposed
next steps on Somalia, including a package to support the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and to assist in building the Somali security and rule-of-law
institutions established under the Djibouti peace process. The Security Council
approved those proposals in its resolution 1863 (2009), and requested an update, by
30 January 2009, on the precise equipment and services to be provided to AMISOM
within the scope of the United Nations logistics capacity support package.
To meet that request, the Secretariat deployed an integrated technical
assessment mission, led jointly by the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including a team of logistics
specialists from the Department of Field Support. It visited Addis Ababa and
Nairobi from 12 to 26 January 2009 to collect the necessary information and consult
the Somali parties, the African Union (AU), AMISOM and other partners on the
details of the support required by AMISOM and the Somali parties, as well as
arrangements for the implementation of the proposals contained in my letter of
19 December. Although the technical assessment mission was unable to travel to
Mogadishu owing to the security situation, it obtained valuable information from the
AMISOM Force Commander, senior officials of the African Union, and Somali
members of the Joint Security Committee who travelled to Nairobi to meet the
mission, as well as representatives of donors supporting AMISOM. A full account of
the findings and recommendations of the Mission will be provided to the Council in
my forthcoming regular report on Somalia.
Overall, the assessment conducted by the technical assessment mission
revealed that the level of support AMISOM has been receiving is very basic, with
much of it falling below United Nations standards. In addition, AMISOM is highly
dependent on donor funding, under complex arrangements which add a high degree
of uncertainty to the planning efforts of the African Union.
AMISOM logistics support is currently predominantly delivered through a
multifunctional logistics contract with a commercial contractor. While existing
support arrangements are far from optimal, they represent the only lifeline of the
Mission, and would need to be maintained in the short term. As I noted in my letter
of 31 December 2008 to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/846), given
the lead time needed to put in place appropriate support arrangements, the
Organization may need to rely on the existing AMISOM logistics arrangements to

09-22496 (E) 030209

*0922496*

S/2009/60

ensure uninterrupted provision of logistics support. In parallel, efforts will be
focused on the expedited establishment of more comprehensive support solutions to
meet the needs of the full AMISOM deployment of 8,000 authorized troops. New
support solutions under resolution 1863 (2009) will comply with United Nations
standards. In addition, they will, where applicable and possible, be capable of rapid
expansion to meet the needs of a full United Nations peacekeeping deployment,
should one be authorized by the Council.
The Department of Field Support is identifying fast-track measures that will
have an impact on the ground, prior to the implementation of more extensive
support packages, in the areas of supply; engineering; medical support; movement
support; aviation; communication and information technology, including public
information; surface transport; and repair and maintenance.
One major challenge stems from the need to deliver this level of support
within the standards of oversight traditionally associated with a United Nations
peacekeeping operation of analogous size. Such a level of oversight calls for a
United Nations international footprint on the ground in Somalia, which is at present
precluded by the current security situation (phase V). This inherent contradiction
must be resolved if we are to achieve our core objectives within the available
oversight mechanisms.
It is to be noted that the logistics support package forms only one part of the
assistance required to enable AMISOM to remain in place and build up its troop
strength to its authorized level of 8,000 personnel. The annex to the present letter
sets out the areas in which AMISOM would receive support from the United Nations
logistics support package funded from assessed contributions, as well as needs that
would have to be met from the envisaged trust fund or bilateral donor arrangements.
Subject to budgetary approval by the General Assembly in March 2009, the
United Nations will begin to deliver quick wins and elements of logistical support
through existing arrangements in the second quarter of 2009. However, it will take
time for new arrangements to come on stream. It will be important to be realistic
about the time required to bring existing contingents up to United Nations standards
and to deliver the full logistics support package. In the interim, capability will
continue to be dependent on strong bilateral assistance from Member States.
I would also recall the request by the Security Council to Member States to
contribute to this endeavour through the trust fund and bilateral arrangements, as
well as through contributions of personnel, equipment and other resources as
detailed in paragraphs 8 and 14 of resolution 1863 (2009), as such support will be
crucial to the success of this effort.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of Members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

09-22496

S/2009/60

Annex
Details of support to be provided to the African Union Mission
in Somalia
1.
In line with the letter of the Secretary-General of 19 December 2008
(S/2008/804) and Security Council resolution 1863 (2009), the technical assessment
mission considered support to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
through two expected channels: (a) provision of a logistics capacity support
package, to be funded from United Nations assessed contributions and comprising
the equipment and mission support services normally provided for a United Nations
peacekeeping operation of the same size; (b) financial support from Member States
through the envisaged United Nations trust fund, which will allow for funding to
AMISOM to cover reimbursements and, eventually, to help procure necessary
contingent equipment. In addition, the technical assessment mission identified a
number of critical needs for military capability that cannot be met through United
Nations assistance but would need to be met through force generation by the African
Union, with support from donors that have the required capability.
2.
Logistical support to AMISOM was considered in the functional areas of
supply (rations, fuel and general supply); engineering, including construction, power
generation and water supply; medical support; aviation; transportation, including the
provision of protected mobility (armoured personnel carriers); strategic movement
support; equipment repair and maintenance; strategic and tactical communications;
and information technology support. Key findings of the technical assessment
mission were as follows:
(a) Supply. All required fuel, oils, lubricants and rations are supplied to
AMISOM under a bilateral arrangement through a contract with a commercial
company providing a multifunctional logistics contract. Some of these commodities
are provided by subcontractors in Mogadishu; others are supplied by local
contractors outside Somalia and are flown by a strategic air bridge from Entebbe to
Mogadishu. AMISOM does not hold significant reserve stocks in Mogadishu.
Contingents are also short of general supply items. In the short term, strategic stock
levels must be built up in Mogadishu in order to improve the robustness and
survivability of the force. In time, contracts for fuels and rations to United Nations
standards will be established. Essential general supply items, including personal
protection items and defence stores required by AMISOM troops and police to fill
immediate needs, can be drawn from United Nations strategic deployment stocks or
procured through United Nations contracts.
(b) Engineering. All required support for AMISOM troop deployment is
currently provided under a bilateral arrangement through the commercial company
providing the multifunctional logistics contract. The overall conditions in theatre are
well below United Nations standards, particularly in the areas of accommodation,
sanitation and the quality and quantity of potable water. There is an urgent need to
provide and/or upgrade key facilities. At the request of the African Union (AU), the
United Nations Office for Project Services has developed a plan for AMISOM
headquarters and a level II hospital. With regard to other support services, there is
no immediate alternative to continuing to draw support from the commercial
company providing the multifunctional logistics contract to improve the sanitation,
power and water production capacity at existing camps, pending the acquisition and

09-22496

3

S/2009/60

development of infrastructure at new locations to rehouse existing contingents and
provide additional facilities for planned contingent deployments. As the support
evolves, United Nations contracts will need to be established for the provision of
hard-wall accommodation and significant infrastructure improvements.
(c) Medical support. Existing AMISOM medical support consists of one
level I medical facility and elements of a level II hospital. Out of area
MEDEVAC/CASEVAC services are provided under the contract held with the
commercial company providing the multifunctional logistics support; however, they
are available only during daylight hours, as Mogadishu airport has no night
capability. Therefore, immediate action is required to provide United Nations
standard medical services up to level II. The equipment, pharmaceuticals,
consumables and laboratory supplies required, including ambulances, can be met
from strategic deployment stocks. However, appropriately qualified medical
personnel to staff the facilities must be provided by the participating contingents.
(d) Movement support. AMISOM relies on partner support for cargo
transport, deployment and rotation of contingent personnel, and expects these
arrangements to continue through current planned deployments of the additional
battalions from Uganda, Burundi and Nigeria. Significant capability and capacity
enhancements to the current movement support by air and sea are required to
provide airfield and port services for cargo handling, as well as cargo handling
equipment, storage and surface transport services. These should be covered under
the United Nations logistics package.
(e) Aviation. Current air operations are performed by the commercial
company providing the multifunctional logistics contract, using subcontracted
commercial operators. These operations are not performed to United Nations
aviation standards or International Civil Aviation Organization standards. There is
an urgent need for the United Nations to provide a small jet aircraft, probably based
initially in Nairobi but able to fly into Mogadishu, in order to improve the capacity
for medical evacuation for AMISOM. Such an aircraft could also be used to support
the activities of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region. Mogadishu airport is
large, with considerable capacity for expanded operations. But there is an immediate
requirement for equipment and infrastructure development of the airport to allow for
greater operational safety, including the provision of a night operation capacity, an
aviation fuel supply system, search-and-rescue operations, firefighting and
emergency crash and rescue services. This should be covered under the United
Nations package.
(f) Communications and information technology. AMISOM has a limited
existing tactical communications capacity using conventional VHF/HF radio
equipment. There is a critical and immediate need for strategic communications and
information technology capability. The option of providing strategic deployment
stocks to meet all aspects of that requirement is available. Installation, training of
contingents and technical support in theatre may be provided through local
contracts.
(g) Public information. AMISOM has no FM radio broadcast capability, a
vital and preliminary component of the Mission’s proposed information operations
plan. To meet that urgent need on a temporary basis, a MDTS-broadcast package
will be transferred from existing stocks at the United Nations Logistics Base at

4

09-22496

S/2009/60

Brindisi, Italy, to Entebbe, where it will be staged for forward deployment to
Mogadishu. Staffing should be provided through a contracted consultant, who would
support personnel from the countries contributing troops to AMISOM.
(h) Surface transport. AMISOM infantry battalions currently possess limited
armoured personnel carriers and urgently need to be brought up to United Nations
standards to increase their security, operational effectiveness and ability to move
casualties under armoured protection. Some equipment shortfalls are being
addressed under bilateral agreements, and further armoured personnel carriers will
be provided as part of the AMISOM support package. There is also an immediate
need for force-level vehicles in the areas of airfield support, engineering and
material handling equipment. Such United Nations-owned equipment can be
operated by contingents and local operators and will be needed to improve current
facilities and prepare sites for planned deployments of additional contingents.
(i) Repair and maintenance. Under current memorandum-of-understanding
arrangements with AU, deployed AMISOM troop-contributing countries are
responsible for maintaining all major equipment to a serviceability level determined
and agreed to by both parties. However, there is a need for operations and
maintenance services to be enhanced and for a wider range of maintenance and
operations support within the Mission, both for contingent- and United Nationsowned equipment, as well as basic training on maintenance of different types of
transport vehicles. In the medium to long term, plans will be developed to ensure the
serviceability of the Mission’s transport assets. This will be covered under the
United Nations logistics package.
3.
To support planning and delivery of the logistics support package, and as
directed by the Security Council in its resolution 1863 (2009), the Department of
Field Support intends to establish a dedicated and independent field support
headquarters. The headquarters should be located in Nairobi (with the option of
establishing efficiencies in shared support services to the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia). As soon as security conditions permit, it will establish an
element forward in Mogadishu to act as an interface with AMISOM headquarters
and to ensure delivery of support, including that provided by commercial
contractors. It will also have an element in Addis Ababa to liaise at the strategic
level with AU and to replace the logistics planning capability currently provided by
United Nations planners in the AU Strategic Planning and Management Unit. Other
specialist planners (military, police, humanitarian, medical and others, including in
the area of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration), would continue to assist
the AU Strategic Planning Management Unit, as requested in resolution 1863
(2009). The establishment of an independent Mission support headquarters
responsible to the Department of Field Support will ensure clear accountability for
the delivery of support to all clients. It will also facilitate planning for and migration
to a full United Nations peacekeeping operation, if mandated by the Security
Council in due course.
4.
The proposed trust fund will be utilized to meet the costs incurred by troopand police-contributing countries in providing contingents for deployment. These
costs could include the provision of contingent equipment, such as uniforms, light
vehicles, armoured personnel carriers and tentage, and the payment of salaries and
allowances to deployed personnel.

09-22496

5

S/2009/60

5.
In addition to the logistics support package and monies delivered through the
trust fund, AMISOM will also have a number of military capability needs to achieve
the new tasks required by the Djibouti Peace Agreement, protect its forces and
provide better security for air and sea operations. These will need to be supplied
either by countries contributing troops to the African Union or through bilateral
support. The following critical needs have been identified by the technical
assessment mission:
(a) Combat engineering. As the threat of indirect fire is high, AMISOM must
have the capability to improve its force protection measures, including through the
construction of bunkers and vehicle checkpoints and the strengthening of key points.
Contracted equipment solutions could be used to support defensive and other
construction tasks, including the building of bunkers, gates and fences, and to
improve facilities and infrastructure. Integral combat engineering capability should
be provided by troop-contributing countries; however, should this not prove to be
adequate, additional support could be provided through a commercial contract.
(b) Counter-IED and explosive ordnance disposal capability. AMISOM faces
significant risks from all forms of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), including
remote-controlled devices, command detonated mines and suicide bombers. The
technical assessment mission found that high-technology anti-IED devices, which
are easily damaged or countered, are not a good solution to the problem. The most
practical solution would be training on patrolling techniques and tactics; this could
be provided to AMISOM by qualified Member States. In addition, a trained
explosive ordnance disposal team will be required. Again, this is best provided
bilaterally to a troop-contributing country from another Member State.
(c) Inshore maritime capability. Protecting air and sea lines of supply will
become an increasingly critical task for AMISOM as additional battalions deploy
and to support the envisaged logistics package. The technical assessment mission
found that that task would require a minimum of six craft, which should be able to
travel at 25 knots and operate in rough sea and weather conditions (except storms).
Armed, low-technology vessels with a communications suite would be suitable;
such craft could be operated by existing troops with minimal training, but would
require support from a professional naval officer who could be seconded to
AMISOM as a liaison officer. The additional inshore craft, maintenance and training
could be provided by a contractor, if not available from a troop-contributing
country.
(d) Offshore maritime capability (maritime task force). Delivery of the
United Nations support package to AMISOM and to any subsequent United Nations
peacekeeping operation will require extensive use of commercial shipping into and
out of Mogadishu and, possibly, in due course, other Somali ports. In order to ensure
safe passage for such shipping, the United Nations will require guaranteed naval
escorts. This would ideally be provided by a dedicated maritime force provided by a
troop-contributing country or through a formal arrangement with one of the existing
maritime forces in the area. Without adequate naval support, it will be impossible
for the United Nations logistics package to be delivered.

6

09-22496

S/2009/60

Legal and contractual issues
6.
The United Nations support programme will be defined and provided through
a range of contractual instruments. Host Government agreements need to be
established to allow the United Nations and its contractors to operate in respective
countries. A memorandum of understanding between the United Nations and
AU/AMISOM is required to define the responsibilities and obligations of each
party. On the commercial side, the United Nations will seek authority initially to
absorb existing arrangements for AMISOM troop support provided by donors, and
formalize arrangements with the United Nations Office for Project Services for the
mission headquarters and hospital construction. A range of additional support
services will be required as soon as possible. As the United Nations analysis of
contingent and future United Nations support conditions develop, it is anticipated
that other services will be identified. In parallel, scopes of work for longer-term
requirements to bring support services to United Nations standards will be
developed and bid commercially. In view of the prevailing conditions in Mogadishu,
which prevent United Nations staff from participating in daily in-theatre activities, it
must be recognized that flexibility will be required in procuring, administering and
verifying services provided by contractors.
Funding arrangements
7.
With the agreement of the General Assembly, a proposal will be submitted to it
for initial funding requirements to provide the United Nations logistical support
package to AMISOM in line with the Security Council resolution. The logistical
support will cover the military and police components of AMISOM. In this regard,
logistics support for the Mission’s full deployment and sustainment will be a
substantial undertaking. Overall costs and staffing would be similar to that for an
equivalent United Nations peacekeeping mission, but, uniquely it would be funded
separately through United Nations funding (for logistics support) and a United
Nations-administered trust fund of voluntary contributions (for AMISOM personnel
and contingent equipment).
8.
United Nations-assessed funding will be utilized to meet the life support needs
of the deployed AMISOM force. This will include payment for rations, fuel and
additional engineering works and improved aviation, communications and medical
support. Assessed funding will also be used to pay for the strategic deployment of
new forces, the rotation of existing forces, the movement of equipment and supplies
and additional staff to manage the delivery of the package.
9.
Costs for the logistics support package remain dependent on ongoing work to
identify suppliers and deliver support solutions. However, the package could require
a significant allotment of United Nations-assessed funding in addition to the trust
fund in order to meet set-up costs and a year of full AMISOM operations based on
comparable missions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
10. The proposed trust fund will be utilized to meet the costs incurred by troopand police-contributing countries in providing contingents for deployment. Those
costs could include the provision of contingent equipment, such as uniforms, light
vehicles, armoured personnel carriers and tentage, and the payment of salaries and
allowances to deployed personnel.

09-22496

7

S/2009/60

Delivery timelines
11. Subject to budgetary approval by the General Assembly in March, the United
Nations will begin to deliver quick wins and elements of logistical support through
existing arrangements in the second quarter of 2009. However, it will take time for
new arrangements to come on stream. It will be important to be realistic about the
time required to bring existing contingents up to United Nations standards and to
deliver the full logistics support package. In the interim, capability will continue to
be dependent on strong bilateral assistance from Member States.

8

09-22496
