UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1994/1245
3 November 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL MISSION TO SOMALIA
ON 26 AND 27 OCTOBER 1994
Letter of transmittal
Letter dated 3 November 1994 from the members of the Security
Council mission to Somalia addressed to the President of the
Security Council

We have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Security
Council’s mission to Somalia, which took place on 26 and 27 October 1994. The
report is submitted to the Security Council in accordance with a decision taken
by the Council during informal consultations on 20 October 1994.

(Signed) WANG Xuexian
(China)
(Signed) Hervé LADSOUS
(France)
(Signed) Colin KEATING
(New Zealand)
(Chairman)
(Signed) Isaac E. AYEWAH
(Nigeria)
(Signed) Kamran NIAZ
(Pakistan)
(Signed) Yuriy V. FEDOTOV
(Russian Federation)
(Signed) Karl F. INDERFURTH
(United States of America)

94-42423 (E)

041194

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 2

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
In resolution 946 (1994) of 30 September 1994, the Security Council
declared its readiness to consider sending a mission of the Council to Somalia
at an appropriate time to convey directly to the Somali political parties the
views of the Council on the situation in Somalia and on the future of the United
Nations presence there.
2.
At the consultations of the whole held on 20 October 1994, the Security
Council decided to send such a mission, which would depart for Somalia on
24 October 1994. At that time, the Council adopted an informal document
entitled "Somalia: guidelines for Security Council mission" (see annex I).
3.
The mission of the Security Council was led by Mr. Colin Keating, Permanent
Representative of New Zealand to the United Nations. Other members of the
mission were Mr. Wang Xuexian (China), Mr. Hervé Ladsous (France),
Mr. Isaac E. Ayewah (Nigeria), Mr. Kamran Niaz (Pakistan), Mr. Yuriy V. Fedotov
(Russian Federation) and Mr. Karl F. Inderfurth (United States of America). The
mission was assisted by two United Nations Secretariat staff:
Ms. Elisabeth Lindenmayer (Department of Peace-keeping Operations) and
Mr. Shigeru Mochida (Department of Political Affairs).
4.
Prior to its arrival in Somalia, the mission members prepared a statement
to be delivered to Somali faction leaders (see annex II).
5.
The mission visited Somalia on 26 and 27 October. Its programme of work
(see annex III) included meetings with Mr. Ali Mahdi Mohamed, Spokesman for the
Somali Salvation Alliance (SSA), and General Mohamed Farah Aidid, Chairman of
the United Somali Congress/Somali National Alliance (USC/SNA) (see annexes IV
and VI). The mission received briefings on recent political developments from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, H.E. Mr. James
Victor Gbeho, and on the military aspects of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia (UNOSOM II) operation relevant to withdrawal from the Force Commander,
General Aboo Samah Bin Aboo Bakar. The mission also had a meeting with
representatives of United Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) operating in Somalia (see annex IX). In Nairobi, the
mission had the opportunity to exchange views with the representatives of the
Horn of Africa countries (see annex VIII) and the members of the Security
Subcommittee of the Somalia Aid Coordination Body (SACB) (see annex X). The
Chairman and the members of the mission also held a press conference each, in
Mogadishu and Nairobi respectively.

II.

ACTIVITIES OF THE MISSION

6.
The mission’s arrival in Mogadishu on 26 October coincided with
consultations being held by factions allied with Mr. Ali Mahdi in North
Mogadishu, and by factions associated with General Aidid in South Mogadishu,
following the issuance of the memorandum on 14 October by General Aidid’s
USC/SNA and 11 other factions, calling for the convening of a national
reconciliation conference on 27 October 1994.
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 3

A.
1.

Briefings by UNOSOM II

Briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General

7.
On 26 October, Ambassador Gbeho briefed the mission on current political
developments. In particular, the mission was apprised of his intensive efforts
to discourage General Aidid from convening a national reconciliation conference
without the participation of those factions allied with Mr. Ali Mahdi. The
mission was informed of General Aidid’s decision to reschedule the convening of
such a conference to 1 November 1994, which had been communicated to the Special
Representative only a few hours prior to the mission’s arrival in Mogadishu.
8.
According to the Special Representative, the only remaining obstacle to the
convening of an inclusive national reconciliation conference was actually the
procedural question regarding who should be represented and take the decision to
establish a Government. In his observation, there was already a broad agreement
to stop fighting, to convene a national reconciliation conference and to
establish a national Government by the end of the year. He felt that one
solution to the question of participation might be for both sides to agree to
set up a credentials committee as is often customary with conferences. This
idea apparently was acceptable to Mr. Ali Mahdi but not to General Aidid. The
Special Representative was concerned that General Aidid would unilaterally
proceed with convening a national reconciliation conference on 1 November and
declare a Government, which, in his assessment, would invite renewed fighting.
He urged the mission to counsel the factions strongly to proceed on the basis of
an inclusive approach to national reconciliation.

2.

Briefing by the Force Commander

9.
The Force Commander’s briefing on 26 October covered an overview of the
current deployment and operation of UNOSOM II troops; the security conditions in
each area of responsibility of UNOSOM II in southern Somalia; the current status
of force reduction, its effects and existing vulnerabilities, including a review
of recent cases of withdrawal from outlying areas that involved the forced
transfer of assets to local parties; UNOSOM II’s assistance to the Somali
police; and the withdrawal planning scenarios and support requirements. The
Force Commander made a special reference to the fact that the flow of arms into
Somalia was continuing unabated despite the Security Council’s arms embargo.
10. The members of the mission focused on the details of withdrawal and
practical difficulties associated with it, in particular implications on time
requirements for completion of the withdrawal. The Force Commander explained
that the estimated requirement of 120 days for withdrawal assumed the
continuation of current security conditions and the availability of shipping and
offshore support from Member States, including hospital ships and amphibious
support. According to the Force Commander, an emergency withdrawal could be
accomplished much more quickly. An intermediate scenario was also outlined. He
made it clear that, if any of the assumptions changed, then the time required
for withdrawal would also change. He further indicated that the kind of support
asked of Member States would depend on what UNOSOM II needed to take out of
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 4

Somalia. He stated, in that connection, that he would advise the Security
Council through the Secretary-General if the situation changed for the worse.

B.
1.

Meetings with Somali faction leaders

Meeting with Mr. Ali Mahdi and faction leaders associated
with him

11. On 26 October 1994, the Security Council mission, accompanied by the
Special Representative, held a meeting with Mr. Ali Mahdi and 13 faction leaders
(see annex IV) associated with him under SSA. These 13 faction leaders included
the chairmen of several signatory factions to the Addis Ababa agreement, those
of a few new factions and even a "new chairman" of USC/SNA who, according to Mr.
Ali Mahdi, had replaced General Aidid. The joint statement addressed to the
mission by Mr. Ali Mahdi and his colleagues is reproduced in annex V.
12. H.E. Mr. Colin Keating, Chairman of the mission, read out the message of
the Security Council, prepared on the basis of the guidelines adopted by the
Council. The texts of the message and the guidelines, the title of which had
been adjusted to read "Elements of presentation made by the Security Council
mission", were subsequently presented to Mr. Ali Mahdi.
13. The message of the Security Council was well received by Mr. Ali Mahdi and
the faction leaders present. In responding to the message on behalf of his
colleagues, Mr. Ali Mahdi assured the mission of their continued cooperation
with the Secretary-General and the Security Council. He stated that SSA
factions had never been involved in any confrontation with the United Nations
and he pledged that SSA would cooperate in the phasing out of the military
component of UNOSOM, but added that it would also seek the cooperation and
assistance of the United Nations in the reconstruction of Somalia. He appealed
to the international community not to abandon Somalia only because of the
obstructive policies of one of the faction leaders. The Chairman and members of
the mission, while noting the assurances of cooperation expressed by
Mr. Ali Mahdi, reminded him and his colleagues that in the coming weeks, the
Security Council would be monitoring the situation in Somalia to judge if their
words were matched by actual developments on the ground.

2.

Meeting with General Aidid and faction leaders
associated with him

14. On 27 October 1994, the Security Council mission, accompanied by the
Special Representative, met with General Aidid and 12 other faction leaders (see
annex VI) currently associated with him, including the leaders of 4 splinter
groups of the signatories to the Addis Ababa agreement. The memorandum jointly
prepared by these 13 factions was presented to the mission. The text of the
memorandum is reproduced in annex VII.
15. Ambassador Keating made a statement identical to that delivered earlier to
Mr. Ali Mahdi and the SSA, conveying the message of the Security Council. In
underlining the importance the mission attached to an inclusive national
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 5

reconciliation conference, he added that any regime that would emerge from a
non-inclusive national reconciliation conference could not expect to acquire
legitimacy or recognition in the eyes of the international community. The texts
of the message and the guidelines (Elements of presentation made by the Security
Council mission) were subsequently presented to General Aidid.
16. In response to the message, General Aidid said that he and his colleagues
were determined to resolve the Somali crisis and that they would do everything
possible to ensure that the remaining influential leaders were represented at
the national reconciliation conference. However, he added that the 13 leaders
present represented 95 per cent of the population of Somalia and would,
therefore, proceed with the conference even if the remaining leaders did not
join. He explained that the Somalis should not be expected to secure
100 per cent support of the population before forming a Government, since such
was not the case elsewhere in the world.
17. On behalf of his colleagues, General Aidid assured the mission that they
would protect the personnel and property of UNOSOM during the phasing out of
UNOSOM II. He also assured them that UNOSOM and other international personnel
would be treated with respect as they were considered guests of the Somali
people. General Aidid added that Somalia needed the assistance of international
NGOs and would ensure their protection following the withdrawal of UNOSOM II,
and he repeatedly expressed the hope that the United Nations and the
international community would continue to assist Somalia with reconstruction and
other areas after the withdrawal of UNOSOM II.
18. Responding to questions from members of the mission regarding participation
in the conference by Mr. Ali Mahdi, from whom they had detected a sense of
willingness to enter into dialogue with General Aidid, the latter informed the
mission that he and his colleagues would welcome Mr. Ali Mahdi’s participation
in the conference through USC, led by Mr. Mohamed Qanyare Afrah, and that he
could also join the broad-based Government by competing for a post as a member
of Somali society and as a member of the Central Committee of USC.
19. While expressing appreciation for the assurances given with respect to the
establishment of a broad-based Government and the security of UNOSOM II during
withdrawal and of humanitarian assistance activities after that, the Chairman
and members of the mission stated to General Aidid and his colleagues that the
international community would be observing with keen interest the situation on
the ground to determine whether or not the assurances given in the meeting would
be matched with deeds, and that the United Nations and the international
community would be judging the worthiness of future cooperation with Somalia
based on such cooperation as they would receive. In particular, the mission
urged General Aidid and his colleagues to use the coming few days to ensure that
the conference would be inclusive, and stated that the Security Council would
give its full support to the Special Representative in his efforts to provide
channels of communication and to facilitate reconciliation among the Somali
factions.

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 6

C.

Meeting with the representatives of the Horn of Africa
countries

20. On 27 October in Nairobi, the mission, at its request, met with the
representatives of the Horn of Africa countries, namely Djibouti, Eritrea,
Ethiopia and the Sudan (see annex VIII), to brief them on its mandate and the
result of its visit to Somalia. The members of the mission stressed the
importance that the Security Council attached to cooperation with regional
organizations such as the Organization of African Unity (OAU) as well as with
the neighbouring countries of Somalia. The representatives of the Horn of
Africa countries assured the mission that neighbouring countries had always
expressed their willingness to be involved in addressing the problem of Somalia,
that they were already playing a role and that they would continue to do so.
21. Ambassador Keating laid particular emphasis on the fact that the mission’s
message to the faction leaders had been that a national reconciliation
conference had to be genuinely inclusive, that there could not be any artificial
exclusion of concerned Somali parties, and that the international community
would judge the legitimacy of any regime that would emerge from the conference
from such a perspective.
22. In view of the possible consequences of failure to achieve national
reconciliation in Somalia and of the special leverage that the neighbouring
countries have with the Somali factions, the members of the mission urged
cooperation between the United Nations and the Horn of Africa countries,
including in making the existing arms embargo on Somalia effective. Such
cooperation should be aimed at promoting national reconciliation by discouraging
a non-inclusive, and encouraging an inclusive, national reconciliation
conference and an interim Government in Somalia.

D.

Meeting with United Nations agencies and NGOs and the
Somalia Aid Coordination Body

23. On 27 October l994, the mission met with representatives from United
Nations agencies and international NGOs in Mogadishu (see annex IX). They
expressed appreciation of UNOSOM II’s contribution to the protection of aid
convoys, guarding of ports, etc. They understood the inevitability of
UNOSOM II’s withdrawal and stated their realization that, in the long run, they
must conduct their activities without UNOSOM II’s assistance. While declaring
their commitment to continue their work even after the withdrawal of UNOSOM II,
they all shared the concern that security conditions in Somalia would worsen
following withdrawal. Some expressed a desire for some form of assistance in
that regard during the transitional period leading to and immediately after
withdrawal and for access to certain UNOSOM physical assets. Others disagreed.
In general, value was seen in an ongoing United Nations presence.
24. In response to queries about the withdrawal plan, the Special
Representative pledged to brief the agencies and NGOs at the next meeting with
them now that UNOSOM II had a draft withdrawal plan. He took the opportunity to
assure the representatives that UNOSOM II included all international staff of

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 7

agencies and NGOs in its emergency withdrawal plan, should that become
necessary.
25. Also on 27 October l994, the mission met with the members of the SACB
Security Subcommittee in Nairobi (see annex X). In sharp contrast with the
United Nations agencies and NGOs that the mission had met in Mogadishu, this
group held a negative view of an ongoing United Nations role in facilitating
political reconciliation. They expressed their intention to continue their
activities after the withdrawal of UNOSOM II.
26. However, the Ambassador of Ethiopia, a member of the Subcommittee,
expressed a strongly dissenting view, saying that, while the fatigue of the
international community was understandable, immediate abandonment of Somalia by
the United Nations was not desirable because there was no infrastructure in
Somalia to facilitate political reconciliation or to permit coordination of
reconstruction of the country. He added that Somalia’s neighbours were too poor
to help and that only the international community could do so.

III.

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
A.

UNOSOM mandate

27. The Security Council mission concluded that 31 March 1995 was the
appropriate date to be included in the Security Council’s resolution as the end
of the mandate of UNOSOM II. None of the Somali factions requested a longer
extension, nor did the humanitarian organizations or NGOs.
28. Withdrawal of the military component of UNOSOM II will be complex and
potentially dangerous. Somali cooperation with withdrawal is possible but
cannot be taken for granted. Availability of military assets from Member States
to cover such a withdrawal will be essential and will, in some respects,
determine the completion of the withdrawal. The availability of commercial
shipping will also be a key factor if withdrawal is to be orderly and if
equipment is to be repatriated. Of overriding importance in this entire
exercise will be the safety of personnel.
29. Issues that will arise include possible transfer of certain assets of
humanitarian value (e.g. pumps, generators, etc.) to local Somali communities
and NGOs.

B.

Security Council message to Somali factions

30. The message based on the guidelines agreed to by the Council was conveyed
in the form of a prepared statement and its text was given to the faction
leaders.
31. The factions were told of the Council’s expectation that they would
cooperate with UNOSOM’s withdrawal and that they understood that the
international community’s ability to provide humanitarian/reconstruction/

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 8

development assistance in the future would depend upon achieving a secure
environment. This, in turn, would depend on political reconciliation.
32. The mission made it clear that only a genuinely inclusive approach to
political reconciliation was likely to lead to such a secure environment, and
therefore that the legitimacy of any unilaterally declared governments would be
doubtful.

C.

The future

33. The mission confirmed to all concerned Somali parties, representatives of
the neighbouring States, and United Nations agencies and NGOs engaged in
humanitarian activities, the Council’s desire not to abandon Somalia.
34. The humanitarian organizations and NGOs confirmed their intention to
continue to operate in Somalia if security conditions permitted. Their views
were sharply divided as to whether the United Nations could or should seek to
assist in this regard.
35. All Somali authorities and most agencies viewed the ongoing role of the
United Nations in providing facilitation and support for the political process
as useful. Successful political reconciliation would take a long time and the
United Nations should recognize that reality. Security conditions may, however,
present problems to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
performing such a role after the UNOSOM military component withdraws.
36. The question of the United Nations role in assisting with security in the
post-UNOSOM period was raised. Any such role would require careful
consideration by the Secretary-General and the Security Council.

D.

Role of neighbouring States

37. The ambassadors of the Horn of Africa countries in Nairobi were briefed on
the Council’s message to the parties and were urged to use their bilateral
contacts to promote genuine national reconciliation and to refrain from
supporting any divisive action by any of the Somali factions. The risks of a
return to civil war were noted, including the possible impact on regional
stability and renewed refugee flows. In that connection, they were also urged
to support the Security Council’s efforts to have the arms embargo observed.
38. The important role that OAU and other regional organizations could play to
ameliorate the situation in Somalia was underlined.

E.

Conclusion

39. The visit accomplished its purpose of clarifying the mission’s
understanding of the issues involved in the critical decision to be taken by the
Council. The mission also served the purpose of clarifying the Somali leaders’
understanding of the issues involved as well.
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 9

40. The Somali factions received the Council’s message with a surprising degree
of acceptance.
41. Assurances were given by two divided groups of Somali factions on
cooperation with UNOSOM withdrawal, on long-term security for humanitarian
assistance and on their intention to bring about genuine political
reconciliation.
42. The Somali parties were left in no doubt that the Council would weigh these
assurances in the light of their actions.
43. The mission’s visit provided a timely opportunity to influence political
events in a positive direction. The mission is hopeful that its visit may have
had some useful impact.
44. However, everything that the mission saw left its members with a profound
sense of unease and a fear that, whether or not UNOSOM leaves, political
reconciliation or the emergence of a Government that enjoys widespread
acceptance is far from certain. The risk of a return to civil war is real.
45. The Security Council should continue to receive reports and monitor the
situation in Somalia, given its role to date, even after the withdrawal of
UNOSOM.

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 10

Annex I
Guidelines for the Security Council mission

1.
The date already foreseen for termination of the United Nations mission in
Somalia (UNOSOM) is the end of March 1995. The lack of progress in the peace
process and on national reconciliation among Somalis, taken together with the
lack of Somali cooperation over security issues, have fundamentally undermined
the United Nations objectives in Somalia. In these circumstances, continuation
of UNOSOM beyond March 1995 cannot be justified.
2.
This implies an orderly and progressive phasing out of the military
component of UNOSOM in advance of that date. The Somali lack of cooperation
with that process is more likely to accelerate it than to retard it.
3.
The United Nations will be ready to sustain a facilitating or mediating
political role beyond March 1995 if that is what the Somalis want and if they
are willing to cooperate with the United Nations.
4.
The United Nations will continue to work with regional organizations, in
particular the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and with the Governments of
neighbouring countries to promote reconciliation in Somalia and the re-emergence
of a civil society there.
5.
The United Nations will do its best to sustain humanitarian activities
throughout Somalia and to encourage non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to do
likewise, but their ability to do so will depend almost entirely on the degree
of cooperation and security offered by the Somalis.
6.
The United Nations will remain ready to provide, through its various
agencies, rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance if the situation in
Somalia develops in such a way as to make that practicable.

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 11

Annex II
Message conveyed by the Security Council mission to the
Somali faction leaders on behalf of the Council
Mogadishu, 26 and 27 October 1994

We have come a long way in order to meet personally with you and deliver a
solemn message to you on behalf of the Security Council. This is an exceptional
step for the Council to take, matching both the gravity of the situation that
now confronts Somalia and the depth of the concern felt by the international
community.
In dispatching this mission, the Council wanted to make sure that all the
Somali faction leaders, and indeed all Somalis, would realize that their country
is at a crossroad and that the Council is about to take decisions that will
profoundly affect the future role of the United Nations in Somalia.
The Security Council is faced with a critical decision in view of unusual
circumstances. It is essential for all Somali leaders to realize that the
responsibility for what will now happen to their country will rest squarely on
their shoulders.
You will need to respond to the overwhelming desire of the Somali people
for peace and reconciliation. This has been, for the past two and a half years,
the path that the United Nations has consistently urged the Somali leaders to
follow. At Addis Ababa in 1993 and in Nairobi in 1994 you had all agreed to do
so. There is no other path.
In this connection, the Security Council mission wishes to convey to the
Somali people, especially its leaders, a sense of the profound disappointment
felt by the international community at the lack of progress in achieving
political reconciliation and an improvement in the security conditions.
As you know, the Secretary-General has reported to the Security Council
that the political reconciliation process is at an impasse. The result has been
a vacuum of civil authority and governmental structure. This has left the
United Nations with no basis to underpin its efforts to help Somalia to emerge
from the present crisis. Security conditions have continuously deteriorated,
especially in Mogadishu, and the tragic toll in lives of peace-keepers and
relief workers and Somali personnel has continued to rise. As you are also
aware, the date already foreseen for termination of the United Nations peacekeeping mission (UNOSOM) is the end of March 1995. In the absence of adequate
Somali cooperation, the assumptions underlying the UNOSOM deployment in Somalia
have been fundamentally undermined and so have the prospects of achieving the
United Nations objectives as set out by the Security Council. In these
circumstances, continuation of UNOSOM beyond March 1995 cannot be justified.
This implies an orderly and progressive phasing out of the military
component of UNOSOM in advance of 31 March 1995. The Security Council mission
expects the Somali leaders to cooperate in creating the security conditions that
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 12

will facilitate the phasing-out process. Any lack of cooperation along these
lines would be likely to accelerate rather than retard this process. This
mission would welcome assurances that every effort will be made to ensure that
the security of United Nations personnel and assets will not be put at risk.
The termination of the UNOSOM mandate will not mean that the United Nations
will abandon Somalia. The United Nations will be ready to sustain a
facilitating or mediating political role beyond March 1995 if that is what the
Somali leaders want and if they are willing to cooperate with the United Nations
to that end.
For its part, the United Nations will continue to work with regional
organizations, in particular OAU, and with the Governments of neighbouring
countries to promote reconciliation in Somalia and the re-emergence of a civil
society there.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General has asked his Special Representative to
continue his efforts to help the Somali leaders to achieve national
reconciliation.
However, whether or not the continued efforts at a political settlement
bear fruit, the Security Council appeals to all Somali factions and clans to
forgo resort to violence as a means of sorting out their differences. The
people of Somalia have suffered enough. Their ordeal must come to an end. They
long for peace. A resumption of large-scale civil strife would be an
indescribable disaster which must be avoided.
In particular, it is essential for the Somali factions at this stage to
agree on convening a broad-based national reconciliation conference along the
lines set out in the Nairobi declaration of March 1994.
A conference without the participation of all 15 Somali factions that
signed the Nairobi declaration, plus the Somali National Movement (SNM), would
be a recipe for continued strife and violence and the United Nations could not
be a party to a divisive move of this kind. The mission urges all Somali
leaders to meet in an inclusive reconciliation conference and to get on with the
vital task of forming an interim Government.
The Security Council mission wishes to assure the Somali people that the
United Nations, together with its agencies and programmes, will do its best to
sustain humanitarian activities throughout Somalia and to encourage
non-governmental organizations to do likewise. But their ability to do so will
depend almost entirely on the degree of cooperation and security offered by
Somalis. Continued attacks and looting will make it impossible to carry on the
humanitarian activities effectively.
The United Nations will remain ready to provide, through its various
agencies, rehabilitation and construction assistance if the situation in Somalia
develops in such a way as to make that practicable. In this regard, the Unified
Task Force and UNOSOM take satisfaction in the fact that starvation was stopped
in Somalia through the joint efforts of the international community and many
Somalis.
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 13

Lastly, the Security Council mission wishes to remind the faction leaders
that the international community has made tremendous personnel and financial
commitments to Somalia. These commitments cannot continue indefinitely,
particularly in the absence of a meaningful improvement of the situation. The
Council must reassess its involvement in Somalia in the broad context of its
world-wide agenda. This is the thought that the mission wishes to impress upon
the Somali leaders.

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 14

Annex III
Programme of the Security Council mission to Somalia

Wednesday, 26 October 1994
1020 hours

Arrival at UNOSOM II headquarters

1040-1225 hours

Briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, H.E. Mr. James Victor Gbeho
Working lunch with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and senior members of UNOSOM II

1350-1550 hours

Meeting with Mr. Ali Mahdi and the Somali Salvation
Alliance (SSA)

1730-1955 hours

Briefing by the Force Commander of UNOSOM II,
General Aboo Samah Bin Aboo Bakar

Thursday, 27 October 1994
0800-0935 hours

Meeting with General Aidid, the Somali National Alliance
(SNA) and associated factions

1050-1110 hours

Press conference

1200-1320 hours

Meeting with United Nations agencies and international
NGOs
Working lunch with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and senior members of UNOSOM II
Transfer to Nairobi

2005-2030 hours

Press conference

2050-2130 hours

Meeting with representatives of the Horn of Africa Group
(Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Sudan)

2135-2215 hours

Meeting with members of the Somalia Aid Coordination
Body (SACB)

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 15

Annex IV
List of leaders present at the meeting with Mr. Ali Mahdi
26 October 1994
(titles as presented)

Mr. Ali Mahdi Mohamed

Interim President

Mr. Abdulkadir Zobe

Vice President

Gen. Mohamed Abshir Muse

Chairman, SSDF

Gen. Adan Abdullahi Nur

Chairman, SPM

Adv. Abdi Muse Mayo

Chairman, SDM

Mohamud Khalif

Vice-Chairman, SNF

Omar Hashi Adan

Vice-Chairman, USC/PM

Mohamed Ramdan Arbo

Chairman, SAMO

Adv. Mohamed Ragis

Chairman, SNU

Adv. Abdullahi Moallim

Head of USC delegate

Mohamed Abdi Hashi

Chairman, USP

Mr. Mukhtaar

Vice-Chairman, SSNM

Mr. Caana Nuug

Vice-Chairman, SDA

Abdinasir Ahmed Adan Serjito

Chairman, USC/SNA (Gyr. Habar Gedir)

Abdullahi Hirsi Drishe

Chairman, SSV (Saleeman/Habar Gedir)

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 16

Annex V
Memorandum dated 26 October from the Somali Salvation Alliance

To:

The Security Council delegation (by hand)
H.E. Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali
Secretary-General of the United Nations
New York

cc:

Ambassador Victor Gbeho
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Somalia
UNOSOM, Somalia

On behalf of the Somali Salvation Alliance (SSA), we submit to you this
memorandum exposing our views on the present political situation, reflecting the
deep aspirations of the vast majority of the Somali people who uphold peace,
nationalism and democracy and firmly reject all attempts to plunge Somalia back
into civil war, tribalism and military dictatorship.
We aim to highlight the relevant factors and crucial issues of the present
political situation, putting the emphasis on the indispensable active mediation
role that in our view the United Nations is to assume in the ongoing national
reconciliation process to ensure the achievement of a just and lasting solution
to Somalia’s political crisis, which is the common concern of our people and the
international community.
Furthermore, we would like to outline herewith our views on major issues of
national interest that need to be addressed together with concrete and practical
proposals to enhance the reconciliation process, overcome the present standstill
caused by the illogical attempt of a minority group to hijack the reconciliation
process and dictate its will to the majority. We oppose the present sterile
contraposition and animosity among the political factions and favour an
innovative problem-solving approach stemming from the mutual comprehension and
clear understanding that today the common and unique objective of all patriotic
and peace-loving people is to keep the Somali nation from falling back again
into the horrors of civil war and starvation.
We would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Somali people and
the political organizations members of our Alliance, to express to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, H.E. Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and to
his assistants, to the Security Council and to the member countries that have
contributed in different ways to the United Nations mission in Somalia, in
particular to the people and Government of the United States of America, our
deep gratitude and sincere appreciation for the historic humanitarian
intervention and peace mission to rescue our people and assist Somalia to stand
again on its feet and regain its legitimate position among the family of
nations.

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 17

ON UNOSOM’S EARLY WITHDRAWAL FROM SOMALIA
In our view today Somalia is again at the crossroads. The choice is
between genuine reconciliation and permanent confrontation, lasting peace and
endless interclan fighting, justice and equality, and total dismemberment of the
Somali nation.
The political climate and the security situation in the capital, Mogadishu,
and in the country as a whole that showed tangible progress at the beginning of
this year has been negatively affected externally by the pressures for the early
withdrawal of UNOSOM and internally by the renewed attempt of the SNA group,
encouraged by the appeasement tactics of UNOSOM officials, to transform
unilaterally the planned national reconciliation conference into a launching pad
for the self-proclamation of its military dictatorship.
Clearly the pressures for the abandonment of Somalia in this crucial moment
will only favour the forces that oppose the return of Somalia to peace and
democracy and that are committed to frustrating the successful accomplishment of
the United Nations mission in Somalia and the reinstatement of the United
Nations sovereignty and the establishment of a genuine Government of national
unity.
The SSA leadership would like to inform the United Nations Security Council
mission of the encouraging new positive trends, currently under way, towards the
peaceful settlement of the existing political differences through a genuinely
broad-based national reconciliation process. In particular we would like to
mention here the recent USC/SNA conference and the election of Abdinasir Mohamed
Adan "Serjito" as the Chairman of USC/SNA.
We would like to underline to the Security Council mission the fact that
UNOSOM’s early withdrawal will wholly nullify all the valuable achievements that
cost the international community a high toll in human lives and massive inputs
of material and financial resources.

ON UNOSOM’S MISTAKES, SHORTCOMINGS AND DEVIATIONS
We are of the opinion that the stubborn opposition and obstruction of the
SNA group to the implementation of the Addis Ababa agreements and the Nairobi
Conference declaration is the root cause of the present stalemate. The
persistent aggressive actions carried out by the SNA against several Somali
clans in the central and southern regions, pursuing their declared objectives of
territorial expansion, disrupted the progress so far made and the gradual return
to normal life achieved by the interclan peace and reconciliation agreements
reached by the clan traditional leaders and elders at the regional level, in the
central regions, Mogadishu, Kismayo, Dhobley, etc.
The recent events in Hiran region and in Lower Shabelle are clear proof of
the escalation of the subversive activities of the SNA, culminating in the
unprovoked attack against the UNOSOM military contingents in Beled Weyn and
Merka.

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 18

We are seriously disappointed and concerned by UNOSOM officials’ continued
appeasement attitude and constant submission to SNA group’s unchallenged
deceptive tactics and diktats to the extent of renouncing its proper active
mediation role in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations Security
Council. In our view this is based on long-standing misunderstanding and
misinterpretation of the basic realities of the Somali political situation and
society, which erroneously overestimated the role of General Aidid and the SNA
group and based UNOSOM’s decisions on the baseless assumption of SNA group’s
"key role" in the solution of Somalia’s political crisis. On the contrary,
UNOSOM persistently neglected the broad popular support enjoyed by the SSA
political organizations throughout the country and systematically downplayed the
fundamental role and the principled stand of these political organizations in
favour of a peaceful settlement and the rebuilding of Somalia on a new
democratic basis.
Notwithstanding the fact that in such a large and complex mission like
UNOSOM, errors and deviations are possible, the deviations and shortcomings on
the part of UNOSOM officials are beyond any reasonable expectation and are
actually jeopardizing the achievement of the ultimate objectives of its mission.
In fact, since the early stage of UNOSOM I, UNOSOM officials constantly
pursued a policy of employing in key and sensitive positions officials connected
with General Aidid and the SNA group. In spite of the existing hostilities
between the SNA group and UNOSOM, General Aidid supporters enjoyed more than
85 per cent of the benefits earmarked for the Somali population in terms of
employment opportunities, contract awards and project implementation, house and
vehicles’ rental.
The officially admitted theft of 4 million United States dollars is evident
proof of UNOSOM mismanagement and unaccountability, benefiting on the other hand
Aidid’s group and penalizing the majority.
The recent SNA attack against the UNOSOM Zimbabwean contingent in
Beled Weyn, and the looting of their weapons, ammunitions and military vehicles,
met a bland verbal protest and is still unanswered. This behaviour casts
serious doubts on UNOSOM officials’ connivance with the SNA group, considering
the fact that the Zimbabwean contingent of 168 soldiers was not only promptly
supported but was ordered to a humiliating surrender, and the call for the
immediate return of the weapons, ammunition and military vehicles remained empty
words to keep quiet internal and international public opinion.
Furthermore, the fuel used by the SNA in their military attack against
Beled Weyn was airlifted by UNOSOM to Galkayo together with a consistent number
of persons under the pretext of logistical support to a non-existing interclan
reconciliation meeting in Mudug region and the cover of transporting displaced
people to their district of origin. The same happened in Merka and Brava in the
Lower Shabelle region where UNOSOM military contingents stationed there stepped
aside and passively assisted SNA aggression against the civilian population of
these towns.
Moreover, UNOSOM officials, deviating from their previous stand of
impartiality and respect for Somali political organizations’ autonomy as per the
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 19

Addis Ababa agreements, unexpectedly interfered in the internal affairs of SSDF
by endorsing arbitrarily the self-appointment of Colonel Abdullahi Yusuf as
Chairman of SSDF in open contrast with the decisions of the SSDF traditional
leaders confirming General Mohamed Abshir Muse as the legitimate interim
Chairman of SSDF for a period of one year.
This interference will only contribute to further confusing the present
situation, together with the unilateral decision of UNOSOM officials to assign
to Colonel Abdullahi Yusuf a "mediation role" without the prior consensus of the
concerned political organizations and their leaders.
The UNOSOM officials are passively observing the SNA group’s manoeuvres and
attempting to replace three political organizations signatories of the Addis
Ababa and Nairobi agreements, namely SAMO, SNU and SSNM, and their legitimate
leaders, with three prefabricated SNA affiliations with the complicity of the
SNA "appointed Chairmen".
We also strongly object to the channelling of the allocated fund for the
Sool and Sanaag regions through the secessionist authority of the north-west.
By doing so we feel that UNOSOM violates both United Nations Security Council
resolution 897 (1994) and the recommendations of the donors at the fourth
humanitarian conference held in Addis Ababa in December 1993.
UNOSOM’s response concerning this subject was that it was pressured by the
United Kingdom Government through its mission at United Nations Headquarters.

ON THE NATIONAL RECONCILIATION PROCESS
The UNOSOM policy of appeasement towards SNA is the cause of the continuous
postponement of the Preparatory Meeting of the National Reconciliation
Conference planned for 15 April 1994 and the subsequent convening of the
National Reconciliation Conference on 15 May 1994 in accordance with the Nairobi
Conference declaration of last March.
UNOSOM submitted to the unilateral position advanced by the SNA group under
the pretext of the indispensable conclusions of the fifth SSDF Congress in
Qardho, the Absame Conference in Dhobley and the SNM request to participate in
the national reconciliation process after they reversed their former
secessionist stand and now advocated the unity of the country on a federal
basis.
The ultimate objective of these delay tactics advanced by General Aidid and
accepted by UNOSOM aimed to gain time for his political manoeuvres directed to
secure the recognition of the "appointments" of Colonel Abdullahi Yusuf as SSDF
Chairman, of Colonel Omar Jess as Chairman of the "unified" SPM and of
Abdurahman Ahmed Ali as the SNM Chairman.
The above manoeuvres and the clear renunciation by UNOSOM of its active
mediation role encouraged General Aidid and the SNA group to embark on a
unilateral call for the convening of a national reconciliation conference to

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 20

deliberate under their dictate in an attempt to grab political power through
undemocratic and deceptive tactics.
We clearly state here that SSA firmly opposes the above manoeuvres and the
unilateral SNA call for the convening of a national reconciliation conference
organized by it. Our principled stand has always been and still remains the
following:
(a) The National Reconciliation Conference should be convened under the
auspices of the United Nations and with its active mediation to ensure that its
deliberations and agreements will be recognized and guaranteed by the United
Nations and the international community;
(b) The National Reconciliation Conference should be preceded by a
Preparatory Meeting to decide jointly the date, venue, participation criteria,
procedures, chairing, etc.;
(c) Participation in the National Reconciliation Conference will be
limited to the following 16 political organizations: the 15 political
organizations signatories of the Addis Ababa agreements and Nairobi Conference
declaration of March 1994 and SNM;
(d) The political organizations’ delegations should include, among others,
political leaders, intellectuals, traditional religious chiefs, community elders
and women’s groups to ensure the broad participation of all social strata;
(e) The earliest date for the convening of the preparatory meeting could
be the beginning of November and the National Reconciliation Conference about
20 November. A final decision should be made jointly by all the 16 political
organizations after the positive conclusion of their ongoing consultations;
(f) We reiterate our firm commitment to participate in a United Nationssponsored national reconciliation conference.
We strongly recommend the United Nations Security Council mission to ensure
the strict adherence by UNOSOM of the spirit and letter of the Security Council
resolutions and support UNOSOM to assume an active mediation role based on
genuine impartiality among all Somali political factions in accordance with the
agreements of Addis Ababa and Nairobi with the ultimate objective of restoring
peace, stability and democracy.
The National Reconciliation Conference will have the priority objectives of
reconciling existing political differences on major issues of national interest
and pave the way for the establishment of a central Government of national unity
that will lead Somalia to free and fair democratic elections within about two
years.
In all stages - the consultations, preparatory meeting and during the
conference itself - UNOSOM should play an active role of mediator and
monitoring, to ensure the adherence of the conference to the agreements of Addis
Ababa and Nairobi signed by all the participants. The Conference should reach
concrete and functional solutions to the following key issues:
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 21

(a) The future constitutional setup of the Somali State; unitary
State/federation, parliamentarian/presidential;
(b) Composition and powers of new State organs: presidency/parliament/
central Government/judiciary;
(c) Regional autonomy: power of the autonomous regions and balance of
power between the central Government and the regions.
The Conference should deliberate upon and set up specific guarantees
against the restoration of military dictatorship and should dissipate reciprocal
suspicion and distrust, and reassure specifically the minority social groups and
communities about their legitimate worries by setting up also guarantees against
clan hegemony that is a legacy of the past dictatorial regime.

ON THE IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM AND GUARANTEES
The setting up of an effective implementation mechanism is an issue of
particular concern for the success of the National Conference. The failures and
shortcomings of the previous reconciliation conference were due to the lack of
an appropriate implementation mechanism agreed upon to follow up and monitor the
effective implementation of the agreements reached. Specific and adequate
guarantees are indispensable safeguards against violations and breaches of
commitments.
In case the peace process does fail, we strongly propose that a Cambodia
type of United Nations administration be imposed on Somalia for a period not
less than three years so that law and order can be retained. The militia must
be disarmed and demining is vitally important. Also this administration will
lead Somalia to civic elections.

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 22

Annex VI
List of leaders present at the meeting with General Aidid
27 October 1994
(titles as presented)

Mohamed Farah Aidid

Chairman, USC/SNA

Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed

Chairman, SSDF

Ahmed Omar Jess

Chairman, SPM/SNA

Mohamed Qanyare Afrah

Chairman, USC

Mohamed Nur Aliyo

Chairman, SDM/SNA

Abdiaziz Sheik Yusuf

Chairman, SSNM/SNA

Sheikh Jama Haji Hussein

Chairman, SAMO

Ismail Bubu Hurreh

Vice-Chairman, SNM

Abdurahman Dualeh Ali

Chairman, USF

Ali Ismail Abdi

Chairman, SNDU

Omar Mungani Aweys

Chairman, SNU

Ahmed Guure Adan

USP

Mohamed Farah Abdullahi

Chairman, SDA

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 23

Annex VII
Memorandum dated 27 October 1994 submitted to the Security
Council mission to Somalia by the 13 signatories

1.
We wish to take this opportunity to welcome warmly the Security Council
mission to Somalia, and would like to express our deep appreciation for the
continued efforts of the Security Council to assist the Somali people to resolve
their political differences. We also wish to express to the delegation our
sincere commitment to work towards the achievement of a durable political
settlement to restore peace and security in our country and to re-establish in
it a broad-based Government which can, with the cooperation of the international
community, begin to rehabilitate and reconstruct the economic and social fabric
of our society.
2.
We are happy to note that the mission has arrived in Somalia at a time when
the myth that Somalis were hopelessly divided into two opposing camps has been
proven wrong by the recent encouraging developments. The mission has arrived
when most of the political leaders representing the vast majority of the people
have agreed to resolve their political differences and have taken a common
political stand as reflected by the Mogadishu memorandum of 14 October 1994,
signed by 12 of the 16 political organizations.
3.
We are happy to inform you today that peace and stability as well as a
sense of national reawakening are materializing throughout the whole of Somalia,
encompassing the northern and southern regions of the country, making the fear
of national disintegration, secession and clan warfare recede into the shadows
of history, and moving forward the peace process and the prospects for a
comprehensive national reconciliation conference. Although the Somali political
organizations that are present with you today have contributed to the creation
of this hopeful atmosphere, we must admit that it is our people, the Somali
masses, whose popular will to overcome the trepidations of civil war and
national chaos, has contributed the most to the materialization of this new era
that is beginning to dawn in Somalia. The sustained pressure of the
international community to prod us towards making peace instead of war has also
contributed its share towards the creation of this atmosphere of dialogue and
discussion.
4.
The Somali political organizations have come a long way from the politics
of the gun to the politics of dialogue and discussions and have contributed a
great deal towards making peace realizable and security attainable. The
political organizations held two major conferences since the beginning of 1993.
In the Addis Ababa agreement of 27 March 1993, the Somali political
organizations reached an agreement to stop hostilities, disarm the feuding
groups and make arrangements that could have led towards the establishment of a
transitional national council. In the Nairobi declaration of 24 March 1994 it
was agreed to make the necessary arrangements to form a transitional government.
In addition to these two major conferences, the political organizations held a
series of meetings at the local, district and regional levels to move forward
the peace process as well as to reverse the tide of secession in the north of
the country in a peaceful manner. Among these meetings were:
/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 24

(a) The central region peace conference, held successfully in Mogadishu on
4 June 1993 between SSDF, SNDU and SNA;
(b) The Lower Juba reconciliation conference, held in Kismayo on
4 June 1994;
(c)

The Hirab peace conference, held in Mogadishu in January 1994;

(d) The Absame reconciliation conference, held in Dobley in JuneJuly 1994;
(e) The Murusade-Habargidir peace conference, held in Mogadishu in
June 1994;
(f) The SNM conference with SNA and the announcement of the end of the
secession of the north from the rest of the country on 29 April 1994;
(g) The SNM, SDA, USF and USP northern-based political organizations’
Djibouti meeting, from 13-17 August 1994;
(h) The consultations and subsequent declaration of the 12 political
organizations to hold a national reconciliation conference on 27 October 1994.
5.
The convening of this reconciliation conference is in many ways the
culmination of the efforts of the Somali political organizations and the United
Nations under the auspices of the Security Council to maintain national unity
and find a sustainable political settlement for the Somali problem as a
prerequisite for restoring peace and security, re-establishing central
government structures and services, and commencing the process of rehabilitation
and reconstruction of our country. The conference will work towards the
formation of a broad-based transitional national Government with a federal
structure to be agreed upon and ratified by the transitional national mechanism
as well as a national reconstruction plan with the vision, versatility and
applicability necessary to put it into action. We will need the support of the
international community and particularly that of the United Nations to work out
the details of this plan as well as to find the means to execute it
successfully.
6.
The convening of this reconciliation conference is also a continuation of
the efforts we have made to find a durable political settlement to our problem
in the Addis Ababa and Nairobi conferences. The criteria for participation in
this conference would therefore be based on the following understanding:
(a) Participant organizations must be members of the 15 signatory
political factions of the Addis Ababa agreement of 27 March 1993, plus the
participation of SNM as stipulated in the above agreement;
(b) It is important to note here that the agreement specifies that it is
the signatory factions as factions per se rather than as individual names that
signed for the factions that carry the authority of representation;

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 25

(c) In case of change of leadership through a democratic process or means
(elections) in any particular faction, the newly elected leader of that faction
will thereafter be the legitimate representative leader of the faction in the
reconciliation conference, in accordance with the constitution of that faction.
7.
As previously agreed upon and accordingly announced on 14 October 1994, the
opening of the National Reconciliation Conference was scheduled to take place on
27 October 1994. However, in deference to the request of the Security Council
mission to Somalia to meet with the Somali political leaders on 27 October 1994,
and in consideration of the wishes of some Somali faction leaders as well as to
the appeal of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Somalia, we
decided to reschedule the opening date of the National Reconciliation Conference
to take place on 1 November 1994. We believe that this postponement will
provide all concerned parties sufficient time to express their views on this
critically important conference and prepare themselves adequately for it. We
call upon all our Somali brothers to respond positively to this gesture and join
us in participating in this conference where the problems facing Somalia will be
discussed and resolved. We request the international community to give its
support and assistance to this forthcoming National Reconciliation Conference.
8.
We wish to inform the distinguished members of the mission that, after the
opening ceremony of the conference, we will continue consultations with
political leaders who are not in the conference until a common understanding on
major political issues is achieved. We reject violence as a means of settling
disputes between political factions, and we put a high premium on the process of
reconciliation through discussions and dialogue. To bring about this process,
over 1,000 delegates, observers and guests will attend the conference,
representing every segment of the Somali society, including clan elders,
religious leaders, women, youth, intellectuals, professionals and local
non-governmental organizations.
9.
We would like to reiterate our commitment to finding a durable settlement
to our current problem. We also believe in the democratic process and adhere to
it in resolving national issues. It is the acceptance of the rights of the
majority and the protection of the rights of the minority which underlies this
process. We constitute 13 organizations of the constituent signatory members of
the Addis Ababa and Nairobi agreements. Nevertheless, we are calling upon the
remaining three members to join us so that together we could shoulder the
responsibility of saving our nation from chaos, warfare and disintegration.

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 26

Signatories

1.

SAMO

Sheikh Jama Haji Hussein

Chairman

2.

SDA

Mohamed Farah Abdullahi

Chairman

3.

SDM (SNA)

Mohamed Nur Aliyo

Chairman

4.

SNDU

Ali Ismail Abdi

Chairman

5.

SNM

Abdirahman Ahmed Ali

Chairman

6.

SNU

Omar Mungani Aweys

Chairman

7.

SPM (SNA)

Ahmed Omar Jess

Chairman

8.

SSDF

Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed

Chairman

9.

SSNM

Abdiaziz Sheik Yusuf

Chairman

10.

USC (SNA)

Mohamed Farah Aidid

Chairman

11.

USC

Mohamed Qanyare Afrah

Chairman

12.

USF

Abdurahman Dualeh Ali

Chairman

13.

USP

Ahmed Guure Adan

Chairman

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 27

Annex VIII
List of ambassadors of the Horn of Africa countries

1.

Ambassador of Djibouti to Kenya

H.E. Saleh Haji Farah Dirir

2.

Ambassador of Ethiopia to Kenya

H.E. Ofato Alew

3.

Ambassador of Ethiopia and
the Horn of Africa Standing
Committee’s envoy to Somalia

H.E. Lissane Yohannes

4.

Ambassador of Eritrea to Kenya

H.E. Beyene Russom

5.

Ambassador of the Sudan to Kenya

H.E. Elsir Mohammed Ahmed

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 28

Annex IX
List of participants: United Nations agencies and
international NGOs

1.

Talib Ali

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations-Somalia Operation

2.

M. Devadoss

United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization-Somalia

3.

Robert Hagan

World Health Organization-Somalia

4.

Raymond A. Collins

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees-Mogadishu

5.

E. Hounsokou

UNHCR

6.

Erling Dessau

United Nations Development Programme-Somalia

7.

Piet Winnubst

World Food Programme headquarters

8.

Ferdinando Zanusso

WFP-Somalia

9.

Raymond Janssens

United Nations Children’s Fund headquarters

10.

Pierce Gerety

UNICEF Somalia

11.

Beverly Irwin

WorldVision International

12.

David Neff

Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere, Inc.
(CARE)

13.

Korky Schaetker

International Medical Corps

14.

Julian Bauer

ECOTERRA International

15.

Robert Meredith

World Concern

16.

Ramos Artiach

Médecins sans frontières-Spain

17.

Mohamed Abdirahman

American Friends Service Committee

18.

Alwahab M. Mohamed

International Islamic Relief Organization (IIRO)

19.

Farah Sheikh

African Muslim Agency (AMA)

20.

Mahamud Ahmed

Al-Hamramain Islamic Foundation (HIF)

21.

Ahmed Abdulle

CARE

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 29

22.

Sukyung Yoon

Hisan

23.

Bill Condie

UNICEF

24.

Ibrahim Koroma

United Nations Volunteers/UNDP

25.

Edward Johns

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

26.

Joe Brunswig

International Civil Aviation Organization

27.

Ken Perkins

International Development and Relief Board (IDRB)

28.

Omar A. Abdi

Muwafaq Charity Foundation (MCF)

29.

J. F. Pietri

Action Internationale contre la Faim

30.

Nancy Smith

Oxfam-UK

31.

Nigel Tricks

Daikonia Caritas Germany (DCG)

32.

De Mey Piet

Comitato Internazionale per lo Sviluppo (CISP)

33.

Ga’al Rashid

CISP

34.

Savorani Guido

CISP

35.

Ali Sheikh Arhi

Somali National Consortium (SNC)

36.

Ahmed Mohamed Ahmed

SNC

37.

Dr. Gutaale

SNC

/...

S/1994/1245
English
Page 30

Annex X
List of participants:

SACB Security Subcommittee

Mr. Sigurd Illing, Chairman, SACB Standing Committee European Commission,
Special Envoy to Somalia
Mr. Giovanni Brauzzi, Vice-Chairman, SACB Standing Committee, Counsellor,
Italian Embassy
Mr. Gerry McCrudden, First Secretary, British High Commission
Mr. Ron Ullrich, Director, United States Agency for International Development,
Somalia
Mr. Jack Hjelt, Deputy Director, United States Agency for International
Development, Somalia
Mr. Basi Papadopoulos, Head of Unit, Horn of Africa, European Commission
H.E. Mr. Lissane Yohannes, Horn of Africa Standing Committee
Mr. Erling Dessau, Resident Representative, UNDP, Somalia
Mr. S. Varadachary, Director, United Nations Development Office for Somalia
Mr. Alexandros Yannis, Personal Assistant to the Chairman, SACB Standing
Committee
2-3 NGO representatives

-----
