A/66/PV.58

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

58

th plenary meeting
Friday, 11 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Thomson
(Fiji), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 73 and 74
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
sixteenth annual report of the International
Tribunal (A/66/209)
Report of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
eighteenth annual report of the International
Tribunal (A/66/210)
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to take note of the sixteenth
annual report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda?

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to take note of the eighteenth
annual report of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I now call on Judge
Khalida Rachid Khan, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Ms. Khan (International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda): First of all, I would like to extend my sincere
congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Nassir
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser of Qatar on his election as
President of the General Assembly and to wish him a
successful tour of duty.
It is a great honour for me to address the
members of the General Assembly and to present the
sixteenth annual report (A/66/209) of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for the first time
since my election as President of the Tribunal in May
2011. I am pleased to report that this will most likely
be the second-to-last speech that the President of the
Tribunal makes to the General Assembly with respect
to the annual report.
As I will shortly describe in greater detail, the
Tribunal’s work is almost complete. In the last year, we
have accomplished so very much. However, our work
is not yet finished, and the assistance of the
international community is required to ensure that there
is no impunity gap.

It was so decided.
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-58963 (E)

*1158963*

A/66/PV.58

I will first summarize the work undertaken at the
Tribunal, and then I will address some of our
remaining challenges.
During the reporting period, from 1 July 2010 to
30 June 2011, the Tribunal rendered six trial
judgements and four appeals judgements, involving
18 accused. As of today, the total number of people
whose judgements have been completed at the trial
level is now 70 and, at the appellate level, 37. Only
five trial judgements involving six accused remain to
be delivered. In June 2011, the Tribunal rendered a
historic judgement in the Butare case involving six
accused — the largest in the history of the Tribunal.
Since July 2011, the Tribunal has rendered the secondto-last multi-accused judgement in the case of
Bizimungu et al. with respect to four accused. Next
week, judgement will be rendered in the Ndahimana
case, and, before the end of the year, judgement will
also be rendered in the final multi-accused case,
Karemera et al. Currently, only one case remains at the
evidence phase, and it is expected to finish by early
2012. After December, judgement will remain to be
rendered in only three single-accused cases. Trial work
is due to be finished by the end of the second quarter of
2012, and appeals work is to be finished by early 2014.
The Trial Chambers have referred Jean Bosco
Uwinkindi’s case to Rwanda for prosecution; this is the
first time that such a referral has occurred. Rwanda
remains the focus of referrals, although other options
for referral countries are being explored. We await the
forthcoming decision of the Appeals Chamber
regarding this referral. The Tribunal continues to
support activities to further strengthen the Rwandan
judiciary, in particular with respect to witness
protection.
As described in our completion strategy reports,
our efforts in the management of the pretrial and trial
phases have allowed us, in the course of the past few
years, to significantly reduce the time between the
arrest of an accused and the judgement, without
compromising the fair-trial rights of the accused.
The 12 permanent judges and nine ad litem
judges in the Trial and Appeals Chambers continue to
work tirelessly to complete the Tribunal’s work. We
would not be at such an advanced stage of completion
of our work without the efforts of the ad litem judges.
The General Assembly, by its resolution 65/258,
reviewed the terms and conditions of service of ad

2

litem judges and granted a one-time ex gratia payment
to those ad litem judges who have been in full-time,
uninterrupted service for longer than three years. Most
recently, Security Council resolution 1995 (2011)
granted ad litem judges the ability to run for and vote
in elections for the President and Vice-President of the
ICTR. The Tribunal would like to thank the members
of the General Assembly and the Security Council for
recognizing,
through
those
resolutions,
the
contributions made by ad litem judges.
The Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan Jallow, who was
recently reappointed, and his Office have been focused
on efforts to arrest the remaining fugitives, conduct
remaining trials and appeals, prepare records for
transfer to the residual mechanism, and provide mutual
assistance to national prosecuting authorities. The
number of requests for assistance from Member States
continues to increase, and this support is crucial
because national prosecuting authorities will have to
continue the fight against impunity once the Tribunal
has closed down. It is also essential that the residual
mechanism continue this support.
State cooperation remains of fundamental
importance to the Tribunal’s work. The efforts of the
tracking team, in cooperation with national authorities,
led to the arrest of one fugitive, Bernard Munyagishari,
in May 2011 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The number of remaining fugitives is now down to
nine. This includes three of the most high-ranking
accused: Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana. In order to help ensure that
evidence is still available when they are arrested,
preservation of evidence proceedings under rule 71 bis
have begun for Kabuga and Mpiranya, and proceedings
in relation to Bizimana are slated to begin this month.
As we have done many times, we call upon all
States — especially the States of the Great Lakes
region, in particular Kenya — to intensify their
cooperation with the Tribunal and to render all
necessary assistance so that the remaining fugitives can
be arrested. These fugitives, who are accused of the
most terrible crimes, must be arrested to send a strong
message to the world that evading justice is not an
option.
The Registrar, Mr. Adama Dieng, continued to
work with Member States on a number of matters,
ranging from the enforcement of sentences to the
relocation of persons acquitted by the Tribunals and

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

those who have finished serving their sentences.
Following the recent trial judgment in the case of
Bizimungu et al., the number of acquitted persons
remaining under the protection of the Tribunal has
increased from three to five. Acquitted persons reside
in a safe house in Arusha, with no travel documents,
separated from their families, without access to
employment and with limited freedom of movement.
One acquitted person has been there for more than five
years since the Appeals Chamber confirmed his
acquittal.
The rule of law requires that those who have been
lawfully acquitted be able to recommence their lives in
full enjoyment of their rights. However, this has not
been implemented for persons acquitted by the ICTR,
as there is no formal mechanism to secure the support
of Member States to accept these individuals. I
therefore ask for the renewed cooperation of Member
States and the Security Council to make this possible.
Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), which
established the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, requests the Secretary-General to
make the practical arrangements necessary for the
commencement of the Mechanism’s operations, which,
I recall, will begin on 1 July 2012 for the Arusha
Branch of the Mechanism. All organs of the Tribunal
are working vigorously to ensure a smooth transition to
a small and efficient Residual Mechanism under the
coordination of the Office of Legal Affairs (OLA) and
in close cooperation with the ICTY.
Among the main transition activities, the
Tribunals provided substantive inputs to the first
budget proposal of the Mechanism, which will be
presented to the General Assembly for approval. Both
Tribunals also provided detailed comments on OLA’s
draft Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the
Mechanism. That draft is being reviewed by Member
States, and we expect that the Tribunals will be
engaged in a second round of comments in the course
of November in order to finalize the draft Rules by the
end of the year.
Resolution 1966 (2010) entrusts the Mechanism
with the responsibility of managing the Tribunals’
archives. The archives will serve as a lasting reminder
of the work of the Tribunals and will help ensure that
the international community remains conscious of the
need to bring the perpetrators of horrific crimes to
justice and of the need to prevent such heinous crimes.

11-58963

Furthermore, I would like to reaffirm the
Tribunals’ strongly held views that Residual
Mechanism staff should be considered as United
Nations Secretariat staff. That would assist in the
smooth and efficient functioning of the Mechanism by
attracting and retaining the most qualified staff. I hope
Member States will join me in supporting this
important determination.
Despite the momentous progress that has been
made this year, there are still a number of obstacles
preventing the timely completion of the Tribunal’s
work. In particular, staff attrition continues to pose a
significant challenge. As the Tribunal prepares to
transition to the Residual Mechanism next year, many
experienced staff members have left for more
permanent jobs at other institutions. These departures
constitute an important loss of experience and
institutional memory. It is difficult to fill vacancies and
attract enough efficient and qualified candidates, since
most of the available contracts are of a temporary
nature. The uncertainty inherent in temporary contracts
affects morale and productivity at the Tribunal.
Furthermore, many temporary contracts will have to be
extended beyond the current prescribed limits.
In resolution 1995 (2011), the Security Council
reiterated its call upon the relevant United Nations
bodies to intensify cooperation with the secretariat and
the Registrar of the Tribunal to find solutions to the
staffing situation. Although those are problems
inherent in any closing institution, there are ways to
combat the extreme staff attrition occurring at the
Tribunal.
Lastly, as the sun sets on the Tribunal, I would
like to raise the essential issue of the legacy that the
Tribunals will leave for the future of international law.
While some excellent projects have been carried out to
preserve our work in the consciousness of the
international community, it is our responsibility to
collect and share the most important aspects of the
work of the Tribunal before it closes its doors forever.
If resources are not allocated to preserve our
legacy, we are in danger of losing the lessons learned
by an institution that has helped to shape international
law. As our last staff members leave, we lose our
collective experience and memory. If that memory is
not captured now, it will be very difficult to retrieve in
the future. In December, we will be presenting a more

3

A/66/PV.58

comprehensive plan for legacy projects. We hope you
will support them.

transferred to the Tribunal, after having evaded justice
for seven years.

It has been a great pleasure and honour to address
the Members of the Assembly for the first time. On
behalf of the entire Tribunal, I want to express our
gratitude for the support that the Governments of
Member States have shown us over the past 17 years.
Although our work is almost complete, it is not yet
over. The Tribunal was created with the goal of ending
impunity for crimes committed during the Rwandan
genocide. Much progress has been made towards that
goal, but we require the help of the Member States to
finish our mandate.

The arrests of Mladić and Hadžić are a milestone
in the Tribunal’s history and brings us closer to the
successful completion of our mandate. With the trial of
the last two fugitives, all persons indicted by the
Prosecutor will face the judicial process, and the
Tribunal will be removing yet another brick in the wall
of impunity.

The Acting President: I now call on Mr. Patrick
Lipton Robinson, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Robinson (International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia): I would first like to congratulate
the President on his assumption of the presidency of
the General Assembly and to express my gratitude for
his country’s steadfast support for the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY).
It is an honour to appear before the Assembly
today in my capacity as President of the Tribunal and
to present to it the Tribunal’s eighteenth annual report
(see A/66/210).
At present, two people indicted by the Tribunal
are at the pretrial stage, 16 are on trial and 17 are in
appeal proceedings. In the past year, the Trial
Chambers delivered judgements in the Gotovina et al.,
Ðorđević, and Perišić cases. The Appeals Chamber
delivered one judgement on review in the Šljivančanin
case and one appeal judgement in the Hartmann case.
To date, the Tribunal has concluded proceedings
against 126 of the 161 persons indicted by the
Tribunal.
On 26 May 2011, Ratko Mladić was arrested in
Serbia, having evaded justice for 16 years. He had been
indicted in 1995 by the Office of the Prosecutor for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
allegedly committed between 1992 and 1995, during
the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 31 May,
Mladić was transferred to The Hague, where he will
face trial. Shortly after Mladić’s arrest, the last
remaining fugitive, Goran Hadžić, was arrested and

4

The Tribunal continues to take all measures
possible to expedite its trials without sacrificing due
process. Over the years, it has kept its procedures
under continual review and has introduced a variety of
reforms in order to improve its work.
But as the Tribunal nears the end of its mandate,
highly qualified and essential staff continue to leave at
alarming rates for more secure employment elsewhere.
The loss of experienced staff has significantly
impacted proceedings and placed an onerous burden on
the remaining staff, and it will place a much heavier
financial burden on the international community in the
long run.
Despite a resolution adopted by the General
Assembly and three by the Security Council aimed at
encouraging the adoption of retention incentives by the
United Nations Secretariat for the Tribunal’s staff, no
significant results have been achieved. The Tribunal is
still seeking support for two measures that will assist in
retaining and replacing its staff.
First, it is essential that consideration be given to
a retention incentive for the Tribunal’s long-serving
and loyal staff members. It is proposed that only staff
members who have more than five years of continuous
service and who remain until their posts are abolished
would qualify for the incentive. In 2008, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
endorsed a retention incentive, and the report of the
Secretary-General on this issue (A/62/681) included
calculations demonstrating that the eventual cost would
be more than offset by the savings associated with
reduced turnover rates in terms of lower rotation and
higher productivity and efficiency.
Providing staff members with a direct incentive
to stay until the abolition date of their posts has proved
highly effective in other downsizing organizations.
Moreover, in the long run, the retention of experienced
staff is the most efficient and cost-effective approach

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

for the Tribunal, because the cost of replacing staff
who leave is greater than that associated with
providing the proposed retention incentive.
Secondly, with the Tribunal reaching the end of
its work, it is likely that the rate of staff attrition will
accelerate if effective action is not taken. It is therefore
necessary for the Tribunal to have mechanisms in place
to allow it to quickly and effectively replace staff in
critical positions.
The Tribunal has been fortunate to be able to
attract a number of highly qualified interns, some of
whom would make ideal candidates for P-2 posts. This
is particularly true in Chambers, where there is high
attrition among junior staff and considerable time is
required for new staff to familiarize themselves with
the work of Chambers. Unfortunately, under current
regulations, interns cannot apply for professional posts
within six months of the completion of their
internships.
The Tribunal therefore needs a waiver of the
relevant regulations so that it can tap this resource and
expand its pool of qualified and experienced
candidates. This would have a direct and positive
impact on the expeditious completion of trial and
appellate activity. There would be no adverse financial
consequences of waiving the six-month rule, and
former interns would have to apply through the regular
Inspira staff selection process. The Office of Human
Resources Management has indicated that it does not
have any objection to the waiver of the six-month
break-in-service requirement for interns before they
can apply for ICTY posts. The Tribunal therefore
renews its plea for the international community to
exercise foresight and assist the Tribunal with
measures to retain and replace its staff. The longer the
problem continues, the longer the work of the Tribunal
will be extended, and the more money it will cost the
international community in the long run.
The second area in which we need the support of
the Member States of the General Assembly involves
the establishment of a victims’ trust fund. In my
previous reports to the Security Council, I raised the
need for the compensation of victims and witnesses.
More than 6,900 witnesses and accompanying persons
from all over the world have been called to appear
before the Tribunal. Without the courage of those
witnesses to step forward and give evidence, there
would be no trials, and impunity would reign. The

11-58963

victims of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia have a
right to compensation under international law for the
crimes committed against them. I have previously
called upon the Security Council to establish a trust
fund for victims of crimes falling within the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction, and thus to breathe life into the General
Assembly’s Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice
for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power of
29 November 1985.
The Tribunal has taken certain initiatives to
establish a system for providing assistance and support
to victims. I wish to announce what may be described
as the achievement of the first step in that process,
namely, that the International Organization for
Migration has secured funding to carry out a
comprehensive assessment study aimed at providing
guidance to the Tribunal on appropriate and feasible
victim assistance measures and possible means of
financing the same. I stress that the measures
envisaged will not impose any obligations upon States
to provide funding, but that they rather contemplate
voluntary contributions. That would go some way
towards bringing the position of the Tribunal somewhat
closer to the International Criminal Court, which has a
trust fund for its victims. The Tribunal cannot, through
the rendering of its judgements alone, bring peace and
reconciliation to the region. Other remedies must
complement the criminal trials if lasting peace is to be
achieved. One such remedy should be adequate
assistance to the victims for their suffering. I would
like to call upon the Member States of the General
Assembly to lend their support to such initiatives.
In 1954, Dag Hammarskjöld, the second
Secretary-General, said, “The United Nations was not
created in order to bring us to heaven, but in order to
save us from hell”. We at the Tribunal realize that what
the world has been experiencing lately may fairly be
described as hell, as is reflected by the matters that the
United Nations has recently had to address. But I urge
the Member States of the General Assembly not to lose
sight of the importance of international criminal justice
in our continual quest for international peace. The
deterrent effect of the threat of criminal sanctions has
always allowed us to police the baser part of our
natures. Each time a head of State sits down at the
negotiating table instead of picking up the phone to
call his minister of defence, international criminal
justice has succeeded. Each time a general orders his
troops to contain protestors instead of opening fire on

5

A/66/PV.58

them, international criminal justice has succeeded.
Each time a person in power chooses peace over
violence, international criminal justice has succeeded.
International criminal justice is not the solution to
all our problems. Like the United Nations itself, it was
never intended to lead us to heaven, but rather to save
us from an inexorable descent into the abyss of selfdestruction. It is an important piece of the great puzzle
that we all must work to solve. We at the Tribunal are
proud to be part of the solution, together with the
States Members of the United Nations. We therefore
thank Member States for their support of the Tribunal.
In return, we pledge to continue discharging the work
that Members have committed to our care.
It was not so long ago that international criminal
justice was but a dream in the minds of those striving
for a safer and more just world. But now that dream is
in the process of being realized. The Tribunal has
demonstrated to the international community that
international humanitarian law is an enforceable body
of law, that it binds the conduct of the most senior
State officials, and that the rule of law is a living,
breathing reality that forms part of the fabric of our
civilization. The Tribunal represents the aspirations of
the international community to ensure that justice
prevails over impunity, and that is something in which
we all have a stake.
It is for those reasons that the work of the
Tribunal, which has been entrusted to us, is not only
our work, but in fact the work of everyone here today. I
therefore call upon all Member States of the General
Assembly to assist us in our commitment to bring the
work of the Tribunal to a close in an expeditious and
fair manner.
The Acting President: I thank the President of
the International Tribunal of the Former Yugoslavia.
I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Iceland; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; along with Serbia,

6

Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
This year, once again, the European Union and its
member States reaffirm their unwavering support for
the work of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Both
Tribunals are making invaluable contributions to our
shared goal of ending impunity for serious
international crimes. The European Union and its
member States thank both President Robinson and
President Khan for their reports (see A/66/210 and
A/66/209) and commends them for their efforts to
complete the work of the Tribunals. We also pay
special tribute to the entire staff of the Tribunals for
their work.
The Tribunals have played key roles in
strengthening the rule of law and promoting long-term
stability and reconciliation, and not only in the Balkans
and Rwanda; their jurisprudence has had far wider
effects. Since their establishment, both Tribunals have
embodied the need to fight impunity and the refusal by
the international community to let the perpetrators of
the most serious crimes of international concern escape
justice. They were forerunners in creating
jurisprudence that is a source of inspiration for all
national and international jurisdictions, in particular
the International Criminal Court, that have to address
such crimes. Their record bears that out.
International criminal justice does exist, and it
prevails. Sooner or later, perpetrators will be held
accountable for their crimes. The arrests and swift
transfers to The Hague of the long-sought fugitives
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić demonstrate that fact.
Their trials, as with all the other cases pending before
the Tribunals, will fulfil a duty to provide justice for
the victims and their families.
We recall that cooperation on the part of States
remains the cornerstone of the Tribunals’ ability to
complete their mandate, in particular cooperation in
bringing those indicted before justice. In that respect,
we commend the cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of Congo authorities with regard to the arrest
and transfer to the ICTR during the past year of
Bernard Munyagishari. However, despite continuing
appeals by the international community, 10 accused
individuals in all remain at large.

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

The failure to arrest those indictees remains a
matter of grave concern. Among those still at large are
three key indictees allegedly responsible for the most
serious atrocities, including Félicien Kabuga. We call
on all States concerned to intensify their efforts to
ensure that all indictees are arrested and transferred to
the Tribunals.
We note that the cooperation of Serbia, Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina with the ICTY was
generally adequate during this past reporting period, in
which Serbia, in particular, met one of its key
obligations with the arrests and transfers of the two last
indictees at large. The countries remain committed to
meeting their obligations towards the Tribunal and
towards justice. With the last fugitives in the Western
Balkans apprehended and in detention in The Hague,
the EU has decided not to renew the asset freeze
imposed on the fugitives and to lift the visa ban against
them and their support network. Completing the
process of rendering justice for crimes committed
during the wars in the former Yugoslavia is essential
for lasting reconciliation.
Full cooperation with the ICTY remains an
essential condition for the Stabilisation and Association
Process in the Western Balkans and is an essential
condition for membership in the EU. The EU and its
member States also call upon the Governments
concerned to pursue with greater vigour the proper
conduct of domestic war-crime trials. Political leaders
should avoid statements and measures that could call
into question the importance of reconciliation and the
need to serve justice through the prosecution of war
crimes. We continue to urge all States to continue to
cooperate with both Tribunals in full accordance with
their obligations under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
With regard to the ICTR, the EU and its member
States note with appreciation that the Prosecutor has
held fruitful high-level discussions with officials of
several States on the issue of cooperation with his
Office. We regret, however, that cooperation with
Kenya remains a major challenge. We call on the
Kenyan authorities to engage in further discussions
with the Prosecutor of the ICTR.
The Security Council in its resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004), called on the ICTY and ICTR
to transfer all lower- and mid-level accused to
competent national jurisdictions for trial by domestic

11-58963

courts. We welcome the ongoing efforts of Rwanda, in
cooperation with international donors, to strengthen the
Rwandan legal system and its ability to adjudicate
cases transferred from the ICTR, should the ICTR
decide to transfer such cases there. The EU and its
member States confirm their commitment to support
activities aimed at strengthening the capacity of the
Rwandan judiciary.
Although the delayed capture and transfer of
fugitive indictees may have led to further delays in the
completion strategy, the EU and its member States
welcome the fact that the deadline will be met for the
completion of the transition to the Residual
Mechanism. We urge the Tribunals to continue to
identify further measures to complete their work as
efficiently and promptly as possible. However, the
completion of the Tribunals’ work should be done in an
orderly manner and not affect the quality of their
adjudication and due process.
We welcome the work of the Tribunals on
strengthening the capacity of national authorities to
handle the remaining war-crime cases effectively. We
fully support, including with financial means, the
training and information exchanges. In its Stabilisation
and Association Process for the Western Balkans, the
EU is increasingly underlining the importance of local
ownership for handling war-crime cases in line with
the need to fight impunity.
The EU and its member States further welcome
the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010), of
22 December 2010, on the Residual Mechanism for the
International Criminal Tribunals and look forward to
the upcoming elections by the General Assembly of the
roster of judges forming the core of that Mechanism.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand (CANZ), my own country.
CANZ pays tribute to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
which have made unprecedented contributions to
international jurisprudence in the area of international
criminal law and to the international community’s
efforts to end impunity for the most serious
international crimes.
CANZ reiterates its strong support for the work
of the Tribunals, which have achieved many important

7

A/66/PV.58

milestones in the past year. Of particular note are the
arrests of Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić and their
transfer to the ICTY in The Hague. The arrest of those
last remaining fugitives brings the ICTY one step
closer to fulfilling its mandate. Their trials will
contribute to the healing process for victims of the
atrocities committed during the 1992-1995 war in the
former Yugoslavia. We commend the Serbian
authorities for facilitating those arrests and the Office
of the Prosecutor for its commitment to moving ahead
expeditiously with the trials.
The Tribunals issued several important decisions
in the past year, including the ICTY’s decision
convicting Momčilo Perišić of crimes against humanity
and war crimes, sentencing him to 27 years
imprisonment, and the decision in the Uwinkindi case,
which marked the first time an ICTR Chamber has
agreed to transfer a case to Rwanda for trial. We
commend the work and the decisions of the Tribunals
in those and other landmark cases, all of which have
greatly improved the international community’s
understanding of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, and will be instrumental in informing the
work of other international criminal courts and
tribunals.
In the context of transfers to national
jurisdictions, CANZ acknowledges the excellent
outreach undertaken by the Tribunals. Making
judgements accessible and understandable to victims
and affected communities is a crucial part of the
Tribunals’ legacy. Equally important are the training
programmes and study visits conducted by the
Tribunals, aimed at building the capacity of national
courts to handle cases concerning the same crimes as
those that fall within the Tribunals’ jurisdiction. The
capacity-building of domestic jurisdictions is essential
to ensuring that both past and future perpetrators of
serious international crimes are brought to justice.
CANZ welcomes the December 2010 decision by
the Security Council to establish the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which
will commence work in July 2012. That resolution
demonstrates
the
international
community’s
determination to combat the impunity of those
responsible for the most serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
CANZ countries are confident that the Residual
Mechanism will continue the good work of the
Tribunals
in
contributing
to
international

8

jurisprudence, and will ensure that high-level fugitives
do not escape justice. We commend the joint work of
the Tribunals to facilitate the commencement of the
Residual Mechanism’s operations and to complete their
remaining work by December 2014. We urge States to
continue to support the Tribunals to help them to
implement their completion strategies and to support
the Residual Mechanism as it takes up its work.
The Tribunals face challenges of staff retention
and recruitment. We recognize that those problems
have the potential to impact on the ability of the
Tribunals to meet their completion strategy targets. We
urge the Secretariat and other relevant bodies to
continue to work with the Registrars of the Tribunals to
find practical solutions to address the staffing situation.
The CANZ countries call on States to support the
Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism at this
important juncture in the delivery of international
criminal justice. We urge States, especially those in the
Great Lakes region, to cooperate with the ICTR to
ensure the arrest of the remaining nine fugitives.
For our part, at this critical time, Canada,
Australia and New Zealand will continue to offer our
full support to the Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): Let me begin by
welcoming the President of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Patrick
Robinson, and the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Khalida
Rachid Khan, and thanking them for their presentation
of the annual reports of the two Tribunals (see
A/66/210 and A/66/209).
In connection with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, I would like to
reiterate that all agencies of the Republic of Serbia in
charge of cooperation with the Tribunal maintain
excellent
professional
relations
with
ICTY
representatives and the personnel of its office in
Belgrade. The Republic of Serbia has fully cooperated
with the ICTY and continues to do so without any
obstacles.
The persistent pursuit of fugitives resulted in the
arrest of Ratko Mladić, in the village of Lazarevo on
26 May, and Goran Hadžić, on Mount Fruška Gora on
20 June. After procedures before the High Court in
Belgrade, they were promptly transferred to the

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

Tribunal in The Hague. Out of the 46 indictees
requested by the ICTY, the Republic of Serbia
transferred 45 of them to the Tribunal. One indictee
died before he could be arrested. In that way, the
Republic of Serbia completed its cooperation with the
ICTY with respect to the transfer of the indictees.

the two Tribunals in the discharge of their respective
mandates. We are pleased to note that the Tribunals
have continued their tireless efforts in completing their
work expeditiously, and are preparing for the transition
to the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

My country responded in full to almost all
requests that it received from the ICTY related to the
provision of documentation and data, access to the
archives of Serbian Government agencies, and the
provision of waivers for testifying in the proceedings
before the Tribunal, with only recent requests in the
process of being met.

The efforts of the Tribunals towards the
completion of their mandates at both the trial and the
appellate levels cannot be overstated. We are especially
delighted to note that the number of fugitives has been
reduced. We also appreciate the fact that the Tribunals
have continued to further advance interaction with the
authorities of the States of the former Yugoslavia and
of Rwanda to encourage cooperation with the Tribunal
on, among other things, bringing to justice those
fugitives who are still at large.

The Republic of Serbia continues to cooperate
with the ICTY regarding a timely response to all forms
of assistance requests, which include cooperation with
the ICTY Chambers, the secretariat and the Office of
the Prosecutor and the defence of indictees. New
requests related to the provision of documentation and
data and access to the archives of Serbian Government
agencies, as well as the provision of waivers for
testifying, are received on a daily basis and are
considered without delay.
The arrest of the last two fugitives and their
transfer to the Tribunal provide ample evidence of the
commitment of my country to the rule of law and the
seriousness with which it approaches cooperation with
the ICTY. By fulfilling its moral and legal obligations
with respect to the arrest of the indictees and by
maintaining a high level of cooperation on matters
related to the provision of technical assistance in
connection with cases tried before the ICTY, as well as
by trying war crimes in domestic courts in a
professional manner, the Republic of Serbia has made a
significant contribution to the achievement of the goals
of the ICTY completion strategy and, at the same time,
to the process of the normalization of relations among
countries of the region and to the strengthening of
confidence in the work of national and international
institutions.
Mr. Gamaha (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, allow me to extend my appreciation to the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Khalida Rachid Khan, and the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Patrick Lipton
Robinson, for presenting their respective reports (see
A/66/209 and A/66/210) on the ongoing activities of

11-58963

Like many others, my delegation is concerned
about the immense challenges currently facing the
Tribunals as they wind up. The staff reduction and the
relocation of persons acquitted by the Tribunals will
negatively affect the completion strategies. We wish to
appeal to the United Nations and the international
community at large to continue cooperating with the
Tribunals, in accordance with their legal obligations, to
ensure that the Tribunals achieve their goals. As for my
country, the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania will continue not only to extend the necessary
support to the ICTR, but also to the ICTY, in whatever
way we can.
As the host country of ICTR and as we mark the
conclusion of the mandates of the ad hoc Tribunals,
Tanzania believes that the role of ICTR in the
development of international law is a great legacy to
the world at large. The Tribunal has inevitably enriched
the practice of law in the regions concerned, but it has
also added great value to international judicial practice
as a whole. Furthermore, the ICTR has served as a
research, learning and educational hub for universities,
colleges and high schools and local and international
courts in the area of international criminal law, human
rights law and international humanitarian law. Many
professors and their students have spent time at the
Tribunal doing research and internships, respectively.
Again, over the years in which these two ad hoc
Tribunals have been in existence, volumes of seminal
works have been written that enrich legal theory and
practice.

9

A/66/PV.58

The presence of the ICTR in Arusha has
amplified the recognition of Tanzania and the memory
of the late President Julius Nyerere’s efforts to search
for peace and reconciliation in the Great Lakes region.
Furthermore, the ICTR has also generated employment
opportunities for a variety of individuals, including
judges, prosecutors at different levels, defence
attorneys, archivists, security personnel, secretaries
and support staff. The Government of the United
Republic of Tanzania has appreciated the interaction of
the international community with the Tribunal as an
intrinsic asset. Individuals who have acquired
international knowledge and exposure at the ICTR can
contribute enormously in terms of knowledge when
absorbed back in their Governments.
The Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania followed with great interest the process that
culminated in Security Council resolution 1966 (2010),
which
established
the
International
Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to complete the
remaining tasks of the ICTR and ICTY, and to maintain
their respective legacies. The Mechanism’s branch for
the ICTR will commence its operations on 1 July 2012.
Among other objectives, the Residual Mechanism will
seek to transfer to national courts some of the cases
currently pending before the Tribunals, in order to
bring to try those high-level accused who are still at
large, as well as to preserve and ensure access to the
archived materials and to guarantee the continued
protection of victims and witnesses. The Mechanism is
poised to play an important role in ensuring that the
completion strategies of the Tribunals do not result in
impunity for fugitives.
On behalf of the Government of the United
Republic of Tanzania and its people, I wish to sincerely
thank the international community for having entrusted
Tanzania to serve as a suitable location for the Residual
Mechanism. We remain ready and willing to assume
the obligations attached to our role as a host country.
We will dedicate our support to the Mechanism in
terms both of administrative and operational needs, as
we have done with the ICTR during the whole period
of its existence.
In conclusion, allow me to underline again the
fact that the two Tribunals have commendably
implemented their mandates. The United Republic of
Tanzania pays tribute to the ICTR and ICTY for their
significant role in fighting impunity and in promoting
accountability for those responsible for committing the

10

most serious crimes of international concern, namely,
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
jurisprudence of the Tribunals forms a significant part
of the legacy of ad hoc Tribunals. There is no doubt in
my mind that the two Tribunals have left a permanent
mark on the development of public international law
and related disciplines in the present epoch. Let me
once again reiterate our total commitment to
supporting the work of the Tribunals, as well as to our
future engagement with the Mechanism.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): Let me begin by
extending our sincere thanks and appreciation to the
Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judges
Khan and Robinson. Their extensive briefings today,
together with the annual reports before us (see
A/66/209 and A/66/210), reflect the tireless efforts of
the two Tribunals to contribute to our overall goal of
fighting impunity for the most serious crimes of
concern us all.
Norway has always been a staunch supporter of
the two ad hoc United Nations international criminal
tribunals, as well as of the permanent International
Criminal Court. We strongly believe that justice is a
prerequisite for national reconciliation and lasting
peace.
Eighteen years after the creation of the Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the first international
criminal tribunal since Nuremberg and Tokyo, and the
first to be established by the United Nations, we are
very pleased that there are now no indicted persons
who have succeeded in evading the ICTY’s judicial
process. We would like to echo the words of the
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz on the arrest of that
Tribunal’s last remaining fugitive, this past July: “This
is a precedent of enduring significance, not only for
this particular tribunal, but also for international
criminal justice more generally”. The ICTY has
demonstrated that international criminal justice can
indeed be delivered.
This year’s arrest and transfer to the ICTY of the
two remaining fugitives would not have been possible
without the commitment of Serbian authorities to
effectively cooperate with the Court. Norway
appreciates the efforts made by Serbia in that regard
and trusts that the Serbian authorities will continue to
assist the Court during the ongoing trials.

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, it is also positive that the number
of remaining fugitives decreased by one during the
reporting period. However, it is far from satisfactory
that as many as nine accused still remain at large. As is
the case for the ICTY, the Tribunal for Rwanda can
only successfully complete its work if it receives
effective assistance from States. We urge all States,
especially those of the Great Lakes region, to intensify
their cooperation with the ICTR and give it all the
necessary assistance. We urge, in particular, that States
contribute to the arrest and transfer to the Tribunal of
the remaining fugitives.
Both Tribunals are working hard to fulfil their
mandates. We commend them for their commitment to
implementing their completion strategies while
ensuring that standards of due process and fundamental
legal principles are fully respected. We are concerned
about reports from both tribunals that the continuing
loss of highly experienced and essential staff could
undermine their ability to meet their completion
strategy targets. There may be a need for further
measures to assist the Tribunals in reversing that
negative trend, so that they can fulfil their mandates in
due time.
Norway welcomes Security Council resolution
1966 (2010), on the establishment of the International
Residual Mechanism for International Tribunals. We
are pleased to note that the two Tribunals are working
closely together to ensure a smooth transition to the
Residual Mechanism. As the mandates of these two ad
hoc Tribunals draw to a close, the Residual Mechanism
will have an important role to play in ensuring their
long-term legacies. We are confident that their work
will lead the way in the continued fight against
impunity.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): For
almost two decades, both the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda have been
led by the demand for justice for all those who were
killed, tortured or raped in the conflicts that ravaged
their two respective regions. They have become
beacons of the international justice system and
guardians of our own consciences, as their work
brought, and still brings, justice for those who lost their
fathers, brothers and sons, or their entire families. As
the Secretary-General stated in 2008, “These courts
pioneered the emergence of international criminal

11-58963

justice and the enforcement of international
humanitarian law”. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
continuously supported the activities of these
institutions, in particular the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
In that context, I am pleased to welcome the
Presidents of the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judges Patrick Robinson
and Khalida Khan, respectively, as we once again
consider the reports of the Tribunals for the previous
year. I wish to thank them for their detailed briefings,
as they provide us with additional facts and accounts of
the activities undertaken. Their dedication to the cause
of justice, with the valuable support of all the staff of
the Tribunals, is highly commendable. As this is the
last appearance of Judge Robinson before us in his
capacity as President of the ICTY, I would like to take
this opportunity to extend our gratitude to him for all
his efforts and hard work he has deployed in the fight
against impunity.
We also noted with deep regret the news of the
death of Judge Antonio Cassese, of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon. He was the first President of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
serving in that capacity from 1993 to 1997. His
contribution to the advancement of international
criminal and humanitarian law was very significant.
As we consider the reports before us (see
A/66/209 and A/66/210), we take note of the efforts
made by the Tribunals to successfully complete their
work, mindful of the highest standards of a fair trial,
requiring in return our full and necessary support. We
further commend their steadfast determination to fulfil
the remaining judicial functions, given in particular the
unforeseen challenges they are facing, which are
beyond their control. In addition, it is important to
mention the late arrests that took place during the
reporting period and the impact that those arrests will
unavoidably have on the completion of their work and
preparations for the transition to the residual
mechanism. For my country, the arrests of Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadžić, despite being long overdue,
are of great importance, as they will finally face
justice. There will never be punishment or consolation
enough for crimes such as the genocide in Srebrenica
and Rwanda, but the delivery of the rulings also serves
as a promise and notice to the perpetrators of mass
atrocities that justice will be served.

11

A/66/PV.58

For those reasons, the commitment and
dedication of my country to the strengthening of
international criminal justice has remained strong and
unwavering throughout the years. We have reaffirmed
our support for the Tribunals, especially for the ICTY,
numerous times, as we do today. The report before us,
as did previous ones, reflects that commitment through
the record of close cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Tribunal. That cooperation has
been particularly constructive in regard to the 11 bis
cases transferred by the Office of the Prosecutor to the
War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as was confirmed recently by the Head of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe mission, Mr. Fletcher Burton. He emphasized
that the mechanism has been a great success in terms
of both assisting the ICTY completion strategy and
demonstrating that the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court
and Prosecutor’s Office have the necessary
independence, professionalism and capacity to handle
complex war crimes proceedings.
Finally, we encourage the Tribunals to continue
their work in an expedited and efficient manner,
without affecting due process and the interests of
justice. The final successful completion of their
mandates will close one chapter of groundbreaking
contributions to international jurisprudence and the
international justice system. Their contribution to the
advancement of the rule of law, peace and
reconciliation is significant, as there can be no
meaningful peace without justice and no joint future
until the past is put to rest.
Mr. Mikec (Croatia): Let me start by expressing
our appreciation to the Presidents of the two Tribunals,
Judges Khalida Rachid Khan and Patrick Robinson, for
their comprehensive and informative reports (see
A/66/209 and A/66/210) on the actions taken and the
progress made during the periods from 1 July 2010 to
30 June 2011, and from 1 August 2010 to 31 July 2011,
respectively.
Croatia has aligned itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union and its member States
delivered earlier during this meeting. I should like,
however, to share with the Assembly some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
The Tribunals’ efforts to prosecute persons
suspected of bearing the greatest responsibility for
atrocities committed on the territory of the former

12

Yugoslavia and Rwanda have led to important
breakthroughs in the field of international criminal law,
conflict resolution and conflict prevention. We are also
glad that the present reports have validated Croatia’s
general responsiveness to requests made by the Office
of the Prosecutor. Croatia is strongly committed to
continuing its full cooperation with the Tribunals.
Furthermore, Croatia welcomes the fact that
during the reporting period, Serbia located, arrested
and transferred Ratko Mladić to The Hague, indicted
for the worst atrocities committed since the Second
World War on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. At
the same time, Croatia regrets that due to time
constraints, Mladić will not be prosecuted for the
crimes committed against the civilian population in
Croatia, in particular in Škabrnja, Zadar, Šibenik,
Kijevo, Vrlika, Sinj and other towns attacked by the
Yugoslav People’s Army under his command, nor
would he be prosecuted for launching indiscriminate
attacks against civilian targets in our country, in
particular the attack against the Peruča Dam.
Croatia particularly welcomes the arrest, during
the reporting period, of Goran Hadžić, indicted for
heinous crimes committed in eastern Croatia in the
early 1990s, including crimes against humanity and
war crimes. The arrest of the last remaining fugitive
indicted by the ICTY sends a powerful message to all
that those who are alleged to have committed serious
crimes cannot await justice and will be eventually held
accountable.
There is no doubt that the most important
development in the reporting period as far as my
country is concerned was the rendering of the firstinstance judgement in the Gotovina et al. case. While
refraining from commenting on that judgement in this
important case, we would like to underline the fact that
the judgement was received in Croatia with grave
consternation and provoked strong disagreement with
some of the legal, historical and political qualifications
contained in the explanation of the judgement. Let me
also stress here that, as was stated by the Croatian
authorities immediately after the judgement, Croatia is
a democratic State based on the rule of law where
judicial institutions are respected and their verdicts
adhered to. Croatia will continue to carefully follow
the ongoing appeal proceedings in this significant case.
In that regard, as a committed Member of the
United Nations, with troops deployed in several United

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

Nations- and NATO-led operations, Croatia also pays
particular attention to the development of new
jurisprudence and new parameters for legitimate
military action that could be established by the ICTY.
While international academia is already debating the
possible effect of such jurisprudence, we would like to
stress the importance of a thorough analysis of this
complex matter based on our common goal of
strengthening international security.
However, fully committed to its cooperation with
the ICTY, Croatia will strive to ensure that any new
parameters for legitimate military action derived from
ICTY judgements are fully observed in making
decisions at the national level as well as in collective
defence and security bodies.
Croatia strongly supports further cooperation and
interaction between the Tribunal and the Prosecutor’s
Office and the competent national authorities
responsible for the prosecution of war crimes. In that
context, we welcome the liaison prosecutors project
funded by the European Union as a key mechanism for
strengthening the working relationship between
prosecutors from the region and the Office of the
Prosecutor. Building that relationship will create a
propitious base for further prosecutions of perpetrators
of war crimes by national judiciaries, leaving no crime
unpunished and no victim without consolation.
Let me conclude by stating that Croatia welcomes
the ICTY’s continued commitment to its completion
strategy and final conclusion of the Tribunal’s work in
accordance with its mandate and without sacrificing
due process. In that context, Croatia supports ongoing
work on the practical arrangements necessary for the
commencement of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
Mr. Panin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to express our gratitude to the
Presidents of the Tribunals for their respective reports.
We consider those reports important, especially now,
after the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
1966 (2010), which set out a time frame and
parameters for launching the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and time limits for
the work of the Tribunal for Yugoslavia and the
Tribunal for Rwanda.
In considering the Tribunals’ reports from the
standpoint of the requirements set out in that
resolution, we see, above all, the progress achieved in

11-58963

their work over the past year. A number of important
legal proceedings have been completed. The process of
preparing cases for transfer to the Residual Mechanism
is moving forward. High points of the past period
include the arrest by Serbian authorities of Ratko
Mladić and his transfer to The Hague, and the arrest in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo of the accused
Bernard Munyagishari and his transfer to the Tribunal
for Rwanda. According to current plans, the latter’s
case will be referred to the relevant national court.
On the whole, we believe that cooperation by
States in both regions with the Tribunals over the past
year has been positive. Now as never before, it is
important to maintain, and if possible accelerate, the
pace of consideration of cases in the Tribunals in order
to meet the deadlines established in resolution 1966
(2010) for the completion of their tasks. We believe
that is entirely possible. A high level of cooperation by
States with both judicial organs will be of great help in
reaching that goal. Russia, for its part, stands ready to
provide all possible assistance to the Tribunals as they
conclude their activities.
We recognize, however, that there are problems
of inadequate space in the penitentiary systems of
States that have agreements with the Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia to carry out the prison sentences of
persons sentenced by that Tribunal. Member States
should give that matter close attention.
We are now at a critical juncture in the history of
both Tribunals, that is, the start of the Residual
Mechanism for the Tribunals. In December, the
Assembly will elect the judges who will form the
benches of the two branches of the Mechanism. We
attach great importance to those elections. In our view,
those judges must be of the finest calibre and capable
of effectively conducting the work of the Mechanism
and completing their work within the allocated time
frames.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on the two agenda items. May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda items 73 and 74?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee

13

A/66/PV.58

on sub-items (a) to (e) and (k) of agenda item 115 and
agenda item 135.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/539)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of the
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint the following persons as
members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2012: Mr. Bruno Nunes Brant

14

(Brazil), Mr. Pavel Chernikov (Russian Federation),
Mr. Dietrich Lingenthal (Germany), Mr. Jean Christian
Obame (Gabon) and Mr. David Traystman (United
States of America).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint those persons as members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2012?
It was so decided.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/540)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint the following persons as
members of the Committee on Contributions for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2012:
Ms. NneNne Iwuji-Eme (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland), Mr. Nikolay Lozinskiy
(Russian Federation), Mr. Hae-yun Park (Republic of
Korea), Ms. Gönke Roscher (Germany), Mr. Henrique
da Silveira Sardinha Pinto (Brazil) and Mr. Sun
Xudong (China).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint those persons as members of the Committee
on Contributions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2012?
It was so decided.
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the of the Investments Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/541)
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
recommends, in paragraph 5 of its report, that the
General Assembly confirm the reappointment by the
Secretary-General of Mr. Masakazu Arikawa (Japan),
Mr. Madhav Dhar (India) and Mr. Nemir Kirdar (Iraq),
as well as the appointment of Ms. Dominique
Senequier (France), as regular members of the
Investments Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2012.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to confirm the reappointment by the Secretary-General
of Mr. Masakazu Arikawa, Mr. Madhav Dhar and

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

Mr. Nemir Kirdar, as well as the appointment of
Ms. Dominique Senequier, as regular members of the
Investments Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2012?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: In paragraph 6 of the
same report, the Fifth Committee also recommends that
the General Assembly reappoint Ms. Hilda OchoaBrillembourg (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) and
Mr. Ivan Pictet (Switzerland) as ad hoc members of the
Investments Committee for a one-year term beginning
on 1 January 2012.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to reappoint Ms. Hilda Ochoa-Brillembourg and
Mr. Ivan Pictet as ad hoc members of the Investments
Committee for a one-year term beginning on 1 January
2012?
It was so decided.
(d) Appointment of a member of the Board
of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/542)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint the Controller and AuditorGeneral of the United Republic of Tanzania as a
member of the Board of Auditors for a six-year term of
office beginning on 1 July 2012.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint the Controller and Auditor-General of the
United Republic of Tanzania as a member of the Board
of Auditors for a six-year term of office beginning on
1 July 2012?
It was so decided.
(e) Appointment of members of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/543)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint the following persons as
members of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2012: Mr. Christopher Mihm (United States
of America) and Mr. John Muwanga (Uganda).

11-58963

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Christopher Mihm and Mr. John
Muwanga as members of the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2012?
It was so decided.
(k) Appointment of members and alternate
members of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/544)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint Mr. Dmitry Chumakov
(Russian Federation) as a member of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee for a term of office
beginning today, 11 November 2011, and ending on
31 December 2012.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Dmitry Chumakov as a member of the
United Nations Staff Pension Committee for a term of
office beginning on 11 November 2011 and ending on
31 December 2012?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (a) to (e) and (k) of agenda
item 115?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 135
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/525)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/8).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item

15

A/66/PV.58

135 and all the reports of the Fifth Committee before it
today.
Agenda item 70
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/66/L.7)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador to introduce draft
resolution A/66/L.7.
Mr. Maza Martelli (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): In its capacity as current President of the
Central American Integration System, and on behalf of
the countries of the isthmus, El Salvador expresses its
gratitude for the opportunity to introduce to the
General Assembly draft resolution A/66/L.7, entitled
“Emergency
humanitarian
assistance
for
the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Belize, Costa Rica,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and
Panama.” The draft resolution has been distributed
among all Member States. Based on suggestions
offered by various friendly countries, I should like to
amend it as follows.
The first preambular paragraph should read as
follows:
“Recalling all relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly on emergency humanitarian
assistance and reaffirming the principles of
humanity,
neutrality,
impartiality
and
independence for the provision of humanitarian
assistance”.
Paragraph 2, should read as follows:
“Extends its thanks to the members of the
international community that have already
provided timely assistance for rescue and aid
efforts targeted to the stricken populations,
especially the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat and the
United Nations Development Programme, and
commends the efforts of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to strengthen the coordination of
emergency assistance”.

16

Paragraph 3 should be a new paragraph, as
follows:
“Acknowledges the efforts and progress
made by Central American countries in
strengthening
their
disaster-preparedness
capacity, emphasizes the importance of investing
in disaster risk reduction, and encourages the
international community to continue to cooperate
with the affected Governments towards this end”.
Paragraph 4 should read as follows:
“Appeals to all Member States and all
organs and agencies of the United Nations
system, as well as the international financial and
development institutions, to continue to cooperate
with Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama in their relief,
rehabilitation and humanitarian assistance efforts
and in rebuilding the region”.
Paragraph 5 should read as follows:
“Requests the relevant organizations and
organs of the United Nations system and other
multilateral organizations to support and assist
national and regional capacity-building in the
areas of natural disaster preparedness, prevention
and mitigation and risk management in the
countries concerned according to needs and in the
specialized institution of the Central American
Integration System, the Coordination Centre for
Natural Disaster Prevention in Central America”.
Paragraph 6 should read as follows:
“Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session
on the implementation of this resolution and
progress made in the aid, rehabilitation and
reconstruction efforts in the stricken countries.”
Tropical Depression 12-E, which affected our
region from 10 to 19 October, is considered one of the
most devastating natural phenomena to have struck
Central America in the past decade. It left at least
100 people dead and thousands wounded and caused
the overflow of rivers, extensive flooding in many
areas, landslides and damage to highways, bridges and
homes, resulting in numerous losses both in human
terms and with respect to damaging basic infrastructure
and crops, thereby becoming a serious threat to food

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

security and a grave blow to the region’s economic and
commercial activity.
Because of their geographical characteristics, the
countries of Central America are particularly
vulnerable to the adverse meteorological effects
associated with climate change, which over the past
few years have created new risk scenarios, increasing
the poverty of our most vulnerable populations and
undermining our efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals and a more sustainable
development that would benefit the peoples Central
America. Climate change is no longer a threat for the
countries of the region; it is a sad reality we face.
The situation currently besetting our region
would be even more difficult without the support that
various members of the international community have
provided us through rescue operations and help to the
affected population. In that respect, we would like to
express our gratitude for the timely assistance we have
received from a number of friendly countries, as well
as from the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations
Development Programme.
We are aware that only with the participation,
integration and coordination of all the economic, social
and political sectors of the region, and with the support
and cooperation of the international community, is it
possible to guarantee the success of the policies,
strategies and short-, medium- and long-term measures
that will permit rehabilitation and reconstruction,
adaptation to climate change, integrated risk
management and the establishment of a model for
sustainable development.
In the name of the peoples and Governments of
Central America, we call upon Member States at this
plenary meeting to adopt by consensus draft resolution
A/66/L.7. We have no doubt that this would constitute
invaluable support by the international community for
our region, as well as an everlasting gesture of
friendship and solidarity imbued with the spirit of
humanitarian concern.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote before the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

11-58963

Mr. Cacciaguerra Ranghieri (Italy): On behalf
of the Italian delegation, we wish to thank you, Sir, for
convening this timely meeting to adopt a draft
resolution on emergency humanitarian assistance for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Belize, Costa
Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua
and Panama in the aftermath of tropical depression
E-12 in the Pacific Ocean and the torrential rains that
affected the whole Central American region between
10 and 19 October.
To those Governments and to the affected
populations, I wish to convey the solidarity of the
Italian Government and people. The geography of the
Central American countries makes them particularly
vulnerable to the adverse effects of meteorological
phenomena and climate change. They have suffered
loss of life and severe damage to their economies,
agriculture, infrastructure and tourist industry. It is
imperative that, as on similar occasions in the past, the
response of the international community be prompt and
generous, particularly at the level of United Nations
humanitarian relief. It is for that reason that Italy
supports, and has become a sponsor of, draft resolution
A/66/L.7. We thank the representative of El Salvador
for introducing it on behalf of the Central American
Integration System.
Allow me to provide a few brief figures on the
aid that the Italian Government has contributed to the
region in this connection, which are as follows: to the
International Federation of the Red Cross and the Red
Crescent, €100,000 to support relief activities in
El Salvador and Honduras; to the World Food
Programme in El Salvador, €70,000 to finance the
project on food and early recovery assistance to
populations affected by tropical depression 12-E and
ensuing rains; and to Nicaragua, €55,000 for the World
Food Programme project on emergency food assistance
to families affected by tropical depression 12-E.
Mr. Nishiumi (Japan): We appreciate the
initiative taken by Central American countries,
including El Salvador, to present draft resolution
A/66/L.7 for the purpose of addressing the serious
humanitarian situation in that region. We wish to
convey the solidarity of the people of Japan to the
people in the region. Today we are ready to join the
consensus. However, the Government of Japan would
like to make it clear that it does not agree with
paragraph 7 of the Comalapa Declaration. We therefore

17

A/66/PV.58

understand the sixth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution A/66/L.7 as taking note of that Declaration.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote. The
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution
A/66/L.7, as orally revised.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/66/L.7, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Bahamas,
Barbados, Brazil, Colombia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Guyana, Haiti, India, Italy, Jordan,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Portugal, San Marino, Slovenia
and Spain.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/66/L.7, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/66/L.7, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 66/9).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of vote after the adoption
of the resolution, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): Canada joined the
consensus on resolution 66/9 as a means of expressing
our solidarity with those who were affected by the
tragic flooding in Central America in recent weeks. In
response to the tragic floods, Canada has provided
$2 million to help the people in the most severely
affected countries of El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras and Nicaragua.
However, we have a significant concern about the
process, which did not allow for any meaningful
consultation on the text of the resolution. The Canadian
suggestion to strengthen the text, and those of other
Governments, were not taken on board. The process
does not reflect the spirit of solidarity and consensus
that we have come to expect on humanitarian
resolutions.
Mr. Sammis (United States of America): The
United States stands in solidarity with the people of

18

Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua and Panama. The United States recognizes
the devastating impact of the disastrous flooding in the
region. We empathize with the hardships that those
countries face. We stand with all those affected, and
encourage Governments, regional and international
organizations and civil society to work hand in hand in
the provision of emergency assistance, as well as
towards longer-term rebuilding and prevention
solutions.
More than 600,000 people lost their homes and
businesses to the recent devastating rains and
landslides caused by the tropical depression. More than
100 people lost their lives. Such people are not simply
numbers and locations that we can chart on a map.
They are individuals who have seen their lives and
livelihoods literally swept away. We must continue to
remind ourselves of the victims of such disasters. This
forum is one of the best places to do just that.
The United States has not stood by idly. Through
the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance of the United
States Agency for International Development, the
United States had pre-positioned emergency relief
supplies in Miami for immediate transport to Central
America. Our Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance
also has staff throughout the region, including more
than 20 disaster risk management specialists and more
than 300 expert consultants. Such experts not only
provide technical assistance to national Governments
to enable them to assess impacts and provide rapid
assistance immediately following a disaster, but also
work closely with national organizations and first
responders to prepare for, and respond to, future
emergencies.
In the hours following the storm in Central
America, the United States Government distributed
mattresses, blankets and drinking water to evacuees in
temporary shelters, and we assisted in fuel purchases
that made possible emergency airlifts of relief supplies.
The United States has provided hundreds of thousands
of dollars in multilateral and bilateral assistance. We
encourage other donors to contribute as well.
The United States also provides assistance
through our voluntary contributions to United Nations
organizations, such as UNICEF, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Development
Programme. We support the efforts of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

11-58963

A/66/PV.58

Affairs under the leadership of Under-SecretaryGeneral and Emergency Relief Coordinator Ms. Valerie
Amos. We will work to assist with coordination efforts
where appropriate and helpful.
More than 17 main storms have swept through
Latin America and the Caribbean this year alone. While
we focus on assisting the victims of the recent storms,
we must also be proactive in our risk reduction and
preparedness efforts. The United States calls on the
affected States and relevant regional organizations to
strengthen disaster risk reduction and preparedness
mechanisms, including through forums such as the
Summit of the Americas.
While we continue to encourage the international
community to be generous in assistance efforts, we
must also recognize the resilience, resourcefulness and
ingenuity of the people of Central America. Having
seen the impact of recent disasters within our own
borders, including Hurricane Irene in August, the
United States has learned that the contributions of civil
society are of unparalleled importance in reviving the
local economy and in boosting morale. We therefore
encourage sustained and open dialogue with all
stakeholders, large and small.
The United States agrees that all over the world
people face real challenges from the effects of climate
change. We will continue to work together with our
partners in Central America and elsewhere to reduce

11-58963

vulnerability to the impacts of natural hazards and to
make progress towards achieving development goals in
a sustainable fashion.
However, we disagree with the specific and direct
causal link made by resolution 66/9 between the
impacts of climate change and the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which are
not borne out by scientific-backed relevant data, given,
in particular, the short time frame in which the MDGs
are set. Climate change is a global problem, and global
problems require global solutions. We will work to
continue to make progress in addressing that problem
in a manner that reflects science and evolving global
economic circumstances.
Before concluding, I would also like to note that
the United States shares the procedural concerns raised
earlier by the representative of Canada.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the adoption of the
resolution.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 70. I should like to inform members that we will
continue our consideration of agenda item 70 on
14 December,
as
announced
in
document
A/INF/66/3/Rev.1.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19
