S/PV.6816

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6816th meeting

Wednesday, 25 July 2012, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question

12-43813 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1243813*

S/PV.6816

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Cuba, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Maldives, Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 24 July 2012 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, which will
be issued as document S/2012/574 and which reads as
follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of the
Security Council which will be held on Wednesday,
25 July 2012, on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in
the meeting in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.
It is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise

2

of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Serry.
Mr. Serry: Let me at the outset join the
Secretary-General and the Council in condemning in
the strongest possible terms the deadly terror attack on
18 July against a bus carrying Israeli tourists outside the
Burgas airport in Bulgaria. The explosion, reportedly
executed by a suicide bomber, killed six civilians, five
of them Israeli and one Bulgarian, and injured more than
30 people, several critically. We extend our condolences
to the families of the victims and wish a speedy
recovery to the injured. That heinous act provides a
reminder, as noted by the Quartet on the Middle East
in its statement on 19 July, of the need for the members
of the international community to stand side by side
in the effort to prevent terrorism wherever it may be
practiced. The Quartet also reaffirmed its commitment
to continuing efforts to reach a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement in the Middle East, where all people
may live in peace and security.
In that regard, the past month has been characterized
by a continuation of the effort to restart talks amid
continued worrying developments on the ground. Quiet,
direct exchanges between the parties are ongoing in an
attempt to reach agreement on a package of measures
that would create an environment conducive to talks
and pave the way for high-level contacts.
President Abbas has emphasized the importance
of a release of Palestinian prisoners arrested before the
Oslo accords were agreed. He has also underlined the
critical importance of Israel’s allowing the delivery of
weapons and ammunition intended for the Palestinian
security forces that are held in Jordan. It is vital that
such steps be taken to enable a continuation of effective
security coordination. More generally, it is concerning
that we have not seen urgently needed enabling steps
or other measures that would bolster the Palestinian
Authority (PA).
Quartet envoys have remained in close contact with
each other and the parties, and a number of high-level
visits have taken place. On 25 and 26 June, Russian
President Vladimir Putin held meetings in Israel and
with President Abbas in Bethlehem. United States
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also visited Israel

12-43813

S/PV.6816

on 16 and 17 July, and on 6 July met with President
Abbas in Paris, where the Palestinian President also
met with French President Hollande, European Union
High Representative Ashton, and United Kingdom
Foreign Secretary Hague. The Arab League Follow-up
Committee held consultations in Doha on 22 July, in
which it supported a Palestinian approach to the United
Nations to seek further recognition without specifying
a timeline.
In sum, the effort to restart direct talks has not
reached a breaking point, but there has not been a
breakthrough either, and that is increasingly of concern.
While talks remain stalled, events on the ground
continue to move in the wrong direction.
To begin with, the Palestinian Authority faces an
acute challenge in maintaining its solvency. At the
start of the year, the Authority announced that it owed
$1.1 billion in bank loans and $400 million to the private
sector. In addition, it expects a $1-billion shortfall
in funding towards its $3.5-billion budget for 2012.
At the start of July, the Palestinian Finance Minister
announced that the Palestinian Authority could not
pay all June salaries to its 150,000 employees on time.
Last week, Saudi Arabia announced a contribution of
$100 million. This is positive news that has provided the
Palestinian Authority with a welcome respite, including
by allowing it to pay the June salaries, but it will be
brief.
We call on other donors, particularly other Gulf
countries, to consider making a timely donation during
this period of critical shortage. We have also repeatedly
pointed to the need for an improved mechanism for the
transfer of the VAT revenues Israel collects on behalf of
the Palestinian Authority to enhance transparency and
efficiency. Last week, Israeli authorities transferred
half of the monthly VAT collection to the PA two weeks
early in order to assist with the payment of salaries
ahead of the holy month of Ramadan.
On 17 July, Israel approved 5,000 permits for
Palestinian construction workers to work in Israel, in
addition to the 34,250 permits that have already been
issued for Palestinian workers to work there. This
initiative is welcome, but more needs to be done to ease
access and movement and enable economic growth
throughout the West Bank, including Area C, the Jordan
Valley and Gaza. In Gaza, next steps must include
enabling exports to Israel and other countries, as well
as transfers to and from the West Bank. This will in

turn enable economic growth and, in addition, provide
much needed additional revenue through taxation for
the Palestinian Authority.
Settlement announcements continued this month,
with the Israel Land Authority publishing tenders
for 171 new settlement units in East Jerusalem, 41 in
Pisgat Ze’ev, and 130 units in Har Homa. Additionally,
13 Palestinian structures, including three residences,
were demolished in the West Bank during the reporting
period, leading to the displacement of 20 Palestinians,
including seven children. We are also concerned about
recent reports that the Israeli Minister of Defence has
ordered the demolition of eight Palestinian villages
near Hebron so that the area can be used for military
training.
On 18 July, a Higher Education Committee
nominated by the Israeli military commander of the
West Bank approved an application by a college in the
settlement of Ariel, which is deep in the West Bank,
to upgrade its status to that of university. While still
pending approval, such an upgrade would considerably
increase Government funding, resulting in an increase
in enrolment, which now stands at 12,000 students.
This represents a further encroachment into the West
Bank and runs counter to Israel’s road map obligations
to freeze settlement activity, including natural growth.
At the same time, a committee led by retired
Supreme Court Justice Edmond Levy and commissioned
by the Israeli Government to provide recommendations
on “the status of the construction” in the West Bank
submitted its report to the Prime Minister on 9 July.
The report claimed that the Israeli presence in the West
Bank was not a military occupation, recommended
post-facto approval of outposts which the Israeli legal
system deems illegal, and proposed changes to the
process of approving settlement construction. The
Israeli Government has not endorsed the report, but such
proposals are in direct contradiction to international
law. I reiterate that any settlement construction in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is contrary to international law and Israel’s
commitments under the road map, and should stop.
As the Quartet has stated on numerous occasions, any
Israeli settlement activity in the West Bank cannot
prejudge the outcome of negotiations and will not be
recognized by the international community.
As in previous reporting periods, clashes between
Israeli settlers and Palestinians have continued. Settlers

12-438133

S/PV.6816

attacked Palestinians near Hebron on 30 June, and
Nablus was the site of clashes during Israeli visits to
Joseph’s Tomb on 21 June and 18 July. Settler attacks
on Palestinian property, including agricultural land and
orchards, also continued, resulting in over 1,000 trees
being damaged.
Palestinian attacks on Israelis in the West Bank,
mostly consisting of stone-throwing at Israeli vehicles,
also continued, resulting in one Israeli injury on 11 July.
On 27 June, a Palestinian was shot and injured by an
Israeli security guard at the entrance of the settlement
of Ma’ale Adumim after allegedly hitting an Israeli
police car with his vehicle. On 17 July, a Palestinian
was arrested for attacking an Israeli girl in Area C.
Citing security, Israeli security forces conducted
477 operations in the West Bank, which was an increase
from previous months, resulting in 185 Palestinians,
including eight children, being injured, while two
Israeli soldiers were also injured. A total of 246
Palestinians were arrested, including a member of the
Palestinian Legislative Council affiliated with Hamas,
on 15 July. On 9 July, a Jerusalem court sentenced two
former Israeli police officers to 30 months in prison for
the negligent death of a Palestinian in 2008.
Most Palestinians injuries and arrests during the
reporting period took place during demonstrations
against the barrier, which deviates from the Green
Line in contravention to the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice. A Palestinian
demonstration in Ramallah on 30 June against a planned
meeting between President Abbas and then Deputy
Prime Minister of Israel Shaul Mofaz resulted in clashes
with Palestinian security forces. Although the meeting
was canceled, demonstrations continued for two more
days to protest the use of force by Palestinian police.
I would like to again stress that the right of peaceful
protest must be upheld and that all protests should be
kept strictly non-violent.
Palestinian security forces continued to work
to maintain law and order in the West Bank. The
Palestinian security operation that started in Jenin in
May in the northern West Bank continues. More than 150
suspects have been apprehended, including members of
Palestinian security forces. On 30 June, a senior Fatah
member was shot and injured in Jenin. On 8 July, Prime
Minister Fayyad inaugurated the Palestine College for
Police Sciences in the presence of the President of the
European Commission.

4

On a positive note, as part of the 14 May agreement
to end the mass prisoner hunger strike, on 16 July 48
relatives from the Gaza strip were allowed to visit 25
detainees in Israeli prisons, and on 23 July 33 relatives
visited 27 detainees. There are more than 500 detainees
from Gaza in Israeli prisons. This was the first time
since 2007 that such family visits from Gaza had taken
place. Four detainees have continued their hunger
strikes. In the West Bank, on 19 July Israeli authorities
released the Speaker of the Palestinian Parliament,
Aziz Dweik, who had been held for six months under
administrative detention.
Internal political dynamics remain fluid. On
17 July, the Kadima party led by Shaul Mofaz left
Prime Minister Netanyahu’s coalition after two months
in the Government. Kadima’s decision to leave the
coalition emerged after disagreements on the renewal
of a law regarding the military service of the Jewish
Haredi community. The creation of the large coalition
in May had stirred expectations for renewed momentum
regarding the peace process.
On the Palestinian side, efforts to advance
reconciliation were again delayed when the de
facto authorities in Gaza decided to suspend the
voter registration process that the Central Elections
Commission had planned for 3 to 14 July. We have
voiced our clear disappointment with this decision
and continue to believe that the democratic renewal of
institutions in the occupied territories is long overdue.
On 10 July, the Palestinian Authority, pending further
developments on reconciliation, called for municipal
elections to be held throughout the occupied territories
on 20 October. This has been rejected by Hamas.
During my recent visit to Egypt on 25 and 26 June, just
days after Mohamed Morsy was announced as Egypt’s
next President, I received firm assurances from the
Egyptian authorities of their continued efforts to reach
reconciliation. President Abbas met with President
Morsy on 18 July, and Hamas leader Khaled Meshal met
the Egyptian President the following day. We continue
to support such efforts through Egyptian auspices,
under the leadership of President Abbas and within
the framework of the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the positions of the Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
I visited Gaza from 2 to 5 July, and was again
struck by the fragility and unsustainability of the
present situation, which has lead to unacceptable
hardship for the local population. That is partially

12-43813

S/PV.6816

explained by growing funding challenges for United
Nations operations. For example, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) currently requires an additional
$57 million to meet the shortfall in its core operating
budget, covering all of its operations, and an additional
$168 million to fully fund the emergency appeal,
including the provision of food aid to almost 700,000
vulnerable refugees in the West Bank and Gaza. Most
urgent is the funding of $7.5 million to meet food
procurement distribution needs in Gaza for 2012. That
funding shortfall has already resulted in the cancellation
of UNRWA’s Summer Games for the children of Gaza
and, if not addressed, will result in cuts to essential
UNRWA programming across the occupied Palestinian
territory.
United Nations reconstruction work in Gaza,
which now totals $360 million, has had a positive
effect not only for those who receive services but also
on short-term employment. However, the economic
benefits of increased employment will end with the
conclusion of that work. Deeper and more fundamental
change is therefore required to enable a functioning
Gazan economy, beginning with authorizing exports
to Israel and other countries, as well as transfers to
and from the West Bank. Without that essential step,
Gaza’s future will remain tenuous at best. In addition,
I urge donors to continue to fund United Nations
reconstruction work in Gaza through the Palestinian
Authority-United Nations Trust Fund. I also urge the
Government of Israel to continue to grant approvals for
outstanding United Nations reconstruction work in the
Gaza Strip, and emphasize once more that there should
be a broader opening for the entry of all construction
materials into Gaza.
The violence in Gaza, which resumed in early June,
has continued. A total of 183 projectiles fired from
Gaza landed in Israel, including 27 Grad rockets and
21 mortar shells. Several rockets were intercepted by
the Iron Dome system. Heavy machine gun shots were
also fired from Gaza at a commercial plaza in southern
Israel on 9 July, without casualties. The Israel Defense
Forces conducted six incursions and 31 airstrikes into
Gaza, resulting in nine Palestinians killed, including
six militants and three civilians, while 54 Palestinians
were injured, including 24 militants and 30 civilians.
We continue to condemn such indiscriminate rocket
attacks from Gaza into Israel and call for their complete

cessation. We also urge Israel to show maximum
restraint.
On 17 July, the de facto Ministry of Interior in Gaza
executed by hanging three Palestinians convicted of
murder, in violation of the Palestinian legal framework
that requires prior ratification by the President. Six
death sentences have been implemented in Gaza since
the beginning of 2012, and 14 since 2007. That runs
counter to the worldwide moratorium on the death
penalty called for by the General Assembly.
On a separate issue that relates to United Nations
relations with Israel, I wish to report that, on 10 July,
the Permanent Representative of Israel sent a letter
to Under-Secretary-General Amos inquiring about
the status of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and its activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The United Nations
will work with the Government of Israel to address the
issues and explain the important work of OCHA in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
Now allow me to turn to regional events. The
Council heard extensive briefings on the escalating
violence in Syria last week, and will receive further
briefings next week. I will therefore limit my remarks
to emphasizing that the Secretary-General remains
extremely concerned by the violence in Syria and by
the rising death toll, as well as by the continuing human
rights abuses and growing humanitarian needs. Each
day brings to light new atrocities and new suffering.
Reports of the aerial bombardment of eastern parts of
the city of Aleppo yesterday add to our serious concerns
about the dangerous escalation currently in play.
We are aware of the reports related to the possible
relocation of alleged chemical weapon stockpiles in
Syria, and to concerns raised about the risk of their
possible use. The Secretary-General has emphasized
the fundamental responsibility of the Government
of Syria in ensuring the safety and security of those
stockpiles, which absolutely must not be used under
any circumstances. The Secretary-General has noted
with concern that Syria is not a party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
We condemn all violence in Syria, which has cost
thousands of lives. That situation cannot continue. The
Secretary-General urges all concerned to immediately
stop the fighting and take steps towards a Syrian-led
transition that will address the genuine aspirations
and needs of the Syrian people. Ending violence and

12-438135

S/PV.6816

seeking a peaceful resolution of the crisis in Syria will
remain at the centre of our efforts.
The situation in Syria is increasingly also
impacting the region. Council members will recall that,
on 19 July, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
informally communicated information regarding the
entry and operations of armed Syrian security forces,
including soldiers, inside the area of separation of the
area of operation of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF), on 18 and 19 July. Since
then, security operations by Syrian armed forces
have continued, mostly in Jabbata and Trunje. The
numbers of armed forces involved in those operations
has varied from 47 up to 396. UNDOF reported heavy
gunfire and many explosions in Jabbata, Al-Baath and
Trunje. UNDOF has lodged its protest with the Syrian
authorities, as the entry of Syrian armed forces and
equipment in the area of separation is a violation of the
Agreement of Disengagement between the Israeli and
Syrian forces. In addition, UNDOF has reported seeing
a total of approximately 100 civilians aboard vehicles
and on foot with personal belongings heading east
through the Bravo line. UNDOF will continue to liaise
with Israeli and Syrian military authorities to prevent
an escalation of tension.
Nowhere else, perhaps, does the impact of the
Syrian crisis loom larger than in Lebanon. As recently
as last week, following a briefing by the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, Mr. Derek Plumby, the
Council, in a press statement on 18 July, expressed
grave concern over repeated incidents of cross-border
fire, incursions, abductions and arms trafficking across
the Lebanese-Syrian border. The Council reiterated the
importance of full respect for Lebanon’s sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity and the authority of the
Lebanese State. In that context, Council members
welcomed President Sleiman’s initiative to reconvene
the national dialogue of Lebanon’s political leaders
and the declarations following the first two meetings
last month, stating that they looked forward to the
continuation of his process.
Since then, a pattern of Syrian army violations of
the Lebanese-Syrian border has continued, including
intermittent shelling from Syria into Wadi Khaled.
In response, the Government has deployed additional
troops of the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) to its
northern border and authorized the LAF to fire back.
New cross-border incidents have been reported since,
including on 21 July in the area of Al-Qa’a, in the

6

north-east of the Beka’a Valley, involving machine-gun
and rocket-propelled grenade fire and a brief incursion
by Syrian soldiers. In addition to the almost 30,000
Syrian refugees registered with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
the surge in the number of Syrians crossing into
Lebanon last week was estimated at some 18,000 over
a two-day period, many of whom have travelled back
into Syria. UNHCR is updating its contingency plan
in the event of a mass or increased influx requiring a
comprehensive humanitarian response.
Lebanon has also continued to face significant
challenges to its security and stability domestically,
linked directly or indirectly to the crisis in Syria.
Incidents in different parts of the country reflect
confessional tensions exacerbated by the conflict
in Syria. On 18 July, following the bomb attack in
Damascus, fresh clashes erupted between groups
from Sunni and Alawite neighbourhoods in Tripoli.
That coincided with a speech by Hezbollah leader
Nasrallah reiterating support for the Syrian regime.
As for the national dialogue, the opposition March 14
coalition decided to boycott its third session, scheduled
for yesterday. President Sleiman has announced that
the process is postponed until 16 August. It is hoped
that the obstacles to continuing the national dialogue
will be overcome in order to allow the next session to
take place as planned. As stressed by the Council, the
commitment of the country’s leaders to safeguarding
Lebanon from the impact of regional tensions at this
difficult time is particularly important.
Meanwhile, the situation in the UNIFIL area of
operation has remained cautiously calm and stable. As
the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed some troops out
of the south Litani sector to reinforce its efforts along
the north-eastern border, UNIFIL increased operational
activities in its area. The Lebanese Armed Forces
assured UNIFIL that this is a temporary measure and
that troops would be sent back to the south as soon as
the situation allowed. Israeli violations of Lebanese
airspace, meanwhile, have continued on an almost daily
basis.
In conclusion, I am addressing the Council today
only two months before the General Assembly’s general
debate, in September, and almost a year since the
Council was presented with the Palestinian application
for membership in the United Nations. When I was
last before the Council, in May, I warned that we were
increasingly moving away from a two-State solution

12-43813

S/PV.6816

towards a one-State reality that would also diminish the
prospects for regional peace in the spirit of the Arab
Peace Initiative.
The continuous negative trends, as reported today
and in previous briefings, just further manifest the
reality that consistently undermines our common goal
of a negotiated two-State solution that will end the
conflict and end the occupation that started in 1967.
The international community should understand that,
absent a credible political horizon for the establishment
of a Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel, its own efforts in pursuit of that
goal will increasingly lack credibility. The parties must
now do their part to overcome admittedly difficult
obstacles and take the steps necessary to enable an
environment conducive to serious engagement. But I
fear that time is running out.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Serry
for his comprehensive briefing to the Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour: On behalf of Palestine, I congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your country, Colombia, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are fully confident in your
leadership. I also wish to express appreciation to the
People’s Republic of China for its wise stewardship of
the Council last month. And I thank Special Coordinator
Robert Serry for his comprehensive briefing today.
Three months ago, I addressed the Council (see
S/PV.6757) on behalf of Palestine and conveyed our
grave concerns regarding the deteriorating situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of the continuation of Israeli
crimes and violations against the Palestinian people,
their land and property.
We regret that positive developments on the ground
cannot be reported at this time, as we continue to find
ourselves in a situation that has precariously worsened
at all levels and further distanced us from the goal that
we all share, namely, to end Israel’s more than 45-year
military occupation in order to realize the two-State
solution of Palestine and Israel living side by side in
peace and security within recognized borders on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders.
Nothing takes us farther away from that
internationally endorsed goal for peace than the

continuation of Israel’s illegal settlement campaign,
which is being waged in a deliberate attempt to seize
more Palestinian land and entrench Israeli control over
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. That
is the matter on which I will focus my statement, based
on our hope of compelling the international community
to finally take serious and practical action aimed at
stopping Israel, the occupying Power, from completely
destroying the viability of the two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders and reviving the prospects
for soon achieving the long overdue just, lasting and
peaceful settlement that we all have been seeking and
working towards.
Yet, before focusing on the destructive, illegal
Israeli settlement campaign in our land, I must once
again draw the Council’s attention to the many other
illegal actions and measures that continue also to be
taken by the occupying Power against the Palestinian
civilian population living under its ruthless occupation.
During the recent period, Israel forged ahead
with the demolition of Palestinian homes and civilian
infrastructure, resulting in further displacement of
families in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. Today’s comprehensive statement by
Mr. Serry testified about many of the details regarding
those issues.
Israel has also continued to carry out daily military
raids throughout Palestinian villages, towns and cities,
arresting more and more Palestinian civilians and
thereby adding to the thousands of Palestinians already
imprisoned or detained, including hundreds of children.
In that connection, we reiterate our grave concern
about the deplorable treatment to which Palestinian
civilians in Israeli jails and detention centres continue
to be subjected, including degrading, inhumane and
unhygienic captivity conditions, severe humiliation
and mental and physical ill-treatment, including acts
of torture, denial of family visits, denial of access to
proper medical care and education and denial of due
process of law.
We recall the plight of the many Palestinian
prisoners, including those under administrative
detention without charge or trial, who have carried
out prolonged hunger strikes in non-violent, peaceful
protest of that cruel treatment by the occupying Power.
We call on the international community to act to compel
Israel to cease those illegal practices and to release all
of the Palestinian civilians it is illegally imprisoning.

12-438137

S/PV.6816

Israel has also continued to carry out military
attacks via missile air strikes and artillery bombardment
of civilian areas in the besieged Gaza Strip, in grave
violation of international law, including the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War. In that regard, Israel has continued to
deliberately target and kill Palestinian civilians, thereby
persisting with its deliberate policy of extrajudicial
executions.
In the month of June alone, at least 15 Palestinians,
including 3 children, were killed and scores were injured
by Israeli military attacks against the Gaza Strip. In
addition to living in constant fear of such military
attacks, the population of the Gaza Strip continues
to suffer grave hardship as a result of the inhumane
blockade imposed since June 2007 by the occupying
Power, which has now entered into its sixth year. The
cruel blockade clearly constitutes collective punishment
of the over 1.6 million Palestinian civilians living
there, more than half of them children, in a deliberate
and grave breach of international law, specifically
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which prohibits the
occupying Power from collectively punishing protected
persons and prohibits pillaging and reprisals against
them and their property. In that regard, I am referring to
article 33 of the Fourth Geneva Convention and article
50 of The Hague Regulations, which are recognized by
the international community as customary international
law. The blockade is also a violation of the population’s
basic human rights.
The international community must not relent in
demanding that Israel, the occupying Power, act in
accordance with its obligations under international law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention and relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 1860
(2009), to end the blockade of Gaza and to cease its
human rights violations and bring an end to the travesty
against our people.
With the myriad of human rights violations
committed by the occupying Power on a daily basis, it
is a challenging task to keep our statement focused on
one issue. However, it is unquestionably clear that the
continuation of illegal Israeli settlement activities and
the vast network of related infrastructure, including
more than 500 internal checkpoints, roadblocks
and other physical obstacles, which exist primarily
to “protect” the illegal settlers and facilitate their
movement while impeding Palestinian movement and

8

all aspects of life in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, are the largest obstacles to peace.
Since the Council’s last debate on this issue in April
(see S/PV.6757), Israeli announcements of settlement
building have continued unabated, inflaming tensions
and mistrust, further poisoning the environment
and undermining any prospects for the revival of
a negotiated peace process. Throughout that time,
Palestine has submitted numerous letters informing
the Security Council of Israel’s gross violations and
appealing to the Council to speak with one voice and to
act to persuade Israel to cease all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in and
around East Jerusalem and the Jordan Valley, and to act
to end the rampant settler terror and violence against
the Palestinian people and their properties. Regrettably,
the Council has failed to find the political will to act,
and the illegal Israeli settlement campaign, including
constant provocations and settler rampages, continue
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory unabated
and unpunished.
I wish to recall to the Council some of Israel’s illegal
settlement activities in the recent period, reflecting
the occupying Power’s ill intentions to continue rather
than end its belligerent military occupation of our land.
First is the construction of 1,121 units in the illegal
settlement of Har Homa, in Jabal Abu Ghneim in the
southern part of occupied East Jerusalem, about which
the Council met 15 years ago but tragically failed to
stop. There are also the construction of 180 units
in the illegal settlement of Giv’at Ze’ev, 117 units in
the Ariel settlement, 92 units in the Ma’ale Adumim
settlement, 144 units in the Adam settlement and 180
units in the settlement of East Talpiot, also known as
Armon Hanatsiv. All of those illegal settlements are
also in or near occupied East Jerusalem. Moreover,
there is the construction of 2,500 more units in Gilo,
a massive settlement on the outskirts of occupied East
Jerusalem near the city of Bethlehem, as well as the
construction of 114 units in the Efrat settlement, also
near Bethlehem. Add to that the construction of a
300-unit settlement in a declared military compound
near the settlement of Beit El, adjacent to the city of
Ramallah. An announcement has also been made of
plans for the construction of another 84 units in the
Kiryat Arba settlement, located in Al-Khalil, where
hundreds of extremist Israeli settlers have been
deliberately transferred into the midst of 200,000
Palestinians, who are daily subjected to terror, violence

12-43813

S/PV.6816

and intimidation. In addition, during the same time
frame, Israeli occupying forces raided the Al-Makhrour
area of Beit Jala, a predominately Christian community
west of Bethlehem, and carried out the demolition by
bulldozer of two Palestinian homes and a water well,
a road and 53 utility poles, cutting off electricity to at
least 12 Palestinian families in the area, to facilitate the
expansion of the illegal settlement of Har Gilo, entrench
Israel’s network of settlements from occupied East
Jerusalem towards Al-Khalil in the south and further
restrict the area for the future natural development of
Palestinian cities, towns and villages.
To be clear, all settlements and settlement-related
infrastructure, including the separation wall, are illegal,
no matter where they are constructed in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem.
Colonization of occupied territory through the transfer of
citizens of the occupying Power is strictly prohibited by
Article 49, Section 6, of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
is considered to be a grave breach under Additional
Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions and constitutes
a war crime under Article 8, Section 2 (a) (iv) and (b)
(viii), of the Rome Statute. Moreover, the illegality of
that practice and the demands for its complete cessation
and reversal have been repeatedly reaffirmed by the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and the Economic and Social Council,
as well as by the International Court of Justice in its
advisory opinion of 9 July 2004.
We continue to call on the international community
to be firm in its condemnation and rejection of all of
Israel’s illegal settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and
to put a stop to them, regardless of the unjustifiable
pretexts and justifications given by the Government
of Israel. In this call we are also referring to attempts
by the occupying Power to try to legalize its illegal
acts, as it has tried to do with the Levy committee
report, a right-wing, Israeli Government-appointed
committee that has made erroneous conclusions and
recommendations to the effect that Israel should legalize
outposts — a recommendation that defies international
law and the international consensus on Israel’s illegal
settlement campaign. Not coincidentally, the so-called
Levy report was published on the anniversary of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 9 July 2004 (A/ES-19/273), which determined, inter
alia, that, as an occupying Power, Israel is bound by the
Hague Regulations, the Fourth Geneva Convention, as

well as the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child — which are all applicable in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
Court also reaffirmed that, in view of the provisions
of Article 49, paragraph 6, of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, “the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory (including East Jerusalem) have
been established in breach of international law”.
How can Israel speak of a two-State solution — or
peace for that matter — while it continues its illegal
policies and practices, stealing more Palestinian land,
scarce water resources and agricultural land, and
destroying homes, civilian infrastructure and historical
and religious landmarks, as well as separating
Palestinian communities and even families through the
construction of its settlements, the separation wall and
its vast system of roads meant only for Jewish settlers,
in addition to the multitude of other violations of
international law and human rights it commits on a daily
basis? How can Israel or the international community
ask the Palestinian side to engage in negotiations on
ending the occupation in order for them to finally gain
their independence in their own State when the occupier
continues to defy all agreements and provisions of
international law and United Nations resolutions and to
take more and more land, totally impairing the viability
of the Palestinian State? Here, we must recall that, for
20 years throughout the height of the peace process,
Israel persisted with the colonization of Palestinian land
and with the entrenchment of its occupation. Indeed,
despite the good faith and intentions of the Palestinian
side, the Israeli side continued its deceitful behaviour,
taking advantage of a flawed negotiation process and
of the total asymmetry of the situation on the ground,
where the occupying Power subjugated the occupied
territory to its might and will in every respect.
In fact, from 1993 to 2000, the number of settlers in
the occupied Palestinian territory doubled. Today there
are more than 500,000 illegal settlers in about 150 illegal
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, in addition to some 100 outposts erected
with the tacit approval of the Israeli Government.
The only conclusion one can come to is that, as
long as Israel is allowed to act with impunity and in
violation of international law without repercussions,
little will change, and the possibility of achieving a

12-438139

S/PV.6816

two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders will
not be possible.
As President Mahmoud Abbas stated recently at
the World Economic Forum on the Middle East, North
Africa and Eurasia 2012, held in Istanbul in June:
“Our region needs bridges of cooperation, peace and
dialogue rather than walls and settlement expansion”.
He cautioned that time was running out for the historic
peaceful compromise we seek. President Abbas has also
repeatedly said that negotiations remain his first, second
and third option for arriving at a peaceful settlement.
But there must be genuine and credible negotiations
based on the pre-1967 borders, with minor adjustments
accepted by both sides, and based on adherence to,
and respect for, international law, United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions,
and in line with Israel’s obligations under the Quartet
road map. That is not a Palestinian condition, nor, for
that matter, is it a Palestinian position; rather, it is the
position of the entire international community.
Settlements run counter to the formula of land for
peace, on which the entire Middle East peace process is
built. Israel’s illegal actions continue to undermine all
efforts to resume the peace process, including via direct
negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides, on
the basis of the well-known parameters. No Palestinian
can accept continued settlement construction and the
ongoing colonization of Palestinian land, whether
in occupied East Jerusalem or in any other part of
the occupied Palestinian territory. The international
community, which has clear obligations under the
Charter, United Nations resolutions, and international
conventions and covenants, including its obligations
as high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention, must live up to those obligations and
muster the political will to compel Israel to abandon its
expansionism, colonization and aggression against the
Palestinian people and their land, and instead pursue
peace and take the hand of peace that has for so long
been extended to it by the Palestinian leadership.
Tragically, 5 June marked 45 years since the onset
of the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
and Arab lands in 1967 — 45 years of suffering and
oppression in addition to the two prior decades of grave
injustice inflicted on the Palestinian people. Our people
have waited long enough for their inalienable rights to
be realized and to live their lives free from occupation
and in their own State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

10

The time is now, and the international community
should spare no effort to achieve the vision of two States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security, which would represent a historic achievement
for our peoples, our region and the global community,
and not just a tragically missed historic opportunity
with far-reaching and ever more tragic consequences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Waxman (Israel): Allow me to express Israel’s
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your able
stewardship of the Security Council this month.
It has been 18 years since a bomb ripped through
the Argentine Jewish Community Centre in Buenos
Aires, killing 85 people and injuring hundreds of
others. The Islamic Republic of Iran — a State Member
of the Organization — was responsible for that act,
along with its proxy, Hizbullah. Last week, a suicide
bomber exploded his bomb on a bus carrying Israeli
tourists in Burgas, Bulgaria. Six were killed, including
a pregnant woman. More than 30 were injured. The
victims were mostly young people on vacation. Again,
Iran and Hizbullah were responsible.
In recent months, Israelis were targeted in terrorist
attacks and attempted attacks in India, Azerbaijan,
Thailand, Kenya, Turkey and, most recently, in Cyprus.
Iran and Hizbullah were responsible for each and every
one of those acts. That is just one part of a bigger
picture. Iran and Hizbullah’s most recent terrorist plots
span five continents and at least 24 countries.
It should be clear to everyone in the Chamber that
those horrific events are not isolated. A clear line of
terror runs from the bombing in Argentina to the attack
in Bulgaria. It begins and ends in Iran.
The Iranian campaign of terrorism is a plague
that threatens not only Israelis and Jews, but innocent
people all over the globe. The time has come for the
world to put an end to that campaign of terror, once and
for all.
One must not underestimate the significance of
the present moment. The Middle East is perhaps at its
most important crossroads since the end of First World
War. There are two main roads that the region can take.
One is the road of fundamentalism. Today, the Iranian
regime is trying to move the region down that road. Its
ideology does not empower people to build a brighter
future, but enslaves them in a medieval past. Instead

12-43813

S/PV.6816

of opening minds with honest discourse, it clouds them
with conspiracy and hate.
Last month, Iran’s Vice-President, Mohammad-Reza
Rahimi spoke in the presence of United Nations
officials at an event in Tehran. He said that the
teachings of the Talmud, one of the holiest books in
Judaism, were responsible for “inciting the global drug
trade and addiction in a bid to annihilate non-Jewish
communities”. He added that “gynaecologists around the
world kill `black babies’ on the orders of the Zionists”.
Those statements were yet another example of the vile
anti-Semitism that is part of the core ideology of the
Iranian leadership.
But Iran’s leaders do not just spread their hate with
words; they advance it with actions. Hizbullah and Iran
are an integral part of Al-Assad’s killing machine.
Just a few days ago, Hizbullah’s leader gave a speech
praising the Al-Assad regime, calling it “a real military
partner”. Hizbullah and Iran provide Al-Assad with
weapons, ammunition, training, intelligence, logistical
equipment and more. They offer their unique expertise
in the business of terrorism, monitoring people on the
Internet and bypassing international sanctions. Iran and
Hizbullah, Al-Assad’s allies in this trio of brutality, will
cross any line to keep the Al-Assad regime in power
and to make sure that the Syrian people’s quest for
freedom is suppressed. And as we watch these events
unfold, Iran continues to advance its military nuclear
programme. The international community should ask
itself a very simple question: If this is the way Iran
behaves without nuclear weapons, how will it behave
when it possesses the most dangerous weapon of all?
Israel continues to monitor the events in Syria
closely. We are horrified by the humanitarian disaster
taking place, and greatly concerned about the wider
implications for regional stability and security. Last
week, Syrian soldiers crossed into the area of separation
set up according to the separation-of-forces agreement
between Israel and Syria, in blatant violation of that
agreement. This week, Syrian officials acknowledged
the existence of their stockpiles of chemical weapons
and stated clearly that they are ready to use them.
That vast stockpile of chemical weapons is a potential
disaster. The international community cannot stand idle.
Al-Assad must know that he will be held accountable
for using these weapons, and he must understand that
transferring chemical weapons to Hizbullah or other
terrorist organizations is a red line that he cannot cross.

Iran represents one road — a road of hatred — but
there is another road that the Middle East can take, a
road of peace, progress and prosperity. Moving down
that road will require the region to push back against
the fundamentalists and deal with the fundamental
problems facing our region. Yet in this debate and
indeed across the United Nations, one hears very little
about such fundamental issues. I am sure that today’s
debate will be no exception. I am sure we will hear the
same old criticisms of Israeli policies, but very little
about the core challenges facing our region.
The United Nations Development Programme
has sponsored five Arab human development reports
since 2002. The reports reveal the crippling deficits
of freedom, educational opportunities and women’s
empowerment that have long afflicted the Arab world. I
ask: Is Israel responsible for the fact that gays are hunted
down and hanged in Iran; that bloggers in the West Bank
are jailed by the Palestinian Authority; that artists in
Lebanon are ruthlessly censored by their Government;
or that women in Gaza are arrested and tortured for
daring to leave the house without a headscarf? Are
we responsible for the Christians and other minorities
who are fleeing the Middle East these days in droves
because Islamic extremists attack their communities?
Is Israel responsible for the fact that 25 per cent of Arab
young people are unemployed and that many others
are desperate to find a decent job? Maybe it is time to
stop using Israel in this debate to sweep such important
issues under the carpet. It is certainly time to finally
deal openly and honestly with the basic deficits that
cripple the Middle East.
A lot is said during these debates about Gaza. Much
of it is disingenuous. Some in this Chamber claim that
the situation in Gaza is deteriorating; however, the
International Monetary Fund reports a gross domestic
product growth of 20 per cent per capita in Gaza for
2011. Some here speak of a so-called Israeli blockade,
although there is not a single item of civilian goods that
cannot enter Gaza today. Let me be clear. There is a
crisis in Gaza, for Israelis and Palestinians alike, and it
is called Hamas.
The crisis in Gaza is that Hamas attacks the
crossings used to transfer humanitarian aid and then
complains about shortages and delays. The crisis in
Gaza is that global terrorists have found fertile ground
from where they can operate and destabilize other
parts of our region, including the Sinai peninsula. The
crisis in Gaza is that Hamas uses Palestinian schools as

12-4381311

S/PV.6816

launching pads to fire rockets at Israeli schools, and uses
Palestinian hospitals to fire rockets at Israeli hospitals.
More than 200 rockets have been fired into southern
Israel in the past two months alone. Just yesterday, a
rocket was fired into the major city of Ashkelon.
Yet even as rockets fly out of Gaza, Israel continues
to work with the international community to make sure
that humanitarian aid, medicine and goods reach the
inhabitants of Gaza. How many other Governments
provide essential assistance to the very areas from
which their citizens are being attacked?
As we stand at this critical crossroads, the leaders
in our region should look in the mirror and finally take
the road less travelled in the Middle East — the road
of tolerance, compromise and moderation; the road that
condemns terrorism and promotes understanding of the
other; the road of peace.
The Palestinian leadership should do the same.
They can start by dropping their preconditions and
rejoining Israel in direct negotiations that deal with all
final status issues. They can take that road by ending
incitement in their schools, mosques and media, and
by naming their town squares after peacemakers, not
suicide bombers. They can take that road by finally
acknowledging that the Jewish people have a historic
connection to the land of Israel.
The Government of Israel is prepared to work hard
to achieve lasting peace with the Palestinians through
direct negotiations. The people of Israel are prepared
to make painful compromises to reach that noble goal.
Yet, as we wait for them to return to the negotiating
table, the Palestinians continue to take unilateral steps
that will not bring us one inch closer to peace.
The moment is critical. It is time for the leaders of
the Middle East to make the right choices. The people
of our region have already sacrificed so much. They
deserve nothing less.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process for his briefing.
Last week the world witnessed, and the Security
Council appropriately condemned, a heinous terrorist
attack in Bulgaria. The target was innocent Israeli
tourists on vacation on the Black Sea. Five Israelis

12

and one Bulgarian were murdered, and scores more
were injured, including citizens of Bulgaria, Italy,
Slovakia and the United States. There is no justification
whatsoever for such attacks on innocent people. We
extend our heartfelt condolences to the victims and
their families, and to the people of Israel, Bulgaria and
all those countries whose citizens were harmed in that
awful event.
Turning to Syria, the Council has failed to respond
credibly to the Al-Assad regime’s onslaught because
of vetoes by two of its members, the most recent
occurring last week. As Ambassador Rice said after
last Thursday’s vote, “The Security Council has failed
utterly in its most important task on its agenda this
year”. It is our hope, as she also said then, that the day
will come when the Council can assume its proper
role at the centre of the international response to the
conflict in Syria.
We continue to see a grave escalation of the regime’s
attacks against its own people that continues to spread
instability well beyond Syria’s borders. As we saw
with incidents over the weekend, the regime is losing
its grip over increasingly large swathes of the country.
The Syrian opposition now controls several crossings
on the Iraqi and Turkish borders. That is increasing
evidence that the Al-Assad regime will not remain in
power, and since the Council has failed to shoulder
its responsibilities, the United States will continue to
work with the friends of the Syrian people to increase
pressure on the regime, support the Syrian opposition,
marshal relief for the Syrian people and help prepare
for a Syrian-led democratic transition.
We are deeply concerned about the incident on
18 and 19 July in the area of operations of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF),
as described in a letter from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to the Council last week,
in which nearly 500 armed soldiers from the Syrian
Arab armed forces entered the area of separation. Over
the past six months, Syria has committed multiple
violations of the key provisions of the 1974 agreement
that led to the establishment of UNDOF, but the July
incident constitutes the gravest breach of the agreement
in its nearly 40-year history. We strongly condemn
all violations of that disengagement agreement. Such
violations must cease immediately.
The ongoing violence in Syria continues to put
pressure on all its neighbours to support dramatic

12-43813

S/PV.6816

increases in the number of refugees. We thank those
countries for providing the refugees with safe harbour.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates that, on 18 and
19 July alone, 18,000 Syrians fled across the border
into Lebanon, meaning that the estimated number of
refugees in Lebanon increased by nearly 60 per cent in
just two days. More than 117,000 Syrian refugees have
registered with UNHCR in Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and
Turkey. It has become a humanitarian crisis. The United
States has provided $64 million during the current
fiscal year to address the needs of those displaced by
violence, and we urge other donors to provide support.
Let me also reiterate what President Obama said
on Monday about one of the most worrisome aspects
of the Syrian crisis. The regime has now acknowledged
stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons.
President Al-Assad and those around him have been
duly warned that the world is watching and that they
will be held accountable should the regime make the
egregious mistake of using such weapons.
Lebanon has been particularly hard hit by
Al-Assad’s aggression. The Syrian military forces
have repeatedly shelled Lebanese territory, resulting
in civilian deaths in several locations. We condemn
those acts and demand that the Syrian regime cease
such egregious violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty. As
reiterated in the Council’s 9 July press statement, the
international community is unified in its demand that
Lebanon’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
and the authority of the Lebanese State be respected, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions.
Despite those destabilizing external dynamics,
Lebanese President Sleiman continues to press ahead
with national dialogue talks ─ an initiative that we
welcome. We support the efforts of Lebanese political
leaders to remain focused on maintaining calm,
including safeguarding Lebanon from the effects of the
crisis in neighbouring Syria. In addition, we welcome
Prime Minister Mikati’s 11 June announcement that the
Government of Lebanon had fulfilled its 2012 funding
obligation to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
I will now turn to our shared goals related to a
comprehensive Middle East peace. During Secretary
of State Clinton’s recent trip, she met separately with
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu and
reinforced the message that the United States supports
the parties’ continued engagement based on the leaders’

exchange of letters earlier this year. She underscored our
view that the status quo is unsustainable. She reiterated
that our goal remains an independent Palestinian State,
living in peace and security alongside the Jewish
democratic State of Israel.
During the visit, Secretary Clinton stated publicly
that “it is only through negotiation, not through
international venues or unilateral acts, that peace can
be and will be secured”. We believe that unilateral
actions harm the peace process and only entrench
both sides. The use of international forums to force
decisions on final status issues that must be resolved
directly by the parties does nothing to tangibly improve
the daily lives of Palestinians, nor to foster the trust
between the parties needed to make progress towards a
two-State solution. It is incumbent upon both parties to
discontinue unilateral actions that jeopardize efforts to
achieve peace.
The United States reiterates that it does not accept
the legitimacy of continued settlement activity and
opposes any effort to legalize settlement outposts. As
we work to put the parties back on the path of direct
negotiations, we must also address the realities on the
ground. The international community, along with the
Palestinian people, has invested a great deal in the
Palestinian Authority’s institution-building efforts.
Sustaining that effort is now in jeopardy as the
Palestinian Authority faces its worst financial crisis
ever. Israel, the donor community and the Palestinian
leadership are all taking steps to address the crisis, but
the financial gap remains large and the consequences
of failing to close that gap are severe. More needs to
be done now to avoid a collapse of the institutions so
vital to providing for the daily needs, governance and
security of the residents of the West Bank.
We should all also focus our support on the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), particularly in this time
of financial crisis for that Agency. UNRWA provides
essential services to the Palestinian refugee population
in the West Bank, Gaza, Lebanon, Jordan and — it is
important to remember — Syria. UNRWA provides
education for more than 485,000 schoolchildren,
primary health care in 138 clinics and social services for
the most vulnerable Palestinian refugees, particularly
in Lebanon and Gaza.
Before concluding, let me reiterate that any further
rocket fire on southern Israel from Gaza is simply

12-4381313

S/PV.6816

unacceptable. We remind members of the paralysing
effects that such attacks have on the lives of innocent
Israelis and the threat that they pose to the peace
process and to the region generally. The international
community must stand united in opposition to such
threats.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for the
very comprehensive information that he has given us.
We also thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel for their
presentations.
As is our custom, every month we meet to consider
the issue of the Middle East and we frequently find
ourselves obliged to repeat our arguments. However,
during the past month, we have been faced with
very unusual situations, whose future impact is still
uncertain. Only last week, we had several significant
events.
First, we did not reach agreement on providing
unanimous political support to Mr. Kofi Annan and,
therefore, adopted a 30-day extension of the United
Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic, supposedly for its orderly withdrawal.
Secondly, in Lebanon, the national dialogue was
resumed under the threat of a spillover of violence
from Syria. Thirdly, in Yemen, the authorities continue
to wage war against terrorist groups that threaten the
nascent democracy. Fourthly, only a few days ago,
more than 100 persons were reported dead in Iraq,
reminding us that the country remains on our agenda,
as the recently adopted extension of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq underscores. Fifthly,
there was a terrorist attack against Israeli tourists in
Bulgaria — an act that we condemn.
The situation in Syria is of particular concern given
the information that reaches us daily on the human
and material losses and the high number of displaced
persons. The lack of consensus on a draft resolution
by the Council is doubly unfortunate against that
humanitarian background. On this occasion, we will
also mention one key issue that has been on the Security
Council’s agenda for the longest time and that took up
most of Mr. Serry’s briefing, namely, the Palestinian
issue. That issue has been somewhat overtaken by
events in other countries of the region.

14

In that regard, and as for the peace process in the
Middle East, we continue to believe that the creation of
a Palestinian State, living in peace and security within
secure borders with its neighbour, Israel, is an objective
of singular importance. The so-called two-State
solution favoured by the Quartet must be the product of
direct negotiations between the parties involved, with
the support of the international community.
We believe that the daily efforts to find a definitive
peaceful solution must continue. However, they should
be complemented by the will and commitment of the
parties to negotiating in an atmosphere of good faith
and mutual trust. Both sides should do their utmost to
find common ground that will lead them to finding a
satisfactory solution as soon as possible.
We note that the situation is extremely fragile, but
that does not mean that it is impossible to resolve. The
efforts of the Quartet and its individual members, as well
as the direct approaches that have taken place between
the parties themselves, suggest that all is not lost. We
are willing to support and promote every opportunity to
resume negotiations, but we remained concerned over
actions that clearly threaten the prospect of a peaceful
solution.
As stated by the International Court of Justice,
the settlement policy promoted by the Government
of Israel is illegal and jeopardizes the outcome of the
peace process. In that regard, we are concerned that
the Israeli Government, on the one hand, should seek
to justify such illegal actions by publishing the report
of a presidential commission appointed to study the
situation of the settlements in occupied territories,
while on the other hand it denies access to United
Nations officials appointed by the Human Rights
Council to analyse the legal status of these settlements.
It is even more disturbing to note that, according to
Israeli authorities, the work of such a mission would be
“biased and flawed” and that the fact-finding mission
“embodies the inherent distortion that typifies the
United Nations Human Rights Council’s treatment
of Israel and the hijacking of the important human
rights agenda by non-democratic countries”.
We have serious doubts about the characterization
of the work of one of the most important bodies for the
protection of human rights as “biased and inaccurate”.
Additionally, we believe it necessary to review the
need to continue the blockade imposed by Israel on the

12-43813

S/PV.6816

Gaza Strip. We are concerned that some 80 per cent of
families in Gaza depend on humanitarian aid. While
recognizing Israel’s security concerns, this collective
punishment has been imposed on all innocent families
living in the area. At the same time, we consider it
important that all armed groups operating from Gaza
cease their military claims. Their actions only prolong
the suffering of these families and jeopardize the peace
process.
Finally, my delegation believes that respect for
international law is the key to the peace process in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. That
respect depends not only on Israel and Palestine, but,
in the face of their continued violation of these norms,
on the international community and the United Nations
as well. Only by respecting the rights of each of these
populations, and by pledging to seek a peaceful solution,
will they be able to live together with strong and secure
borders.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.
I would also like to extend the sincere condolences
of France to the victims of the terrorist attack in
Bulgaria. I reiterate my country’s full solidarity to the
Israeli State and people in their fight against hatred and
terrorism.
The Syrian regime has systematically violated
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) by intensifying
its use of heavy weaponry against its own people and by
bombing urban centres from airplanes today, for the first
time. According to non-governmental organizations,
an estimated 19,000 Syrians have been killed by the
regime, while 3 million have been endangered by
internal displacements. By United Nations estimates,
another 1 million face food insecurity. The escalation
of violence has caused tens of thousands of refugees
to flee to neighbouring countries. We commend the
assistance given to the people fleeing Syria.
The impact of all this on regional stability is of
increasing concern. In the Golan Heights, the Syrian
authorities committed a serious violation of the 1974
agreement by penetrating into the separation zone.
We will not allow Syria to dissimulate its excesses
by fomenting regional unrest. The threatened use of
chemical and biological weapons and the violations of

Lebanese sovereignty and of resolutions 1559 (2004),
1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006) are equally unacceptable.
That is the message sent by the Security Council
last week, reiterating week its commitment to the
stability, sovereignty and integrity of Lebanon,
threatened by the growing number of Syrian incursions
and bombardments on the Lebanese side of the
border. We welcome the responsible attitude of the
Lebanese authorities, politicians and people, who
have demonstrated their resolve not to be dragged into
a conflict that is not theirs. We encourage them to
continue to invest in the national dialogue relaunched
by Lebanese President Sleiman.
The impotence to which the Council has been
reduced by the Russian and Chinese vetoes does not
leave it without recourse. We will maintain our support
for the Syrian people and a democratic transition. We
have adopted a new series of sanctions against Syria
in the context of the European Union. We will pursue
our work to support the opposition, including on the
ground, and to help them to coalesce around a political
project and a transitional Government for Syria. We
will also continue to build a case against the Syrian
regime to establish its criminal responsibility for the
crimes against humanity of which it is guilty. We will
continue to respond to the appeals of peoples in danger
and to pursue our resolute efforts, including within the
European Union, for increased humanitarian aid to the
Syrian people.
The threats to regional stability are not without
consequences for the peace process in the Middle East.
Our responsibility today in this difficult context is to
maintain the viability and political credibility of the
two-State solution. And yet, every day Israel’s pursuit of
its settlement policy undermines the possibility of peace
and violates international law and the resolutions of the
Security Council. Expulsions continue in Area C. The
violence of certain settlers too often goes unpunished.
The recent report of the Levy Commission adds insult
to injury by claiming legitimacy and legality for a fait
accompli. We call on Israel to reject it and to put an
immediate end to its gross violations of international
law.
For our part, we will continue to affirm that
settlement activity in all its forms is counter to
international law and impedes peace. We deplore the
inability of the Council and the Quartet to express
themselves on this issue. Today, alongside our European

12-4381315

S/PV.6816

partners, we are considering specific ways to respond
to this policy, which has become the main threat to the
two-State solution.
The viability of that solution requires the viability
of the partners implementing it. We therefore reaffirm
our support for the weakened Palestinian Authority. The
financial crisis besetting the Authority is unprecedented.
We call once again on donors to remobilize support for
the construction of a Palestinian State courageously and
successfully launched by Prime Minister Salam Fayyad
under the authority of President Abbas.
It is important in parallel to make headway on
confidence-building measures that would allow dialogue
to resume. We are encouraged by the pursuit of contacts
between the two parties, but their discussions must lead
to significant gestures on such issues as the pre-Oslo
prisoners and weapons for the Palestinian police.
We support President Abbas in his pursuit of
Palestinian reconciliation pursuant to the principles of
the peace process endorsed by the Palestine Liberation
Organization. No peace will be possible without
Palestinian unity, and in that regard we deplore the fact
that Hamas has interrupted the work of the Electoral
Commission in Gaza. If new socio-economic and
political prospects are to emerge in Gaza, Israel must
change its policy and move towards a complete lifting
of the blockade, pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009).
Moreover, Israel’s security must be taken into account,
and we firmly condemn the rockets being launched
against southern Israel from the Gaza Strip and Sinai.
Such confidence-building measures are no substitute
for a credible negotiating process. France has frequently
reaffirmed, here and in the General Assembly, the need
to identify a framework for the negotiations. Above and
beyond the required leadership, negotiations cannot be
credibly resumed without clear parameters, a realistic
timetable, and guarantees against non-respect for the
decisions of the international community. We hope that
the interested parties as a whole, including within the
Council, can contribute to the development of such a
framework. If such reflection is not begun as soon as
possible, we must fear that the two-State solution is no
more than a pious wish and that peace is beyond our
reach.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to express our thanks to the Colombian presidency
for convening this very important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. I also thank the Special

16

Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing.
It has now become conventional for any
consideration of political dynamics in the Middle East
region to focus on the wave of changes that the region has
encountered in the aftermath of the Arab Spring. Never
before has the region experienced such a large-scale
transformation driven from within. In the shortest
time, the region has been caught in the limelight of the
international security agenda and generated intense
discussion over the causes of these transformational
processes, the courses of action and strategies to be
adopted by the international community, and the future
that these events presage for the entire region.
Our discussion today should undoubtedly be yet
another attempt to recollect, analyse and think through
the vital changes that Middle Eastern societies have
been exposed to and are still grappling with. The
peoples of the Middle East should be congratulated on
their determination and firmness towards achieving
greater freedom and wider political participation. At
the same time, many outstanding issues are pending,
and we have come to realize that there are no easy fixes
or magic solutions. While the prospects are promising,
the challenges of transition may look arduous and, to
some extent, intimidating. Against this background,
the international community should do its utmost and
direct its collective efforts towards helping the countries
of the region and make their transition successful,
sustainable and durable.
Having shed some light on the challenges of the
outstanding new transformational processes in the
Middle East, one cannot help but ponder the lasting
traditional security challenges, more specifically armed
conflicts, that are rife in the region. It is obvious that
their solution is imperative to achieving durable peace,
stability and security in the region, and that respect for
international law should be an absolute priority to this
effect. At the same time, political consistency represents
one of the major prerequisites if legitimate demands
are to be transformed into desirable outcome. It is clear
that, while seeking justice, one cannot simultaneously
advocate or encourage injustices in respect of others.
At a more specific level, we would like once again
to express our profound concern over the situation
with regard to the Middle East peace process, which
has been at a standstill with no substantive progress
towards resuming direct talks between the parties.

12-43813

S/PV.6816

Against this background, the construction and
expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, the confiscation of Palestinian lands,
the displacement of the civilian population, action
characterized as collective punishment of civilians, and
attempts to legitimize illegal activities are particularly
alarming. Such measures represent open disregard
for international law and contempt for human rights,
place a tremendous burden on civilians, cause serious
obstruction to the peace process and, more dangerously,
threaten the two-State solution and the emergence of a
viable Palestinian State.
It is clear that there is no alternative to peace
and negotiations. However, the lack of agreement on
political issues in situations of armed conflict and
military occupation cannot be used as a pretext for
disrespecting international law and human rights. We
proceed from the importance of reaffirming, with
respect to the occupied Palestinian territories and similar
situations in other parts of the world, the continuing
applicability of all relevant international legal norms,
achieving the invalidation of activities aimed at the
consolidation of military occupations, initiating urgent
measures towards removing the adverse effects of such
activities, and discouraging any further practices of
the same or a similar nature. Illegal activities in the
occupied territories cannot be recognized under any
circumstances.
In assuming its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council must react adequately in order to
put an end to illegal practices and policies and ensure
that international law, human rights and fundamental
freedoms are observed and respected. We support the
ongoing efforts to achieve the Palestinian reconciliation,
and express our hope that Palestinian unity will soon be
restored in the interest of the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people.
The people of Palestine has been recognized as
having the right to self-determination and statehood.
That has been noted in a number of United Nations
resolutions and by the International Court of Justice
in its advisory opinion on the Legal consequences of
the construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Azerbaijan supports the application of
Palestine for admission to membership in the United
Nations and looks forward to a solution on this issue
based on international law.

To sum up, let me express the hope that, with
the best efforts of the nations of the Middle East and
the international community, positive achievements
and momentum will be sustained, while the pending
issues related to security and democratic transition are
resolutely addressed by adopting swift policies and
approaches in view of changing realities in the region.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority,
for his briefing. I have also listened carefully to the
statements made by the representatives of Palestine and
Israel.
The Palestine and Israel question is at the heart
of the Middle East process and has a major impact
on the situation in the Middle East region. The
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks have long been at a
standstill, which is a source of great concern for China.
Dialogue and negotiation are the only way to achieve
a settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli issue. China has
always maintained that both sides should, on the basis
of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map for peace in the Middle East, resolve
their differences through dialogue and negotiation and
achieve the ultimate goal of establishing an independent
Palestinian State and having two States living side by
side in peace and security.
We welcome and support every initiative conducive
to breaking the deadlock in the Palestinian-Israeli talks
and pushing for a resumption of the talks between the
two sides. We hope that the two parties will continuously
build up mutual trust and create conditions for a
resumption of engagement and an early relaunching
of peace talks. The international community should
further intensify efforts to promote such talks. China
hopes that the Quartet will play a greater role in
pressing for a resumption of the peace talks. China
supports a greater contribution by the Security Council
in advancing the Middle East peace process.
As always, China opposes the Israeli practice of
building Jewish settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as well as attempts to unilaterally change
the status quo of Jerusalem. We call on Israel to release
Palestinian prisoners and detainees and to improve
the living and medical conditions of Palestinians still

12-4381317

S/PV.6816

in prisons or in detention. We urge Israel to halt any
actions that may lead to tension and to take measures to
remove the barriers impeding the resumption of peace
talks.
At this stage, the security and humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including Gaza,
remains grim. The relevant United Nations resolutions
must be effectively implemented. We hope that Israel
will expeditiously and comprehensively lift its blockade
against Gaza and allow access to medical aid, assistance
and all the materiel needed for reconstruction, so as to
alleviate the humanitarian situation.
As always, China firmly supports the Palestinian
people’s just cause for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights. We support the establishment of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We also support granting United Nations
membership to Palestine.
China is prepared to work with the rest of the
international community and will continue to play a
constructive role in ensuring the early achievement of
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
Last week, a draft resolution on Syria failed to be
adopted (see S/PV.6810). That was because there were
major drawbacks in the draft resolution, which violated
the basic principles governing international relations.
Ambassador Li Baodong gave a detailed account of
China’s position on that occasion, so I shall not repeat it.
I wish to emphasize that China has always maintained
that the destiny of Syria must be decided by the Syrian
people themselves. The Syrian question can only be
resolved through political means. The imperative for
the international community is to fully support and
coordinate with Mr. Annan in his mediation efforts;
support the implementation of the communiqué adopted
at the Geneva meeting of the Action Group, the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and Mr. Annan’s
six-point plan; push for an immediate ceasefire and
cessation of violence by all sides in Syria; and create
conditions for the early launch of an inclusive political
dialogue.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): No one here doubts that the transformative
processes that have engulfed the Middle East are
serious and long-term in nature. Their impact is often
difficult to predict and will continue for a long time to

18

come. Russia, which has unswervingly supported the
yearning of the peoples of the region for a better life,
consistently champions non-violent and evolutionary
forms of change — which should not be achieved at the
cost of loss of life and destruction.
Any internal political differences must be resolved
peaceably by the peoples concerned themselves,
through national dialogue and without outside
interference, especially interference involving force.
That principled approach was reaffirmed by Russian
President Vladimir V. Putin during his recent visits
and talks with the leaders of Israel, Jordan and the
Palestinian Authority.
At the same time, as we have underscored
repeatedly, the events of the Arab Spring cannot be
used as a pretext to postpone resolving issues related
to an Arab-Israeli settlement. Quite to the contrary,
progress towards a comprehensive, fair and robust
peace between Israelis and Palestinians on the basis
of the well-known international legal platform would
promote the overall normalization of the situation in
the region.
Unfortunately, the situation with regard to
the Israeli-Palestinian track continues to stagnate.
The status quo is, quite obviously, fragile, and it is
periodically interrupted by flare-ups of confrontation,
which further jeopardizes the prospects for achieving
a just settlement on the basis of the two-State solution.
We must also point out the stalemate with regard to
implementing the programme of action for a final
settlement before the end of 2012, pursuant to the now
almost year-old statement of the Quartet issued in New
York (see SG/2178).
In spite of the efforts of the Quartet and other
interested parties, including Jordan, we have thus far
not succeeded in relaunching the negotiating process.
However, that is not a reason to give up. We will
continue to work within the framework of the Quartet
and bilateral channels to restore positive momentum to
the process.
Steps to promote an atmosphere of trust between
Ramallah and Tel Aviv could help to break the
deadlock. For Israel that could include, for example,
releasing Palestinian detainees held in Israeli jails since
before the Oslo Agreement and allowing the transfer
to the Palestinian Authority of goods, including
those of Russian manufacture stored in Jordan. In
that connection, we welcome the decision by Israeli

12-43813

S/PV.6816

authorities to transfer tax and customs revenues to the
Palestinians. That step, just as the financial assistance
provided by Saudi Arabia, should have a positive impact
on the socio-economic situation in the Palestinian
territories.

consensus. We are referring, in that regard, to tried,
tested and balanced political decisions. In backing the
work of the Mission, Russia has recently informed the
Secretariat of its readiness to contribute 30 military
observers to it.

The ongoing Israeli settlement activity, including
in East Jerusalem, is impeding the establishment of
a conducive climate and destroying the prospects for
a two-State solution. That policy of creating a fait
accompli blatantly violates the requirements of the
road map and aims to prejudice the outcome of final
status negotiations. Such activity is illegal and must end
immediately.

The position of the Russian Federation is consistent
in nature and is based on principle. We advocate
the rapid peaceful settlement of the crisis by the
Syrians themselves, without foreign interference,
through national dialogue between the Government
and the opposition, during which they could freely,
democratically and without any preconditions determine
the future order of the country. That position is fully
in keeping with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex), which laid the foundation for the activity of
Kofi Annan’s Action Group for Syria. Against the
backdrop of an unfolding spiral of violence, intense
pressure on both Damascus and all of the opposition
groups and strict compliance with Kofi Annan’s plan
and the Geneva agreements are needed. The situation is
dangerous because the opposition, a significant part of
which does not wish to even hear of dialogue, is being
told to continue with the armed struggle, which only
exacerbates the confrontations and destabilization.

It is regrettable that the veto by the United States
of America on a draft resolution on settlements (see
S/PV.6484) prevented the Council from expressing itself
on such an important political and humanitarian issue.
We are seriously concerned about the deterioration in
the grave humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip,
which is fuelling radical activity.
Restoring Palestinian national unity on the basis
of the Palestine Liberation Organization platform
and the Arab Peace Initiative is an important element
in the success of a future settlement. Without that, a
full-fledged negotiating process and the practical
implementation of agreements cannot be considered.
The logical conclusion of that process should be the
reunification of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip under
legitimate Palestinian authorities. In that regard, we
welcome the efforts of Egypt’s new leadership, headed
by President Morsy.
For many months now, the members of the
Security Council have had on the table before them
an application by the Palestinians for admission to the
United Nations as a full-fledged Member State. We
back the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people for
self-determination and see no incompatibility between
the implementation of those rights and the pressing
need to resume negotiations. The vulgar forms of
pressure that the Palestinian people are subjected to in
their desire to fulfil those legitimate aspirations should
be condemned.
The unanimous adoption by the Security Council
on 20 July of resolution 2059 (2012) on extending the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria served
as an important indication of the need for both sides,
including the opposition, to cease violence. The
Council’s unanimity demonstrates its ability to achieve

The United States of America has recently spoken
of its intention to circumvent the Security Council.
In essence, that is nothing new as such a policy has
been followed by Washington and a number of other
capitals since the beginning of the crisis in Syria,
which has significantly exacerbated it. It is therefore
those Member States that should bear the burden of
responsibility for the likely catastrophic consequences
of those actions.
The Russian Federation intends to continue to
work towards a consensus in order to reach an internal
Syrian dialogue. We are ready to afford both the
opposition and the Government a negotiation platform
in Moscow to forge contacts to unify the opposition and
for possible negotiations between representatives of the
Government and the opposition.
In conclusion, a lot of attention has been paid to the
recent statement by the representative of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Syria with regard to the possible
use of chemical weapons in case of foreign aggression.
We assume that the authorities of the country will
continue to abide unswervingly by the international
commitments they subscribed to in 1968 when they
acceded to the 1925 Geneva Protocol for the Prohibition

12-4381319

S/PV.6816

of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other
Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank Robert
Serry for his very comprehensive and useful briefing,
as well as the representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
Portugal naturally aligns itself with the statement
that will be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union.
The situation in the Middle East remains of the
highest concern. A traditionally volatile region is again
facing increasingly grave risks as the bloody conflict in
Syria rages and the Middle East peace process remains
in a protracted impasse, stubbornly oblivious to the
changes and shifting dynamics underway. Violence
and terrorism continue to maim and claim innocent
lives. Portugal condemns in the strongest terms the
terrorist attack in Bulgaria, on 18 July, which caused
the death of a Bulgarian and several Israeli citizens and
gravely injured many others. We present our sincere
condolences to the families of the victims. Likewise, we
condemn the ongoing firing of rockets into Israel from
Gaza against innocent civilians. All acts of terrorism
are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation wherever, whenever and by whomever they
are committed.
Last Thursday I expressed in this Chamber my
country’s views on the deteriorating situation in Syria
(see S/PV.6810), so today I will refer to it only briefly.
Eighteen months into that deadly conflict, the
country continues to slip into civil war, destabilizing
neighbouring countries and threatening the integrity
of Syria itself with grave and unforeseeable risks for
regional peace and security. Resolution 2059 (2012)
allows the Syrian authorities a final chance to match
deeds with words, reverse the situation and prevent
the country’s descent into absolute chaos. The Syrian
Government must immediately cease the use of heavy
weapons in populated centres. That is the first minimal
step needed for the establishment of an environment
conducive to a cessation of violence and a Syrian-led
political transition.
We also call upon all parties to engage constructively
with the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States on Syria and to commit to
a sustained cessation of all armed violence in all its
forms, as well as to the implementation of the six-point

20

plan and the political transition set forth by the Action
Group for Syria in Geneva. Portugal highly values
the role of the League of Arab States and its efforts
in seeking a peaceful solution to the conflict, and we
commend the assistance that neighbouring countries
continue to provide those persons fleeing violence and
persecution in Syria.
As has been repeatedly stated, developments in the
Arab world render a final settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict ever more urgent. However, comprehensive
and enduring regional peace will remain elusive
as long as the Palestinian question, the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, stays unresolved. Nevertheless,
the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations continue to be at a
dangerous standstill, and actions on the ground render
the resumption of the dialogue between the parties
increasingly difficult. Most troublesome, in that regard,
is Israel’s continued and intensified settlement activity;
its ongoing policies in Area C and East Jerusalem of
evictions, confiscations and demolitions of Palestinian
housing and infrastructure; and its forced transfer
of populations. Just a couple of days ago the Israeli
Government requested the Israeli Supreme Court to
allow the demolition of Palestinian hamlets in the South
Hebron Hills to enable the area to be used for military
training. All those acts are illegal under international
law and must be clearly condemned as such. Moreover,
they undermine any possibility of a two-State solution
based on the internationally endorsed parameters as
colonization erodes the territorial basis of any such
solution. Soon there will be no land to exchange for
peace. The political credibility of the whole process is
at stake, and the disingenuous report of Justice Levy
further undermines it.
Also, the human rights and humanitarian situation
of Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territory is
deplorable, as we heard from Mr. Serry and Ambassador
Mansour. Settler violence and vandalism, including
attacks on religious sites, excessive restrictions on
movement, deliberate humiliations, arbitrary and
administrative detentions without formal charge, and
the use of disproportionate force by the Israeli security
forces continue to take a heavy toll on Palestinian daily
life.
In Gaza, the blockade, which is now entering its
sixth year, has created an aid-dependant economy
and reinforced extremism. Fundamental change of
the situation in the Gaza Strip and lasting recovery
will require the full implementation of resolution

12-43813

S/PV.6816

1860 (2009). We urge Israel to cooperate full with the
relevant humanitarian actors in the occupied Palestinian
territory, namely, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, and to ensure full and
unimpeded humanitarian access, as is its obligation as
an occupying Power.
The parties must undertake all efforts to engage
in credible direct negotiations. They must take steps
that foster mutual confidence. In that context, Portugal
welcomes the second visit by families from the Gaza
Strip to see relatives in Israeli detention, as we welcome
the transfer by the Israeli Government to the Palestinian
Authority of 180,000,000 shekels advance on tax revenue
transfers. A reliable and predictable transfer of revenues
is essential for the economic and fiscal sustainability of
the Palestinian Authority. But Palestinian access and
use of their resources in Area C are also key for the
economic viability of the Palestinian Authority, without
which it would be increasingly difficult to sustain and
build upon the Palestinian State-building achievements
carried out by Prime Minister Fayyad, under the
direction of President Abbas, whose endeavours we
commend and encourage.
The resumption of a meaningful negotiation process
based on the well-known parameters and on the Quartet
statement of 23 September 2011 remains an utmost
priority. We all know that direct negotiations are the
only way to settle all final status issues, but the window
for a negotiated solution is closing quickly. Israelis and
Palestinians — and all in the region — can only gain
from the establishment of a sovereign, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State committed to
peace and security and Israel’s full integration into its
regional environment on the basis of the Arab Peace
Initiative. The parties simply cannot afford to miss this
historic opportunity.
Time is running out, as Mr. Serry said. Now is
the moment for Israelis and Palestinians to re-engage
seriously and courageously. It is the time to take the
risks that a just and durable peace necessarily entails.
It is not the time for yet more procrastination. It is an
illusion for either party to think that time and the status
quo are on their side. If there is one thing the past year
and a half has shown us, it is that history will wait for
no one. It will proceed at its own pace, and it will follow
its own course.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
begin by thanking Special Coordinator Robert Serry for

his comprehensive briefing on the status of the Middle
East peace process and the situation in the region. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their valuable statements.
The Middle East peace process has been stalemated
for a long time. Informal talks over the past two years
have not resulted so far in any substantive progress
towards the resumption of direct talks. The efforts of
the international community, including the Quartet,
to create an environment conducive to meaningful
negotiations have not yielded any positive results either.
Recent efforts towards addressing basic differences
over the parameters for the resumption of direct talks on
final status issues — settlements, borders, security and
resources — have also failed to make any progress. The
focus of the international community on the unfolding
events in the region appears to have overshadowed the
Middle East peace process.
Under such circumstances, there is a growing
risk of a sharp deterioration in the situation. Clearly,
the status quo in the Palestinian question is untenable
and unsustainable, particularly when the leading
members of the international community claim to be
supporting the democratic aspirations of other peoples
in the region. Before it gets too late, the international
community, particularly the Quartet, must redouble
its efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating
table. The parties should also remain engaged and
take confidence-building measures that may help to
resume dialogue. In that regard, the joint statement
issued by Israel and the Palestinian Authority in
May, committing the sides to peace and the release of
Palestinian prisoners, is a welcome sign. The parties
must implement their commitments under the joint
statement fully and without further delay.
We think that the first step to be taken for the
resumption of direct talks between the parties is the
freezing of illegal settlement activities by Israel in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The continuing
settlement activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
are threatening the basic premises of the two-State
solution. Settlement activities have also exacerbated
the humanitarian problems of the Palestinian people,
with increasing violence and the aggravation of tension
between the settlers and the Palestinian population.
We therefore reiterate our call on Israel to stop all
settlement activities.

12-4381321

S/PV.6816

The blockade of Gaza has entered its sixth year.
The humanitarian situation continues to be grim, with
disruption to essential services, economic activity and
infrastructure. While Israeli security concerns are
legitimate, there is a need to avoid all violence against
civilians everywhere. The blockade of Gaza is causing
severe hardships, amounting to collective punishment
of the population. While Israel has taken some positive
steps to relax the blockade by allowing essential
commodities to enter Gaza, those steps fall short of what
is required. Israel should immediately lift the blockade
and allow for the resumption of normal socio-economic
activities in Gaza so that the residents can rebuild their
lives and their dependence on humanitarian assistance
is reduced.
In line with their commitment to democratic values
and principles, the progress made by the Palestinian
factions on the reconciliation front is welcome. We hope
that those efforts will bear fruit soon, leading to the
formation a unity Government, the holding of elections,
the reunification of Palestinian State institutions and
measures for the reconstruction and development of
Palestinian society.
Despite severe political and economic constraints,
the progress made by the Palestinian Authority in
institution-building is commendable. Various studies
have indicated that Palestinian institutions have reached
the threshold required for a functioning State. We
expect the Organization to reaffirm that fact through
a favourable decision on Palestine’s application for
membership. Meanwhile, the donor community should
provide additional resources to address the severe
financial difficulties that the Palestinian Authority is
facing. Palestinian tax revenue must be transferred to
the Palestinian Authority regularly and on time.
India has a long history of solidarity with the
Palestinian people. India has extended its consistent
and unwavering support to the Palestinian cause in
word and deed. Let me reiterate that India continues to
support the legitimate right of the Palestinian people
to a State living side by side and in peace and security
with Israel based on the pre-1967 borders, as enunciated
in the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
principle of land for peace endorsed by the Quartet
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative. India will also
continue to provide material and technical assistance
to the Palestinian people through budgetary support to
the Palestinian Authority, various development projects
undertaken under the India-Brazil-South Africa

22

Facility for Hunger and Poverty Alleviation, bilateral
training programmes for institutional capacity building
and human resource development, and regular financial
assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
With respect to Syria, let me state that we do not see
an alternative to the full implementation of resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) for a political resolution of
the crisis without further bloodshed. A right step in that
direction will be for all sides to implement resolution
2059 (2012), adopted unanimously by the Council last
week. It is necessary that all parties, inside and outside
of Syria, fully cooperate with Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan.
In conclusion, the Palestinian question remains at
the centre of the Arab-Israeli conflict, which includes
other Arab lands under occupation. The Security
Council should remain cognizant of the fact that the
final and comprehensive settlement of all Arab-Israeli
issues is paramount to an enduring and lasting peace
in the region. Developments in the Middle East since
early 2011 underscore the urgent need to expeditiously
address those issues. India stands ready to play its
role in our collective endeavours to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by thanking Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
very comprehensive briefing.
Everyone here knows that the situation in the Middle
East and the Palestinian cause are marked by a freeze
in negotiations and a deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip. Also, there is a stalemate on
the vision of a two-State solution, as a result of Israeli
settlement activity. We simply do not know what the
consequences will be for the security and stability of
the Middle East as a whole. This year has witnessed
further unprecedented expansion of settlements.
The Israeli occupation forces have mobilized their
legal arsenal, their settlers and their armed forces to
conquer more land following the expulsion of residents
from their homes and after crops and trees that form
their only source of income have been uprooted. The
illegal settlement policy has been repeatedly affirmed,
and the international community has repeatedly
condemned the situation and Israel’s expansionist
policy. Even so, the Israeli authorities have pursued
their policy of settlement, including in East Jerusalem.

12-43813

S/PV.6816

The Security Council has been unable to reaffirm
its position against such illegal settlements. The
Palestinian people have, however, continued to negotiate
or to express their readiness to resume negotiations,
responding to them favourably and showing their good
intentions and good will. About that there can be neither
doubt nor question.
Unfortunately, that has not been the case with
Israel, which has persisted in its expansionist settlement
policies, bringing to naught the vision of a two-State
solution. Its policy of gradually isolating the city of
Jerusalem from its natural Palestinian surroundings,
which has already been implemented in the region,
clearly speaks to a premeditated plan to ensure that a
two-State solution is too difficult or even impossible to
achieve.
The city of East Jerusalem is experiencing troubling
changes. Indeed, the rate at which settlements are being
built and religious and holy sites desecrated is alarming.
The Al-Quds Committee, chaired by our sovereign,
categorically rejects the report of the Israeli legal advisor
who claimed that the Al-Aqsa Mosque was an integral
part of Israeli territory. The Kingdom of Morocco
denounces, condemns and rejects his irresponsible and
unacceptable position, which threatens the holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque and runs counter to United Nations resolutions,
which reject any changes to the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The Kingdom
of Morocco understands the real intention behind those
statements, which are accompanied by repeated steps
to Judaize the city of East Jerusalem that have changed
the religious and cultural character of the city. We wish
to warn against such a policy and its consequences,
and urge the international community to assume its
responsibilities.
First and foremost, we urge the Security Council to
ensure that the historical and legal nature of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif is respected and that its Christian and
Muslim holy sites are not violated. Israel is maintaining
its settlement policy and, at the same time, depriving
Palestinians of their right to build on their lands. The
recent decision of the occupation authorities to destroy
eight villages in order to build an Israeli training camp is
yet another manifestation of the defiant and provocative
policy carried out by Israel.
We reaffirm the need for Israel to put an end to
such practices, and we thank the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and all

organizations that back the right of the Palestinians to
build homes and facilities on their own land. We also
condemn acts of violence and intimidation against
Palestinians by settlers in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank.
Israel continues to impose its blockade on the Gaza
Strip, which has lasted for years now and deprives
the inhabitants of Gaza of all forms of livelihood and
well-being. The decisions of the Security Council
and the Quartet are important in that respect, and we
invite them to step in to put an end to the settlement
policy, including the seizure of Palestinian land in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank, especially now that the
Levy Commission has reaffirmed that Palestinian lands
are not occupied or settled. That added insult to injury,
with blatant disregard for all international resolutions
and laws.
Furthermore, Israel’s intransigence and the failure
of the international community to implement the vision
of a two-State solution make the resumption of the peace
process almost impossible. The Quartet’s decision to
send a special envoy to encourage the parties to make
specific proposals regarding territory, borders and
security has yielded no palpable results. The political
stalemate benefits no one, including Israel. To the
contrary, a final legal solution to the Palestinian issue
would promote peace, security, stability and prosperity
in the entire region, including Israel.
We cherish the hope of seeing Palestinian national
reconciliation and hope that the obstacles to it will be
eliminated. We are aware that Palestinian unity will
strengthen the position of Palestinian negotiators. We
have spoken at length of the Palestinian issue, because
it lies at the very heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict and
because the likelihood of a resolution, unfortunately, is
currently being threatened from all sides.
That does not mean that we are not concerned
about or do not understand the severity of the situation
in Syria, which has dominated the Council’s agenda
of late. What is very important in that case is the
occupation of the Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon
by the Israeli armed forces. That occupation must
be brought to an end. Morocco, like all other Arab
States, is committed to seeing a negotiated, just and
comprehensive solution that will afford the Palestinian
people a viable, independent State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and that would guarantee the security and
safety of all States in the region.

12-4381323

S/PV.6816

Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Coordinator Robert Serry for his
briefing and his dedicated work.
Let me start with a word on the heinous terrorist
attack in Bulgaria last week. Like the whole Council,
Germany has condemned in the strongest terms that
attack, which targeted Israeli citizens. We are looking
forward to the results of the ongoing investigation.
Those responsible for the attack must be found and
brought to justice. We extend our condolences to the
families of the victims.
Before I turn to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, let
me first address the situation in Syria. Last week, the
double veto against the draft resolution on Syria marked
a decisive split in the Council. The Council has failed
once again to assume its responsibility. It has not been
able to agree on clear messages — neither to Damascus,
that the use of heavy weapons must stop, nor to the
people of Syria, that the Council fully supports Kofi
Annan’s effort to solve the crisis politically.
As I said last week, the Syrian people will pay the
price for this failure. Not only has the use of heavy
weapons increased, but we now hear reports that
even fighter jets are being used in the Syrian regime’s
onslaught on its own people. Our agreement to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) should not
be seen as a whitewash of the Council’s failure. The
agreement does not reflect consensus in the Council; it
is merely the lowest common denominator.
We continue to believe that the Syrian regime
must face consequences if it continues to trample on
international law and its own promises. We are very
worried about the prospect of a civil war in Syria, and
we urge all Council members to do their utmost not to
put the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy, Kofi Annan,
in peril.
The Al-Assad authorities are not only unleashing
heavy weapons and gunships against their own people;
two days ago, they even went a step further, making
threats to the international community of the use
of chemical and biological weapons. Such a threat is
ruthless and inhumane. The international community
has strongly, and rightly, condemned that threat,
which my Foreign Minister described as monstrous.
We will continue to hold the Syrian authorities fully
accountable for any use of such weapons and for the
safety of their storage. We reiterate our call to all those

24

within the Syrian regime to reconsider their options.
One day there will be a new Syria. One day there will
be accountability for their deeds. And one day they may
wish they had taken the right decision for themselves,
their families and the future of their own country.
The increasing number of refugees from Syria
into neighbouring countries shows clearly the serious
regional repercussions of the conflict there. Germany
commends Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey for
offering refuge to civilians fleeing Syria. My country
has increased its humanitarian assistance to those
refugees. Another cause for concern is the entry last
week of Syrian armed forces into the area of separation,
in violation of the disengagement agreement between
Israeli and Syrian forces. We welcome the fact that the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force has
liaised with all sides in an effort to prevent an escalation
of the situation.
Let me now turn to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Last month saw another spike in rocket attacks from
Gaza. The situation on the Sinai has become more
difficult. While fully recognizing Israel’s legitimate
right to self-defence, we continue to call on all
sides to exercise the utmost restraint in that volatile
regional situation, and to consider the humanitarian
consequences of all use of force.
Lasting security in the Middle East can be achieved
only by addressing the root causes of the conflict.
An end to that conflict, which will bring to an end
the occupation and allow all the people of the region
to live in security and realize their aspirations to
freedom and self-determination, can be reached only
through a negotiated, two-State solution. The basis for
that two-State solution must therefore not be allowed
to erode further. Germany has been following with
concern recent decisions on settlement expansion and
Government subsidies for developing settlements, as
well as the discussion of the status of certain settlement
outposts. Let me be clear: international humanitarian
law applies to the entirety of the occupied territories.
The road map obliges Israel to dismantle all outposts
erected since March 2001. They cannot be legalized.
All settlements are illegal under international law. We
are also worried about the increasing number of acts
of violence committed by settlers, including attacks
involving firearms.
The social and economic development of Area C
is critical to the viability of a future Palestinian State.

12-43813

S/PV.6816

We are worried by recent reports about Israeli plans to
demolish eight Palestinian villages in Area C so that
the area can be used for military training. Together with
our European partners, we have engaged in a dialogue
with the Israeli authorities with the aim of preventing
demolitions, improving the efficiency, transparency
and accountability of planning and permission
procedures, and increasing Palestinian participation.
We support and are in close liaison with the efforts and
work of the Quartet representative and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Area C.
Germany follows the human rights situation on both
sides of the Middle East conflict with close attention.
We have urged Israel to abide by all its obligations
founded in international law. Conversely, we have
urged the Palestinian Authority to address human rights
concerns, particularly those regarding the security
forces. The recent death sentences carried out by the
de facto authorities in the Gaza Strip are unacceptable.
The resumption of substantive negotiations on
final status issues is the only way to make progress
towards a solution. Those negotiations will be difficult
and will require painful concessions from both sides.
They therefore need an environment of mutual trust.
Palestinians must be able to believe that the Israeli
Government truly wants a two-State solution and is
ready to make the necessary concessions. And Israelis
must be able to believe that they have a partner on the
other side that is interested in solving the conflict once
and for all in a way that will provide security.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing this
morning, and the Palestinian and Israeli representatives
for their contributions to today’s debate.
First, I would like to express the United Kingdom’s
deepest condolences to the families and friends of the
victims of last week’s terrorist attack on Israeli tourists
in Bulgaria, and to emphasize our condemnation of
such inexcusable acts.
The crisis in Syria has now entered its eighteenth
month. Despite the best efforts of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan, the Syrian regime has refused to implement
a single aspect of his six-point plan. It has ignored the
decisions of the Council enshrined in resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012). Instead, it has intensified
its brutal repression, killed almost 20,000 Syrians
and detained, tortured, raped and abused innocent
men, women and children. The regime continues the

indiscriminate and disproportionate use of heavy
weapons, in violation of international law, resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), the six-point plan and its
own commitments. The recent reports of attacks on
Aleppo by the regime’s fighter jets mark even further
dangerous escalation and emphasize that are there are
no boundaries that the Al-Assad regime will not cross
in the misguided hope that it can resist the will of its
people and hang on to power.
Last week’s vetoes by Russia and China (see
S/PV.6810) were the third example of how they are
prepared to deny the Council the ability to influence
the situation for the better. The consequences are clear:
further violence and bloodshed, and a deteriorating
situation that is now spilling over the borders and
sucking in the region. Shelling across the Lebanese
borders, in clear violation of Lebanon’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as the Syrian military’s
violation of the area of limitation in the Golan Heights,
are but two examples of the threat to regional stability.
For our part, we will continue to work with the Envoy,
the Secretary-General and responsible members of
the international community to achieve the political
transition that is the only way forward for Syria.
As grave as the situation is in Syria, we must not
lose focus on the ongoing injustice of the unresolved
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Our shared goal is a
negotiated, two-State solution, based on 1967 lines; a
fair solution for refugees; security arrangements that
respect Palestinian sovereignty and protect Israeli
security; and Jerusalem as the joint capital. We
remain fully committed to that goal, and have urged
both sides to focus on dialogue, avoid steps that could
undermine the prospects for peace, and work towards
the resumption of direct negotiations.
It is disappointing that progress towards a just
and negotiated outcome looks increasingly unlikely in
the near future. In the immediate term, therefore, we
must guard against threats to the two-State solution
and prevent further deterioration on the ground. Israeli
settlement activity remains the single most serious
threat to the two-State solution.
Settlements are illegal under international law and
undermine the very viability of the two-State solution.
We were dismayed by the announcement last month of
tenders for the construction of 171 homes in settlements
in East Jerusalem and the recent decision of the Israeli
Ministry of Defence to reclassify the illegal outpost

12-4381325

S/PV.6816

of Givat Sal’it as part of an adjacent settlement. Any
step that entrenches the presence of settlements in the
West Bank risks sending the message that Israel is not
serious in its support for a two-State solution.

to be delivered later today by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We
also thank the representatives of Palestine and Israel
for their contribution to the briefing this morning.

Along with our European partners, we also call
upon Israel to halt the demolition of Palestinian housing
and infrastructure in Area C of the West Bank, and the
subsequent forced transfer of the population, and to
address humanitarian needs.

The blockade of Gaza by Israel has now entered its
sixth year. There does not appear to be even a glimmer of
hope that the Israeli Government will lift the blockade
that has stifled socio-economic growth and affected
the humanitarian conditions of the Gazan population.
Despite repeated calls for Israel to lift the blockade,
it has continued its defiance of international law
with impunity. Israel must adhere to the international
community’s demand for it to end the illegal blockade
that has exacerbated the suffering of ordinary civilians.
Such a blockade and the attendant restrictions imposed
on essential materials entering Gaza are in violation of
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and are contrary to the will of the
international community, as expressed in resolutions
242 (1968), 338 (1973) and 1515 (2003), as well as the
Arab Peace Initiative.

In the longer term, we should all maintain support
for the Palestinian Authority. The United Kingdom
will continue to be one of the principle supporters
of Palestinian State-building efforts, assisting them
to tackle poverty, build institutions and boost their
economy. With our European partners, we will work to
encourage Israel to accelerate approval of Palestinian
master plans and to simplify administrative procedures
to obtain building permits for Area C of the West Bank.
Without control over that land, including planning,
building and security, the viability of a future Palestinian
State, and thus the two-State solution, is significantly
reduced. We continue to value the essential work that the
United Nations and its agencies, including the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, carry out on
the ground in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
hope that such work can continue without hindrance.
We remain concerned about the situation in Gaza
and will continue to press the Israeli Government to
ease restrictions on movement and access. Although
we understand Israel’s security concerns, we believe
that for any peace deal to be sustainable, there must be
an economically viable Gaza. At the same time, rocket
attacks from Gaza into Israel must stop. The recent
escalation in such attacks only further entrenches the
status quo.
We continue to witness change and the struggle for
change across the Middle East. Achieving a peaceful
and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
will not only secure peace and security for the parties
directly involved, but also be beneficial to the region
as a whole. We will continue to urge both sides to
show the political leadership and courage required to
make progress towards that shared goal of a two-State
solution.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing to the Council
today. My delegation associates itself with the statement

26

We welcome the socio-economic progress in the
occupied Palestinian territories mentioned in the 2012
report of the Director-General of the International
Labour Organization, entitled “The situation of
workers of the occupied Arab territories”. However,
we are deeply concerned about the report’s worrying
conclusion that the overall framework remains grim,
primarily because of the realities of the occupation and
the unabated expansion of Israeli settlements.
In that regard, we believe that it is the obligation
of the international community, especially the Security
Council, to use the variety of measures at its disposal
to ensure that the occupation of Palestine, in general,
and the blockade of Gaza, in particular, be immediately
stopped. The Palestinians deserve better. South Africa
applauds the various United Nations agencies for their
efforts to assist the Palestinians as they struggle to
survive the Israeli military occupation.
South Africa once again condemns the continued
settlement construction in the West Bank, and in East
Jerusalem in particular, which violates international
law and the resolutions of this Council. Again, it is
deplorable that the Council, which has moved with
commendable speed on conflict situations elsewhere in
the world, has been unable, and sometimes unwilling,
to end those illegal actions.

12-43813

S/PV.6816

Equally, we condemn the continued demolition of
Palestinian property and the violence carried out by
Israeli settlers against the Palestinian population in
the occupied Palestinian West Bank. Manifest to that
illegal practice are the recent reports of Israel seeking
the authority to demolish eight Palestinian hamlets in
the South Hebron Hills, opening the way for Israeli
military training operations. The latest figures released
by the United Nations, which indicate a significant loss
of farmland and fishing waters in Palestine, further
undermining sustainable economic activity, are also a
cause for great concern.
On the issue of Palestinian political prisoners,
South Africa welcomes Israel’s decision to allow family
visits to Palestinians held in Israeli jails. The efforts
of the International Committee of the Red Cross in
facilitating those visits are commendable. However,
we urge the Israeli Government to fulfil its obligations
under international humanitarian law by ensuring the
prisoners’ safety and welfare, including by respecting
their basic human rights.
We condemn the assault, torture, killing and
deportation of African migrants in Israel, which
constitute human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law. Gravely concerned
about such atrocities, the Assembly of the African
Union, at its nineteenth ordinary session held recently,
reminded Israel of its obligation under the 1951 United
Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and the 1961 United Nations Convention on the
Reduction of Statelessness. We hope that the Israeli
Government will prosecute those responsible for abuses
against African migrants and adhere to its international
humanitarian law obligations.
Regarding the political process, South Africa
remains concerned about the lack of significant
progress. However, we note the ongoing low-level
talks between Israelis and Palestinians, especially on
confidence-building measures, which, if successful,
may lay the ground for the resumption of the
long-awaited direct negotiations.
We have heard expressions of concern, including
by some members of the Council, about the efficacy
of the Quartet. The United Nations is a member of the
Quartet but it is unclear to us what value it adds to its
equation. We believe that there is a serious need to take
a step back and assess the utility of the Quartet in its
current make-up with a view to consolidating its gains,

correcting its mistakes and weaknesses, and possibly
reconfiguring or even disbanding it, if needs be.
We encourage the Palestinian parties to forge
ahead with their reconciliation efforts. The role that
Egypt continues to play in that regard is most welcome.
We encourage the parties to proceed rapidly with
preparations for the upcoming local elections, which,
we hope, will enhance democracy and ensure that
internal Palestinian unity is sustained.
The brutal attacks on Israeli tourists in Bulgaria on
18 July are deplorable. South Africa strongly condemns
them. We support the call to bring to justice those
responsible for the attacks.
On Syria, we remain extremely concerned that the
violence continues unabated, with no sign of adherence
to the Annan plan. South Africa reiterates its position
that the only hope for the people of Syria is a Syrian-led
dialogue, aimed at a peaceful political transition that
reflects the will of the people. The only way forward is
the six-point plan as proposed by Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan. Again, we call on the parties to stop
the fighting and violence and to immediately begin
negotiations. Failing to start negotiations immediately
will result in the already dire situation further spiralling
out of control. Such a development would have a severe
impact on the stability of the entire region.
In conclusion, we welcome the Arab League’s
decision to revive Palestine’s bid for United Nations
membership. Restating the continent’s support of the
Palestinian cause, the Assembly of the African Union,
at its nineteenth ordinary session, underscored that
“full membership of the United Nations is a right to
be enjoyed by all sovereign States” and reaffirmed
Africa’s support to the two-State solution.
Evidently, it is not enough that the Security Council
meets every few months in the Chamber merely to
restate our widely known positions on this agenda item.
South Africa calls on the international community to
seriously exert its energies and channel its resources
towards a permanent and sustainable political solution,
namely, the implementation of a two-State solution,
providing for the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State, existing side by side in peace with Israel within
internationally recognized borders, based on those
existing on 4 June 1967, prior to the outbreak of the
so-called Six-Day War between Arab States and Israel,
and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

12-4381327

S/PV.6816

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate.
Pakistan aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the Permanent Representatives of
Egypt and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.
We in the Security Council hold monthly
consultations on the Middle East, followed by these
quarterly open debates. The idea is to remain abreast
of the situation through closed consultations and
by listening to the views of non-members on how
to proceed in the open debates. We all agree that
this is the core issue in the Middle East. Without its
resolution, comprehensive peace will continue to
elude the region. Yet, the Middle East peace process
has stalled, and we see no serious effort towards its
resumption. Well-established terms of reference of
the peace process, including the Arab peace Initiative
and Security Council resolutions, provide an elaborate
framework. It is the political will of one of the parties
that continues to stymie us and, as a consequence, the
prospects of peace in the region.
The current situation gives rise to questions about
the role of the major actors, including the Security
Council and the Quartet. What is the role of the
Quartet? Is it doing justice to the task entrusted to it?
Similarly, why do countries that have influence over
the intransigent party not use that influence to nudge
it towards a resumption of the process? While we
continue to dither, the region is in turmoil. Without a
clear road map, chances of escalation remain high. The
Security Council must act now. Otherwise, the situation
may spiral totally out of control.
The Security Council continues to pay lip service to
the plight of Palestinians while they continue to languish
in abysmal conditions. According to the conclusions of a
study called “Children in Military Custody” conducted
by a team of British lawyers and funded by the British
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the occupying
Power imprisons hundreds of Palestinian children and
is in blatant breach of a number of provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Two legal systems continue to be in operation in
the occupied lands. This year’s report (S/2012/261) of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
draws several conclusions. How can the rights of
Palestinians be protected under such unethical policies?

28

The Palestinians just marked five years since the
imposition of Israel’s illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip.
According to United Nations estimates, 44 per cent of
the Palestinians in Gaza are food insecure, and 80 per
cent are aid dependent. Unemployment remains high,
and 38 per cent of the population lives below the poverty
line. While the collective punishment of 1.6 million
Palestinians continues unabated, in flagrant violation
of resolution 1860 (2009), the Security Council remains
paralysed and indecisive.
Does the international community think that
inaction will somehow lead to a resolution of the problem
on its own? Earlier, we proposed, and today reiterate,
that the Secretariat should present the Council with
a matrix on the implementation status of resolutions
adopted by the Council on the Palestinian question,
beginning with resolution 1860 (2009). It is only logical
for the Council to review the implementation of its own
resolutions and consider appropriate steps to address
non-compliance.
With the further intensification of the illegal
settlement campaign, it has again become evident that
prospects for a two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders are being eroded. The announcement
in June of plans to construct additional units and to
grant subsidies for homes in the West Bank settlements,
backtracking on promises made earlier this year to deny
such incentives, are further proof of that mindset.
A report prepared by the Economic and Social
Council of West Asia on people living in the occupied
Palestinian territory states that Israel persists in
exploiting and endangering natural resources in the
territories. In addition, Palestinians and Syrians living
under occupation continue to suffer from discrimination
with respect to the allotment of water. The Human
Rights Council has established a fact-finding mission
to investigate those issues further. We hope that it will
be allowed to undertake its mandated task.
The question of a visit by the Security Council
to the occupied Palestinian territory remains on the
Council’s agenda. The visit, we feel, would not only
provide Member States with an opportunity to observe
conditions on the ground; it would also restore much
needed attention and focus on the part of the international
community to that festering sore. The Council should
have responded positively to the Palestinian invitation.
Pakistan supports lasting peace for all inhabitants
of the Middle East. That is not possible without the full

12-43813

S/PV.6816

withdrawal of Israel from all occupied lands, including
those of Lebanon and the Syrian Golan.
The solution to Syria’s internal situation lies in a
Syrian-led political process and the framework of the
Council’s resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). The
consensus adoption of resolution 2059 (2012) provides
an opportunity for all sides to commit to peace and for
all quarters to use their influence to genuinely support
the Special Envoy’s plan.
The denial of the Palestinian’s right to self­
determination remains at the heart of unrest in the
region.
Many speakers have mentioned the Arab Spring. In
our view, the essence of the Arab Spring, which is the
fulfilment of legitimate aspirations through peaceful
means, is of direct relevance to the Palestinian question.
It should be a reason to do away with the lethargy
and intransigence, and serve as the prime mover for
concerted actions to finally resolve a dispute that has
been hanging fire [at risk of exploding unexpectedly]
for decades.
Our ultimate objective is the creation of an
independent sovereign and viable Palestinian State. We
welcome the backing of the League of Arab States for
a Palestinian plan to ask for United Nations recognition
of the State of Palestine. We remain ready and willing
to assist.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to associate myself with previous speakers in thanking
Mr. Robert Serrry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his briefing on the situation
in the Middle East. I also thank the representatives of
Palestine and Israel for their statements.
On the occasion of this debate, I shall limit my
statement to addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and the situation in Syria. Before I do so, I should like
to reiterate my country’s firm condemnation of the
cowardly act of terrorism perpetrated against Israeli
tourists on 18 July in Bulgaria, killing and wounding a
number of individuals. We again extend our condolences
to the Governments of Israel and Bulgaria, and to the
families of the victims. We wish the wounded a speedy
recovery.
The situation on the ground in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has seen no significant progress since the
Council’s most recent meeting on this issue (see
S/PV.6788). There remain concerns arising from the

unilateral initiatives and provocations of both parties,
which continue to erode trust and confidence. Indeed,
during the reporting period settlement activities did not
stop. They include permits issued for new settlement
construction and the expulsion of Palestinian families,
including refugees, from their homes, including in Beit
Hanina.
Togo believes that the Israeli authorities should
take appropriate steps not only to put an end to acts of
violence committed by settlers, but also to bring their
perpetrators to justice. In that regard, we welcome the
decision taken by the Israeli Supreme Court to order the
expulsion of settlers who had forcibly occupied houses
in Beit Hanina. We note that, as a result of this decision,
the settler families announced in June that they would
leave voluntarily. My country also congratulates the
Israeli Parliament, which, on 6 June, rejected a draft
law that would have retroactively authorized settler
homes built on private Palestinian land. These brave
steps are likely to help to ease tensions and should be
continued in order to create a climate conducive to the
resumption of direct negotiations, which we fervently
hope to see.
In that context, we believe that the ongoing blockade
of the Gaza Strip does not contribute to a resumption of
the negotiating process. We therefore invite Israel to
lift the blockade, pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009).
We also urge Israel not to impede the reconstruction
of damaged or destroyed infrastructure and to approve
suspended projects of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, the United Nations Development Programme and
other United Nations agencies in the region, including
in the field of construction. Furthermore, we remain
concerned by the issue of political prisoners. While we
welcome the recent release of a number of these, we
believe that the parties should continue negotiations to
progressively expand this programme to all remaining
detainees.
We urge Israel to put an end to the reprehensible
actions of the settlers, lift the blockade of Gaza and
work for peace, but we also express our deep concerns
over the ongoing launching of rockets at Israel from
Gaza and all acts of violence and provocation by Hamas
and associated groups aimed against Israel.
The Palestinian Authority — whose encouraging
progress in the West Bank in many fields, especially that
of security, we commend — should pursue its efforts

12-4381329

S/PV.6816

within the framework of reconciliation with Hamas to
prompt that organization to renounce violence and join
initiatives aimed at achieving a comprehensive solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through dialogue
and negotiation. My country has always believed that
the path of dialogue is the best possible option for
achieving a lasting settlement of the issue, and urges
the parties to accord it pride of place, despite its proven
limitations — which, it should be said in passing, are the
result of deficient political will and formal commitment
on the part of both sides.
In that respect, Togo again urges the Quartet to
continue its efforts to lead the parties to resume direct
negotiations, and welcomes the commitment of Jordan
to this matter and encourages that country to continue
to work for the timely resumption of direct negotiations.
As to Syria, my country remains extremely
concerned by the violence that continues to rage
throughout the country. The refusal of the Government
and the opposition to implement the six-point plan
of the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan, and
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) has pushed
the country into civil war. Togo believes that the
Council’s inability to speak with one voice has greatly
contributed to this situation, which is now beyond the
United Nations control. Although we welcome the
adoption of resolution 2059 (2012) on 20 July, extending
the mandate of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in Syria by a month, we are forced to note that it has had
a minimal impact on events, so strong is the compulsion
of the parties to fight it out. The announced withdrawal
of half of the observers is proof of the Mission’s current
inability to operate on the ground.
It is not too late, however, for the Council to shoulder
its responsibilities before the mandate expires, as the
Syrian crisis now poses a challenge to all humankind
and represents a failure of the international community,
and above all the Security Council, which, let us recall,
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Far from throwing in the towel, the entire world
should continue to seek a solution to the Syrian crisis.
Countries that have proven influence on the parties
should bring greater pressure to bear in order to persuade
them to end the hostilities and prioritize dialogue
based on the six-point plan and the Final Communiqué
adopted in Geneva on 30 June (S/2012/522, annex). The
Syrian-led formation of a Government of national unity

30

remains the best way to overcome the crisis. To that end,
we welcome the recent announcement in the media that
the Syrian opposition is ready to accept a transitional
Government led by a member of the Al-Assad regime.
The current situation in Syria gives rise to genuine
fears regarding the spread of war to neighbouring
States. The inter-communal clashes of the past month in
Tripoli, Lebanon, and the incursions of Syrian soldiers
into the Golan Heights, in violation of the 1974 accord,
further exacerbate those fears. My country is also
alarmed by the recent threat of the use of chemical and
bacteriological weapons by the Syrian authorities. We
urge the Syrian Government to exercise restraint, act
responsibly and preserve the fragile regional security.
Finally, Togo urges all parties to avoid exporting
the war beyond Syria’s borders and invites the countries
of the region to continue to work with the Syrians for a
negotiated settlement to the conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.
I have already thanked Mr. Serry for his very thorough
and thoughtful briefing. In my capacity as President
of the Security Council, on 19 July I disseminated a
statement issued by this organ condemning in the most
severe terms the terrorist attack on Israeli tourists in
Bulgaria, in which Israeli and Bulgarian nationals died
and many were wounded. My country reaffirms its
total repudiation of that heinous act, and reiterates its
condolences to the families of the victims.
Colombia has always clearly and precisely
articulated its vision of a Palestinian State living in peace
with Israel within internationally recognized, defined
and secure borders resulting from an agreement that
guarantees coexistence between the two peoples. We
therefore reiterate today that negotiations between the
two parties are the only viable path to a comprehensive,
structured and lasting solution.
We support the work of the Middle East Quartet,
and most specifically the platform for seeking a
definitive solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict based on
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003), 1850 (2008), the Madrid principles, and the road
map laid out in the Quartet statement of 23 September
2011. We regret that, notwithstanding the individual
and collective efforts of members of the Quartet and
various countries of the region, the parties have not

12-43813

S/PV.6816

been able to overcome the existing obstacles or renew
direct bilateral negotiations without prior preconditions
so that talks could be successful. It is urgent to create
confidence-building measures.
I find relevant Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
comment, in his message to participants at the United
Nations Asian and Pacific Meeting in Support of
Israeli-Palestinian Peace, held in Bangkok on 10 July,
that
“recent actions on the ground have not contributed
to a conducive environment for dialogue. Israel
has continued settlement activity, contrary to
international law and its commitments under the
Road Map.”
In addition, the Palestinian reconciliation process
taking place in the context of the commitments of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, under the leadership
of President Abbas, continues to be a crucial element
in achieving lasting peace between Palestinians
and Israelis. We believe that a unified Palestinian
Government is essential to achieving two States based
on the principles of mutual acknowledgement and
peaceful coexistence.
While efforts continue to rekindle peace talks
between the Palestinians and the Israelis, my country
believes it to be of the utmost importance to renew efforts
to strengthen the financial position of the Palestinian
Authority and to revitalize the Palestinian economy. In
order to achieve sustained economic growth and create
jobs in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, there is a need
for efforts aimed at increasing investor confidence and
unleashing the enormous potential of the Palestinian
private sector.
The international community should promote
respect for human rights and the protection of all
Palestinian and Israeli civilians without exception.
That includes a halt to the launching of rockets from the
Gaza Strip into Israel. There is no justification whatever
for such indiscriminate attacks against civilians. Both
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples have a right to live
in peace and security with dignity, free from fear of
indiscriminate violence.
The Syrian crisis constitutes a flagrant threat to
the peace and security of the region, where conditions
are already fragile and in a state of alert. We therefore
deplore the impotence of the Security Council to act in

a tougher manner, with a view to halting the violence
and bloodshed and facilitating a political solution.
I would like to draw attention to the effects of
the devastating tragedy that Syria is experiencing
when it comes to providing stability, protection and
humanitarian access to the 500,000 refugees living
in that country. The inability to be able to effectively
ensure the protection of the humanitarian personnel
and facilities in Syria of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
is a matter of concern. We call on all the parties to
take the necessary measures to save lives, avoid forced
displacements and ensure the protection of Palestinian
refugees trapped in the armed conflict taking place
in Syria. The neutrality and integrity of the facilities
of the United Nations in areas where Palestinians and
other civilians are living should also be respected.
In conclusion, we are alarmed about the incidents
taking place along the Syrian-Lebanese border, as they
violate the sovereignty, independence and territorial
and political integrity of Lebanon, including the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. We
should maintain our firm commitment to support the
Government of President Sleiman and Prime Minister
Mikati in meeting their humanitarian obligations
vis-à-vis Syrians who have sought refuge in Lebanon.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, there are 30,000 such
refugees, with 2,500 awaiting registration.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to first thank Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive
briefing.
I should like to reiterate Lebanon’s insistence on
the full implementation of the provisions of resolution
1701 (2006). I would also like to pay tribute to the
commendable efforts of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon.
I would also like to emphasize to the Security
Council that Lebanon continues to adhere to its
principled position in defence of Syria’s unity and
sovereignty, as well as the right of the Syrian people
to live in dignity and freedom and enjoy safety and
security.

12-4381331

S/PV.6816

Allow me now to turn to the main topic on our
meeting today, namely, the Arab-Israeli conflict and its
repercussions.
The Council may be aware that, the day before
yesterday, Israeli Defence Minister Ehud Barak
approved a decision to demolish eight villages south of
Hebron, in the occupied West Bank. Those are villages,
in which Palestinian Arabs have lived for more than
200 years, include Majaz, Tabban, Safti, Fakheit,
Halaweh, Mirkez, Jinba and Kharuba. The decision
will result in the expulsion of more than 1,500 people,
on the pretext that the Israeli army needs the land for
military exercises. This is a step aimed at appropriating
more Palestinian territory and establishing another
buffer zone in the southern West Bank, along the Blue
Line. Ultimately, this will serve to displace people and
destroy their property.
As a country that upholds the Charter of the United
Nations, we are duty-bound to recall that the Security
Council must play its full role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Does the Council intend
to take any steps to put an end to such Israeli actions?
What are those steps? Or will the Council remain
paralysed, its will held hostage in the face of ongoing
Israeli violations of the provisions of international law
and its total disregard for the resolutions of the Council
and the General Assembly?
The Council may well be aware that the committee
established by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu, and led by retired Supreme Court Justice
Edmund Levy, to consider the legal status of Israeli
outposts in the West Bank and find a way to legalize
them concluded in its report issued earlier this
month that Israel was “not an occupying State from
the perspective of international law” and that “all
settlement activities are legitimate, in particular those
described as ‘illegitimate’”. The Levy committee
recommended that settlers be given property rights and
that a parallel Israeli land cadastre be established for
them. It also called for the revocation of the Jordanian
land law, which is valid in the West Bank, as well as for
the revocation of the Israeli Supreme Court decision of
1979, so as to facilitate the building of settlements and
the exercise by Jews of settlers’ rights all over Judea
and Samaria.
A comment in the Levy committee report made by
Michael Sfard, a lawyer and legal adviser to the Israeli

32

human rights organization Yesh Din, expressed the
eloquent view that,
(spoke in English)
“The Levy committee was conceived in sin
to legalize a crime, and it has fully accomplished
its mission. Its report is not a legal report but an
ideological report that ignores the basic principles
of the rule of law. The members of the Levy
committee apparently fell down the rabbit hole, and
their report was written in Wonderland, governed
by the rules of absurdity: there is no occupation,
there are no illegal outposts and there is apparently
no Palestinian people either. To that we must say in
the words of Alice: ‘This is the silliest tea party I
have ever been to’”.
In the same context, Aeyal Gross wrote, on 10 July,
in an editorial on the report of the Levy committee in
Haaretz:
“What would you call an occupation where the
occupying State moves its citizens in as inhabitants
while exploiting ground, water and other natural
resources? And what would you call a regime
where two populations live under different law,
applied according to their nationality? If any good
could come out of the Levy committee, it is the
unveiling of the hypocrisy that under the perception
of occupation lies a regime which better resembles
a combination of colonialism and apartheid.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Faced with the gravity of the recommendations
and the discussions of the Levy committee, allow me
to ask, once again, are there any steps that members
intend to take in the Council to recall the provisions
of international law and the resolutions of the Council
and the General Assembly on the illegitimacy of settler
activities, or will the Council remain paralysed with its
will held hostage?
We have frequently recalled before the Council that
article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War states
that “The occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies.”
We have also recalled repeatedly that the Security
Council, in paragraph 1 of resolution 446 (1979),
adopted more than 30 years ago, after recalling the fact

12-43813

S/PV.6816

that the Fourth Geneva Convention applied to Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, determined
that
“the policy and practices of Israel in establishing
settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal
validity and constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East.”
Do I really need to recall that the International
Court of Justice decided in its advisory opinion on the
Legal consequences of the construction of a wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory that
“The Court concludes that the Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory (including
East Jerusalem) have been established in breach of
international law”. (A/ES-10/273, advisory opinion,
para. 120)
The legal provisions on settlements are very clear,
as they are with regard to the ongoing Israeli practices
since 1967, which themselves are in defiance of those
same provisions. The number of settlers exceeds half a
million. The more than 120 settlements, to say nothing
of the outposts, the bypass roads and the camps, have
devoured approximately 42 per cent of the territory of
the West Bank. Our question remains: how long will
the Council continue to be paralysed, its will held
hostage, failing in the face of Israeli settlement activity
to shoulder its responsibilities under Article XXIV of
the Charter of the Nations?
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. At the outset,
I would like to express the Movement’s appreciation to
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, for his
briefing to the Council.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
conviction of the urgent need for the international
community to act resolutely and collectively to fulfil
its longstanding commitment to, and responsibility
for, the realization of a two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and a just solution to the
question of Palestine in all its aspects, on the basis

of international law and the terms of reference of the
peace process, including the resolutions of the Council.
The independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, is long overdue. Its continued
postponement will only put that goal further out of
reach.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its view
that serious international action in a timely manner is
required. The window of opportunity for implementing
the two-State solution, based on the 4 June 1967
borders, is rapidly closing. The Movement recalls, in
that regard, that the application submitted by Palestine,
on 23 September 2011, for membership in the United
Nations is consistent with the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and independence. The
Movement looks forward to the Security Council’s
assumption of its responsibility to take action in a
manner that recognizes the legitimate and historic
rights of the Palestinian people and contributes to the
peace efforts.
The Movement regrets that all efforts exerted to
date by international and regional parties, including by
the Quartet, have been unable to achieve any progress
owing to the deliberate obstruction by Israel, the
occupying Power, its refusal to respect the parameters
of the peace process and its insistence on continuing to
change the facts on the ground, in total contradiction of
the two-State solution, the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Those Israeli policies were
described by President Mahmoud Abbas of Palestine
during his visit to Egypt on 18 July as shutting the door
on the political process.
The Movement strongly condemns Israel’s illegal
measures in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, particularly its construction
and expansion of settlements and the separation wall,
the confiscation of Palestinian land, the displacement
of the Palestinian civilian population, and the persistent
attempts to legitimize the illegal settlement activities,
as demonstrated recently by a report commissioned by
the Israeli Government, the so-called Levy Ccmmittee
report, which suggested that the West Bank was not
occupied territory and that the settlements were therefore
legal. The Movement stresses that those actions must be
ended, as they undermine the resumption of credible
negotiations and obstruct the achievement of a just,
lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

12-4381333

S/PV.6816

In the light of the very difficult conditions on
the ground, the Non-Aligned Movement calls once
again for the implementation of the recommendations
made by Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, to the Security Council on 18 January
2012 on the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Specific measures are necessary
to address, in particular, the grave impact of Israel’s
settlement policies on the Palestinian people and their
land, including the violent actions by Israeli settlers
against Palestinian property and Palestinian civilians,
including women and children, as well as provocations
and incitement, including against holy sites in occupied
East Jerusalem and the vandalizing of mosques and
churches.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call for
the Security Council to act, and demands that Israel,
the occupying Power, immediately cease all such
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, and fully abide by
its legal obligations, including those under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Israel’s blatant impunity and
disregard for the law cannot be tolerated.
The Movement remains concerned about the critical
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We call once
again for the full and immediate lifting of the illegal
Israeli blockade, which has now entered its sixth year, in
violation of resolution 1860 (2009), other relevant United
Nations resolutions and international humanitarian law,
which prohibits collective punishment of the civilian
population under occupation. Israel must promptly and
unconditionally open all its crossing points with Gaza
and end its continued obstruction of the freedom of
movement of persons and of the reconstruction efforts
in the Gaza Strip.
The Movement also takes this opportunity to
express its support for Palestinian reconciliation
efforts, which continue to be sponsored by Egypt, and
hopes that Palestinian unity will soon be restored in
the interest of the legitimate national aspirations of
the Palestinian people. The Movement looks forward
to that achievement and to the holding of Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections.
Turning to Lebanon, the Movement condemns
Israel’s ongoing violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty
and calls on all parties concerned to fully implement

34

resolution 1701 (2006), in order to end the current
fragility and avoid the resurgence of hostilities.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions
taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli measures to
impose its own jurisdiction and administration there,
are null, void and have no legal effect. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
I shall now speak in my national capacity. Egypt
would like to emphasize the importance we attach to
the work of United Nations agencies in support of the
Palestinian people, particularly through addressing
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, which is gravely impacted by Israeli policies in
general and its settlement policies in particular. In that
regard, Egypt is deeply concerned by the restrictions
that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to impose on
the work of the United Nations agencies in the occupied
Palestinian territory, as demonstrated recently by the
letter dated 10 July 2012 addressed to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, by the representative of
Israel. United Nations agencies working in the occupied
territory should not yield to pressure on the part of the
occupying Power to prevent them from fulfilling their
mandates to support the Palestinian people.
It is no surprise that Israel does not feel comfortable
with the work and the mere presence of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory.
An occupying Power that decides to demolish eight
villages in the territory it is occupying under the
pretext that the land of those villages will be used by
the occupying forces for training exercises, as was
ordered by the Israeli Defence Minister on 22 July,
is an occupying force that will use all measures at its
disposal to avoid being held accountable for its illegal
actions and to continue to enjoy impunity as it has
benefited from for decades.
One flagrant measure was the letter addressed by
the representative of Israel in Geneva to the President
of the Human Rights Council officially stating that
Israel had decided to suspend its relationship with that
Council and with the Office of the Office of the High

12-43813

S/PV.6816

Commissioner for Human Rights, both in Geneva and
in Jerusalem. Such actions should not be allowed to
pass without repercussions.
The Middle East has seen dramatic changes over
the past 18 months. The aspirations of the peoples of
many Arab countries for freedom, democracy and
social justice are on the rise. They are going to prevail.
The situation in Syria is no exception in that regard.
Egypt welcomes the attention given by the international
community to the developments in the region, including
the Syrian crisis, aimed at finding a settlement based
on the six-point plan, especially ending the violence,
protecting civilians and respecting Syria’s unity and
territorial integrity. However, that should not be at the
expense of addressing the historic injustice that the
Palestinian people have endured for decades. It should
not divert attention from the Palestinian question,
which remains the principal source of instability in
the region. As many Arab countries chart their way
towards democracy and good governance, the promise
of a peaceful and stable Middle East cannot be achieved
without finding a just and lasting peaceful settlement
that ensures the independence of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It is time for the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities and work seriously
to achieve that objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Obhrai (Canada): On behalf of the Government
of Canada, I would like to thank the Colombian
presidency for convening today’s open debate on the
Middle East.
There are dark clouds gathering over the Middle
East. The region is more volatile and unstable than
it has been in years. We face multiple and serious
challenges to regional and global peace and security.
From barbaric acts of terrorism aimed at Israel, as
we witnessed in Bulgaria last week, to the senseless
slaughter of civilians perpetrated by extremists in Iraq;
from the violence in Syria, which has the potential
to spin the region into turmoil, to Iran’s continued
unwillingness to respond with real action to address our
concerns about its nuclear activities — it is time for the
Security Council to overcome its paralysis and act with
determination to protect peace and stability on behalf
of all nations.
The Al-Assad regime has lost legitimacy by waging
a campaign of terror on the Syrian people, who began

their campaign for freedom, dignity and democracy
with peaceful demonstrations. There is no future for
Al-Assad in Syria. His regime is creating sectarian
strife and regional instability. There are growing
tensions in Lebanon and a massive outflow of refugees
to Jordan, Turkey, Iraq and Lebanon. Democracy based
on the rule of law and respect for human rights is the
best way for disparate voices to live together in peace.
The Action Group on Syria in Geneva has conceived
a pragmatic transition plan, building on Joint Special
Envoy Annan’s six-point plan. But it will not work unless
those who continue to support the Al-Assad regime
with arms and resources stop doing so immediately. It
is past time for the Security Council to stand up for
peace with universal and binding sanctions to pressure
Al-Assad to honour commitments he has already made.
The failure to do so during the recent debate on the
renewal of the United Nations Supervision Mission in
Syria demonstrates the tragic unwillingness of some
Council members to live up to their international
responsibilities.
The International Atomic Energy Agency’s reports
of Iranian non-compliance with its international
obligations and on that country’s nuclear-weapons
development effort reinforce our deep concern about
Iran’s ambitions and the resulting consequences for
regional and global security. While we acknowledge
that Iran has come without preconditions to the table
with the five permanent members of the Security
Council plus, those talks cannot drag on forever while
centrifuges continue to spin at Natanz and Fordow.
Iran needs to understand that the international
community is serious, and that it is expected to take
real and concrete steps to halt its nuclear-weapons
development programme before any sanctions are
eased. For years, Canada has implemented some of
the toughest sanctions against Iran. Now, the full
impact of the European Union oil embargo that began
on 1 July is beginning to bite. Only through that kind
of concerted action will we be able to impress on the
Iranian authorities that the game is up and that the time
has come to stop enrichment and comply with their
international obligations.
The target of our sanctions is not the Iranian
people, but rather the regime, which continues its
nuclear programme in violation of international law.
It is a regime that stifles free speech and access to
information and religious freedom, and that denies the
Iranian people a democratic voice. On behalf of those

12-4381335

S/PV.6816

voices that are silenced inside Iran, we will continue to
speak out.
Amid this strife and instability, the peace process
between Israel and the Palestinians is languishing.
We wholly support the Quartet’s efforts based on its
statement of last September (see SG/2178), as well
as Jordan’s efforts to bring the parties together. But
the parties themselves need to resume direct peace
negotiations without delay or preconditions. Unilateral
actions by either side are not helpful to a resumption of
negotiations, since they prejudge the outcome. I must
be clear that Canada cannot accept any renewed effort
by the Palestinian Authority to change its status in the
United Nations. The stakes are too high for the peace
process itself, but also for the Organization, as we
saw with the funding situation concerning UNESCO.
Rather, both parties need to stop talking about talking,
and instead roll up their sleeves, sit down and start
serious negotiations towards a two-State solution.
Concerted action to combat violence and incitement to
violence would help to create an atmosphere conducive
to negotiating peace.
Against that very dark backdrop, Egypt’s first
democratic presidential elections were a glimmer of
light and a historic moment. My Government celebrates
that tremendous achievement of the Egyptian people
as a demonstration of what can happen when people
are allowed to exercise their basic democratic rights.
But an election is only a beginning. President Morsy
faces many challenges. It will be a long road towards
inclusive governance that fulfils the aspirations of all
Egyptians for greater freedom, democracy and respect
for the rule of law. We stand ready to support President
Morsy in that regard. Indeed, one of the pressing
challenges he faces is the precarious security situation
in the Sinai peninsula, which has profound implications
for Israel. In that regard, we welcome President Morsy’s
commitment to honour Egypt’s international obligations
and responsibilities to protect religious minorities.
The sky is indeed dark over the region, but this
body can choose to exercise its power and authority and
can act to support them. It is time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address
the Security Council on the situation in the Middle East.

36

Japan continues to be deeply concerned about the
deteriorating situation in Syria over the past 16 months,
and profoundly deplores the death of many thousands
of people as a result of the continued violence. We
condemn the Syrian authorities’ failure to keep their
own commitments, as well as their increased use of
heavy weapons and all other violations and abuses of
human rights in Syria. The continuing bloodshed is
totally unacceptable and must end now.
Japan has strongly supported the diplomatic efforts
of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, Mr. Kofi Annan. We
call upon all Syrian parties, in particular the Syrian
authorities, to unconditionally and swiftly implement
Mr. Annan’s six-point plan. The transition plan set
forth in the Action Group communiqué of June 30 must
also be implemented, with the aim of bringing about a
democratic and pluralistic political system.
Japan has been cooperating with its partners to
urge the Syrian authorities to cease their violence and to
implement concrete measures for a Syrian-led political
transition, including through the framework of the
Friends of Syria. Japan deems it extremely regrettable
that, last week, owing to the exercise of the veto, the
Security Council failed to unite and speak in one voice
(see S/PV.6810), in line with other international efforts.
Japan will continue to make the utmost effort at every
opportunity in cooperation with like-minded countries.
Japan highly appreciates the dedicated work of
the United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS). At the same time, Japan regrets that the
Mission had to suspend its operational activities
owing to the escalation of violence. As stipulated in
resolution 2059 (2012), we call upon the Syrian parties
to guarantee the safety and freedom of movement and
access for UNSMIS personnel. We also wish to believe
that the security and political environment will improve
so that UNSMIS can effectively implement its mandate.
Japan is also concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation of the Syrian people. For that
reason, the Government of Japan decided in May
to extend an additional aid grant of $5 million in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme
and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We underline the importance of
allowing humanitarian personnel full and unimpeded
access to the people in need of assistance.

12-43813

S/PV.6816

With regard to the Middle East peace process, Japan
has supported the efforts of the Palestinians to establish
an independent State, and it remains committed to
providing continuous assistance in that regard. In that
connection, we call upon Israel to support the fiscal
stability of the Palestinian Authority, including by
enabling uninterrupted tax transfers to the Palestinian
Authority.
Japan firmly supports a two-State solution in
which Israel and a future independent Palestinian State
would live side by side in peace, security and mutual
recognition. It is regrettable that direct negotiations
between the parties have been suspended for nearly two
years. We call upon Israel not to be satisfied with the

status quo on the ground and to be positively engaged
in the dialogue with the Palestinians. We would also
like to remind both sides that a two-State solution can
be achieved only through sincere direct negotiations
between the parties concerned. Japan hopes that contact
between negotiators in order to build confidence will
lead to the resumption of direct negotiations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list. Given the
lateness of the hour, I intend, with the consent of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.50 p.m.

12-4381337
