A/61/PV.92

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

92

nd plenary meeting
Monday, 2 April 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 144 (b) and 151.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations

of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. This means that, where
recorded or separate votes were taken, we will do the
same. I also hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 144 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/657/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report.
I shall now give the floor to representatives who
wish to explain their votes before the voting.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to explain its vote
on the draft resolution to be adopted shortly under subitem (b) of agenda item 144, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle
East: United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-29155 (E)

*0729155*

A/61/PV.92

At the outset, we would like to express our
support for the draft resolution. My delegation will
vote in favour of it, on the basis of the principle we
have
consistently
reaffirmed,
namely,
that
responsibility for the financing of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) must be borne by
Israel. As the aggressor, Israel is the party that is
occupying territory, and is therefore the party
responsible for the establishment of the Force. Our
position is consistent with the general principles set out
in resolution 1874 (S-IV), of 27 June 1963.
We would also like to express our satisfaction at
the fact that the General Assembly has taken note of
the concerns expressed by my delegation during the
consultations on the draft resolution before the
Assembly.
My delegation has expressed its serious concerns
with regard to the conceptual framework of the
UNIFIL budget for the period 1 July 2006 to 30 June
2007. The manner in which expected accomplishment
1.1 was drafted gave us pause. That accomplishment
called for the establishment of a “Stable and secure
environment in southern Lebanon” (A/61/766, para.
19). We pointed out that that phrase was inconsistent
with the mandate given to UNIFIL by the Security
Council. We also pointed out that Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), which strengthened the
mandate of UNIFIL — a mission established by
Security Council resolution 425 (1978) — cannot be
interpreted in that manner. The use of the phrase a
“stable and secure environment in southern Lebanon”
to describe an expected accomplishment could be
misconstrued as giving Israel the right to interfere
indefinitely in southern Lebanon on the grounds of
security. It could also be used to justify Israel’s
continuation of its maritime, ground and air violations
until a stable and secure environment is established in
southern Lebanon.
In addition, that expected accomplishment has no
connection whatsoever to the two basic objectives for
the establishment of UNIFIL under Council resolution
1701 (2006). Those objectives were to monitor full
respect for the Blue Line separating the two parties
(see para. 8) and to monitor the cessation of hostilities
(see para. 11). My delegation also reiterated that the
expected accomplishment set out in the conceptual
framework of UNIFIL’s budget did not reflect the
actual mandate conferred by the Security Council upon
the Force.

2

We therefore caution against the possibility that
Israel may utilize the phrase a “stable and secure
environment in southern Lebanon” to continue its noncompliance with Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) and to continue to erode the credibility of
UNIFIL in southern Lebanon.
We welcome the fact that the General Assembly
has taken note of the concerns of my delegation, and
that it has requested the Secretary-General to continue
to measure the accomplishments of the Force,
including expected accomplishment 1.1, fully in
accordance with the Security Council mandate. We
expect the Secretariat to take the concerns to which I
have referred with complete seriousness as it prepares
the next draft UNIFIL budget, for the period 1 July
2007 to 30 June 2008. We also expect it to bear those
concerns in mind when it prepares its report on
UNIFIL’s budget performance for the period 1 July
2006 to 30 June 2007. We hope that will be achieved
through a redrafting of expected accomplishment 1.1 to
bring it into line with the unambiguous mandate
conferred by the Security Council, namely, by
including a reference to full respect by both parties for
the Blue Line and the cessation of hostilities.
Mr. Thomma (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union.
The European Union is very pleased that the
General Assembly is today taking action to approve
financing for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). As with all peacekeeping missions,
it is essential that the Force be provided with sufficient
resources to fully implement its mandate. The draft
resolution before the Assembly recognizes that and
provides the necessary financing for this important
operation.
As the draft resolution and the level of funding
provided recognize, UNIFIL’s mandate, the size of the
Force and its area of operations have been significantly
increased by Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
In budgetary terms, the Force is working under a new
strategic
framework,
with
new
expected
accomplishments and new indicators of achievement
that flow directly from the Security Council mandate.
In paragraph 12 of the draft resolution, we
acknowledge and make clear that we wish the
Secretary-General to continue to measure the
accomplishments of the Force in that way. It was that

07-29155

A/61/PV.92

understanding that made it possible for the paragraph
to receive the support of the whole Fifth Committee.
Mr. Ramadan (Lebanon): Lebanon very much
appreciates the important role that the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon plays in southern Lebanon in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1701
(2006).
Lebanon is grateful to all the delegations that will
vote in favour of the draft resolution on the financing
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
specifically the States members of the Group of 77 and
China.
Lebanon expects the Secretary-General to
continue to implement the mandate given by the
Security Council in resolution 1701 (2006), recalled in
operative paragraph 12 of the draft resolution under
consideration. In this regard, we believe that the
logical framework put forward by the SecretaryGeneral in his budget report (A/61/766) is in line with
the mandate given by the Security Council.
Mr. Rashkow (United States of America): As my
delegation explained on Friday, 30 March 2007, in the
Fifth Committee, the United States strongly supports
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which is implementing an important
mandate. However, the use of General Assembly
funding resolutions to pursue claims against a Member
State procedurally is not correct. That is the reason
why we have opposed such draft resolutions in
previous years and why we will do so today. However,
in response to the statement by the delegation of Syria
concerning the logical framework contained in
UNIFIL’s budget, my delegation would like to state
that it is the Secretariat’s proper role to develop those
results-based budgeting elements on the basis of
Security Council mandates. It is not the role of the
General Assembly to alter the results-based budget
elements.
The President: We will now take a decision on
the draft resolution entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”. A single separate
vote has been requested on the fourth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 20 of the
draft resolution.
If there is no objection to those requests, I shall
now put to the vote the fourth preambular paragraph

07-29155

and operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 20. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Gabon, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Moldova, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 20 were retained by 82 votes
to 5, with 50 abstentions.

3

A/61/PV.92

[Subsequently the delegation of Zambia advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova,
Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of

4

Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Palau, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia.
The draft resolution was adopted by 135 votes to
3, with 1 abstention (resolution 61/250 B).
[Subsequently the delegation of Zambia advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 144.
Agenda item 151 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/644/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/249 B).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
151.
Programme of work
The President: I would like to inform members
that the General Assembly will consider the other
reports of the Fifth Committee on Wednesday, 4 April
2007, in the afternoon.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

07-29155
