General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

68

7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Israeli nu­
clear activities under constant review and to report thereon
as appropriate;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Organization of African Unity and the League of
Arab States, to follow closely the nuclear and military col­
laboration between Israel and South Africa and the dangers
it constitutes to peace and security and to efforts aimed at
the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in Africa
and the Middle East;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear
armament''.
98th plenary meeting
9 December /982
37/83. Prevention of an arms race in outer space
The General Assembly,
Inspired by the great prospects opening up before man­
kind as a result of man's entry into outer space twenty-five
years ago,
Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Reaffirming that the exploration and use of outer space,
including the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall be car­
ried out for the benefit and in the interest of all countries,
irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific de­
velopment, and shall be the province of all mankind,
Reaffirming further the will of all States that the explo­
ration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other
celestial bodies, shall be exclusively for peaceful purposes,
Recalling that the States parties to the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, 61 have undertaken, in article III, to carry on activ­
ities in the exploration and use of outer space, including the
Moon and other celestial bodies, in accordance with inter­
national law and the Charter of the United Nations, in the
interest of maintaining international peace and security and
promoting international co-operation and understanding,
Reaffirming, in particular, article IV of the above-men­
tioned Treaty, which stipulates that States parties to the
Treaty undertake not to place in orbit around the earth any
objects carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of
weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons on ce­
lestial bodies or station such weapons in outer space in any
other manner,
Reaffirming also paragraph 80 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 62 in
which it is stated that, in order to prevent an arms race in
outer space, further measures should be taken and appro­
priate international negotiations held in accordance with the
spirit of the Treaty,
Recalling its resolutions36/97 C and36/99 of9 December
1981 ,
Gravely concerned at the danger posed to all mankind by
an arms race in outer space,
Mindful of the widespread interest expressed by Member
States in the course of the negotiations on and following
the adoption of the-above-mentfoned Treaty in ensuring that
the exploration and use of outer space should be for peaceful
purposes, and taking note of proposals submitted to the
61 Resolution
"

2

2222 (XXI), annex
Resolution S-10/2.

General Assembly at its tenth special session and at its
regular sessions and to the Committee on Disarmament,
Noting the grave concern expressed by the Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space over the possible extension of an arms race
into outer space and the recommendations made to the com­
petent organs of the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, and also to the Committee on Disarmament,63
Convinced that further measures are needed for the pre­
vention of an arms race in outer space,
Recognizing that, in the context of multilateral negotia­
tions for preventing an arms race in outer space, the re­
sumption of bilateral negotiations between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America
can play a positive role,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on
Disarmament, 64
Noting that in the course of its session in 1982 the Com­
mittee on Disarmament considered this subject both at its
formal and informal meetings as well as through informal
consultations,
Aware of the various proposals submitted by Member
States to the Committee on Disarmament, particularly con­
cerning the establishment of a working group on outer space
and its draft mandate, 65
Noting, in particular, the express wishes of the over­
whelming majority of members of the Committee on Dis­
armament for the establishment, without delay, of a working
group on outer space,
1. Reaffirms the will of all States that outer space shall
be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that it shall
not become an arena for an arms race;
2. Declares that any use of outer space other than for
exclusively peaceful purposes runs counter to the agreed
objective of general and complete disarmament under ef­
fective international control;
3. Emphasizes that further effective measures to prevent
an arms race in outer space should be adopted by the in­
ternational community;
4. Calls upon all States, in particular those with major
space capabilities, to contribute actively to the objective of
the peaceful use of outer space and to take immediate meas­
ures to prevent an arms race in outer space;
5. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to consider
as a matter of priority the question of preventing an arms
race in outer space;
6. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament to
establish an ad hoe working group on the subject at the
beginning of its session in 1983. with a view to undertaking
negotiations for the conclusion of an agreement or agree­
ments, as appropriate, to prevent an arms race in all its
aspects in outer space;
7. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to report
on its consideration of this subject to the General Assembly
at its thirty-eighth session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this subject by the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session;

"' Sec Report of 1he Second United Nations Conference on the Explo­
ration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Vienna, 9-21 August /982
(NCONF.101/10 and Corr. I and 2), paras. 13, 14 and 426.
64
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 27, A/37/27 and Corr. I).
"' Ibid .. paras. WI - !06

III.

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled '' Prevention of an arms
race in outer space''.
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982

37/84. Relationship between disarmament and de­
velopment
The General Assembly,
Recalling the conclusions contained in chapter VII of the
study entitled The Relationship between Disarmament and
Development, 66
Recalling also resolution 36/92 G of 9 December 1981 ,
in which the General Assembly, inter alia, commended the
study, its conclusions and its recommendations to the at­
tention of all Member States and decided to transmit the
report to the Assembly at its twelfth special session for its
substantive consideration and appropriate action,
Noting the proposals on the follow-up decisions regarding
the study, circulated as official documents at the twelfth
special session of the General Assembly, 67
Noting also that, in the Concluding Document of the
Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly, it is rec­
ommended that the items on the agenda on which the
Assembly had not reached decisions should be taken up at
its thirty-seventh session for further consideration, 68
Noting further that it has decided to include the question
of the relationship between disarmament and development
in its agenda as a separate item,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
administrative action in accordance with the recommenda­
tions of the Group of Governmental Experts on the Rela­
tionship between Disarmament and Development, as
specified in chapter VII of the study entitled The Relation­
ship between Disarmament and Development;
2. Urges Member States to consider appropriate meas­
ures in accordance with all relevant recommendations of the
Group of Governmental Experts;
3. Determines that the question of reallocation and con­
version of resources, through disarmament measures, from
military to civilian purposes should be included in the pro­
visional agenda of the General Assembly at intervals to be
decided upon, starting with its fortieth session, in I985;
4. Recommends that an investigation-with due regard
to the capabilities of existing agencies and institutions cur­
rently responsible for the international transfer of re­
sources--of the modalities of an international disarmament
fund for development should be undertaken by the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, in consultation
with other relevant international institutions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the measures
taken in implementation of the present solution.
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982

37/85.

Immediate cessation and prohibition of nuclear­
weapon tests

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned over the continuing nuclear-arms race
and the growing danger of nuclear war,
66

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.IX.l .

67 A/S-12/18 and A/S-12/AC.l/49.

69

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

68 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Twelfth Special Ses­
sion, Annexes, agenda items 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13, document A/S-12/32.
para. 64.

Convinced that an immediate cessation of nuclear-weapon
tests by all States in all environments and the prohibition
of such testing in the future would be a serious obstacle to
the development of ever-new types and systems of nuclear
weapons, as well as to the emergence of new nuclear States,
Taking note of the "Basic provisions of a treaty on the
complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests'',
submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics at the
current session, 69 the text of which is annexed to the present
resolution,
I. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to proceed
promptly to practical negotiations with a view to elaborating
a draft treaty on the complete and general prohibition of
nuclear-weapon tests;
2. Refers to the Committee on Disarmament, for its
consideration, the basic provisions of such a treaty, sub­
mitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the text
of which is annexed to the present resolution, as well as the
proposals and observations made by other States on this
question in the course of the current session;
3. Calls upon all the nuclear-weapon States, as a gesture
of goodwill and with a view to creating more favourable
conditions for the formulation of a treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests, not to con­
duct any nuclear explosions, starting from a date to be
agreed among them and until the above-mentioned treaty is
concluded, after the appropriate declarations have been made
by them to that effect well in advance;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Immediate cessation
and prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests".
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982
ANNEX
Basic provisions of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition
of nuclear-weapon tests

The objective of averting nuclear war, towards which the efforts of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and of other peace-loving States are
directed, makes it imperative to take such measures, inter alia. as would
impede the development of ever-new types and systems of nuclear weapons.
One such effective measure would be the immediate cessation and pro­
hibition of nuclear-weapon tests by all States and in all environments,
which at the same time would promote the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons.
Motivated by these goals. the Soviet Union is submitting to States
Members of the United Nations, for their consideration, the following
basic provisions of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of
nuclear-weapon tests.
A.

SCOPE OF THE PROHIBITION

1. Each State party to this Treaty shall undertake to prohibit, to prevent
and not to carry out any nuclear-weapon test explosions at any place under
its jurisdiction or control, in any environment-in the atmosphere, beyond
its limits, including outer space, under water or under ground.
2. No party shall cause, encourage or in any way participate in the
conduct of any nuclear-weapon-test explosions anywhere.
3. A moratorium shall be declared on nuclear explosions for peaceful
purposes, under which the parties to this Treaty shall refrain from causing,
encouraging, or in any way participating in carrying out such explosions
until the relevant procedure has been evolved.
4. Promptly after the entry into force of this Treaty, consideration shall
be given to the question of procedure for carrying out nuclear explosions
for peaceful purposes. Such procedure, to be agreed upon, may take the
form of a special agreement or agreements constituting an integral part of
this Treaty.
"

9

See A/37/24.1
