tion, and to submit a first report not later than 17
February 1978.

Noting with deep anxiety and indignation that the
South African racist régime has continued violence and
massive repression against the black people and all
opponents of apartheid in defiance of the resolutions of
the Security Council,
Gravely concerned over reports of torture of political
prisoners and the deaths of a number of detainees, as
well as the mounting wave of repression against individuals, organizations and the news media since 19
October 1977,
Convinced that the violence and repression by the
South African racist régime have greatly aggravated the
situation in South Africa and will certainly lead to
violent conflict and racial conflagration with serious
international repercussions,
Rea,ffirming its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the South African people for the elimination
of apartheid and racial discrimination,
Affirming the right to the exercise of self-determination by ail the people of South Africa as a whole, irrespective of race, colour or creed,
Mindful of its responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security,
I. Strongly condemns the South African racist
régime for its resort to massive violence and repression
against the black people, who constitute the great majority of the country, as well as al! other opponents of
apartheid;
2. Expresses its support for, and solidarity with, al!
those struggling for the elimination of apartheid and
racial discrimination and ail victims of violence and
repression by the South African racist régime;
3. Demands that the racist régime of South Africa:
(a) End violence and repression against the black
people and other opponents of apartheid;
( b)
Release al! persans imprisoned un der arbitrary
security laws and ail those detained for their opposition
to apartheid;
( c) Cease forthwith its indiscriminate violence
against peaceful demonstrators against apartheid, murders in detention and torture of political prisoners;
( d) Abrogate the bans on organiz:itions and the
news media opposed to apartheid;
(e)
Abolish the "Bantu education" system and ail
other measures of apartheid and racial discrimination;
(f) Abolish the policy of bantustanization, abandon the policy of apartheid and ensure majority rule
based on justice and equality;
4. Requests ail Governments and organizations to
t~ke ail appropriate measures to secure the implcmentatton of paragraph 3 of the present resolution;
5. Further requests all Governments and organizations to contribute generously for assistance to the
victims of violence and repression, including educational assistance to student refugees from South Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Special Committee against Apartheid, to follow
the situation and report to the Security Council, as appropriate, on the implementation of the prcsent resolu-

Adopted unanimously at the
2045th mectin,:.

Resolution 418 (1977)
of 4 Novemher 1977

T/1e Sernrity Council,
Reca!ling its resolution 392 l 1976) of 19 June 1976.
strongly condemning the South African Government for
its resort to massive violence against and killings of the
African people, including schoolchildren and students
and others opposing racial discrimination, and calling
upon that Government urgently to end violence against
the African people and to take urgent steps to climinate
apal'fhcid and raci:il discrimination,
Recognizing that the military build-up by South
Africa and its persistent acts of aggression against the
neighbouring S1ates scriously disturb the security of
thosc States,
Furtlzer recognizing that the cxisting anns embargo
must be strengthencd and universally applied, without
any rescrvations or qualifications whatsocver, in ordcr
to prcvcnt a further ,:ggravation of the grave situation
in South Africa,
Takinr; note of the Lagos Declaration (or Action
against Apartheid, rn
Gravely concerned that South Africa is at the threshold of producing nuclcar weapons,
Strongly condemning the South African Government
for its acts of repression, its defiant continuance of the
system of apartheid and its attacks against neighbouring
independent States,
Considering that the policies and acts of the South
African Government are fraught with danger to international peace and security,
Recalling its resolution 181 (1963) of 7 August
1963 and other resolutions concerning a voluntary arms
embargo against South Africa,
Com·inced that a mandatory arms embargo needs to
be univcrsally applied against South Africa in the first
instance.
Acting therefore under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations,
1. Determines, having regard to the policies and
acts of the South African Government, that the acquisition by South Africa of arms and related matériel constitutcs a threat to the maintenance of international
pcacc and security;
2. Decides that all States shall cease forthwith any
provision to South Africa of arms and related matfriel
of ail types, including the sale or transfer of weapons
and ammunition, military vehicles and equipment, parami litary police equipmcnt, and spare parts for the aforementioncd, and shall ccase as well the provision of ail
1
"

5

United Nation~ publication. Sales No. E.77.XIV.2, sect. X.

Recalling its resolution 4 l 8 ( l 977) of 4 November
1977, in which it determined, having regard to the
policies and acts of the South African Government, that
the acquisition by South Africa of arms and related
matériel constituted a threat to the maintenance of
international peace and security and established a
mandatory arm,- embargo against South Africa,

types of equipment and supplies and grants of licensing
arrangements for the manufacture or maintenance of
the aforementioned;
3. Calls upon all States to review, having regard to
the objectives of the present resolution, ail existing
contractual arrangements with and licences granted to
South Africa relating to the manufacture and maintenance of arms, ammunition of ail types and military
equipment and vehicles, with a view to terminating
them;
4. Further decides that all States shall refrain from
any co-operation with South Africa in the manufacture
and development of nuclear weapons;
5. Calls upon all States, including States non-members of the United Nations, to act strictly in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the progress of the implementation
of the present resolution, the first report to be submitted
not later than 1 May 1978;
7. Decides to keep this item on its agenda for further action, as appropriate, in the light of developments.

Mindful of the need to have appropriate machinery
in order to examine the progress of implementation of
the measures envisaged in rcsolution 418 ( 1977),
N oting that it requested the Secretary-General to
report to the Council on the progress of the implementation of n:solution 41 8 ( 1977),

1. Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28
of its provisional rules of procedure, a Committec of
the Security Council, consisting of all the members of
the Council, to undertake the following tasks and to
report on its work to the Council with its observations
und recommendations:
(a)
To examine the report on the progrc!".s of the
implementation of resolution 418 ( 1977) which will be
submitted by the Secretary-General;

Adopted unanimously at tlie
2046th meetin[!.

(b) To study ways and means by which the manùatory arms embargo could be made more e!Tcctiw
against South Africa and to make recommcndations to
the Council;

Decisions

( c) To seek from ail States further information
regarding the action taken by them concerning the
effective implementation of the provisions laid down in
resolution 418 (1977) ;

At its 2052nd meeting, on 9 December 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Saudi
Arabia and the United Republic of Cameroon to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled "The question of South Africa: letter dated 5
December 1977 from the Permanent Representative of
the United Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12470)". 17

2. Calls upon all States to co-operate fully with the
Committee in regard to the fulfilment of its tasks concerning the effective implementation of the provisions
of resolution 418 (1977) and to supply such information as may be sought by the Committee in pursuance
of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral to provide all
necessary assistance to the Committee and to make the
necessary arrangements in the Secretariat for that purpose, including the provision of appropriate staff for the
servicing of the Committee.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at
the request of the representatives of Benin, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius, 18 to extend an invitation to Mr. M. J. Makatini under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adopted u11animous/y at the
2052nd 111eeti11g.

Resolution 421 (1977)
of 9 December 1977

Decision

The Security Council,

At its 2053rd meeting, on 9 December 1977, the
Council decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure, to the Chairman
of the Special Committee against Apartheid.

17 See Oficial Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1977.
1 s Ibid., document S/12480.

6
