UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

252t!rh

MEETING:

.

COUNCIL

3 APRIL

uT\E”
L~~~~~Y

1984

NEWYORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2528). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16449). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV .2528
and Corr.1

..,

.:

. .

‘.

‘./

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
._
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
,Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2528th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,

3 April

the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

President: Mr. Vladimir Alekseyevich KRAVETS
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. Al-Al& (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Martinez (El Salvador), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. R&z (Hungary),
Mr. Kittikhoun
(Lao People’s Democratic Republic),
Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Ms. Gonthier
(Seychelles) and Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2528)

of the agenda

Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16449)
The meeting

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The first speaker is the representative of Pakistan.

was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption

1984, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda
4. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): Allow me to begin
by extending to you, Sir, our sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. We are confident that
your personal qualities and rich diplomatic experience
and skills will be great assets in enabling the Council to
deal effectively with the issues that may come before it
during this month. I also wish to express our profound
appreciation and admiration for the outstanding manner in which your predecessor, Mr. Javier Arias Stella
of Peru, guided the work of the Council.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 29 March 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16449)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian],:
In accordance wifh the decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [252&h and 2527th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Guyana, Honduras, Mexico and Syrian Arab Republic
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

5. Since this is the first time I am speaking in the
Council following the untimely death of Mr. Ahmed
SCkou Tout-e, President of the Revolutionary
People’s
Republic of Guinea, I wish to express our profound
anguish at his passing away and to convey to the delegation of Guinea our deep sympathies and heartfelt condolences. President Ahmed SCkou TourC was a pioneer
in the struggle against colonialism,
which surged
through the continent of Africa following the Second
World War. He was an indefatigable freedom-fighter,
an outstanding statesman of Africa and an inspiring
symbol of our time as a valiant leader dedicated to the
cause of freedom, peace and progress. He was among
the founding fathers of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the Organization of African Unity and the
Organfzation of the Islamic Conference. As Chairman
of the Islamic Peace Committee,
he devoted himself
unsparingly to bringing to an end the tragic Iran-Iraq

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. KovaEiE (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana), Mr. Flores Bermridez (Honduras), Mr. Marin Bosch (Mexico) and Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab
Republic), took the places reservedfor them at the side
of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Ruisian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of Algeria, Democratic Yemen, El Salvador, Ethiopia, the
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Seychelles and Viet Nam in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
I

L

:

conflict. During ,his many memorable visits to ‘our region in pursuit,of his peace initiatives he visited Pakistan, where he endeared himself to our leaders and people, who will always cherish his memory as a true friend
and share with their brothers in Guinea their deep sense
of grief and sorrow.
.->
6. The troubled region of Central America is once
again the subject of the Security ‘Council’s
consideration in response to the compIaint brought to
it by Nicaragua. When a siinilar’complaint
from Nio
aragua was considered by the’ Council in March of
last year we voiced our feelings ,of profound concern
[2423rd meeting] at the distortion of the issues within
the region under the impact ‘of interference
and
involvement from outside:While
remaining sensitive to
the tense situation on Nicaragua’s borders with Honduras at that time and to the risk of armed conflicts among
the States of the.region, we were fully conscious of the
imperative need to prevent alien hands.from manipulating the process of change in the region and to ensure
that the peace initiative by the Contadora Group of
countries was provided with unhindered opportunity to
resolve the regional contradictions.

tries must learn to tolerate and respect socio-political
differences in their neighbourhood
and must learn
to live in peace and harmony with’one another. The
political processes in Nicaragua and El Salvador, each
in its own way, aim at strengthening the democratic
institutions
and sustain the validity of pluralistic
systems for the region. The Contadora Group, as well
as j the communique
adopted by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on
15 March [S/16422, annex], have noted with interest the
advances made with respect to elections in various
countries of the region and have,highlighted
the importance of making use of democratic processes as a means
of bringing about domestic reconciliation in the various
countries and detente in the region.
Il.
Nicaragua has invoked its right under the Charter
to bring its concerns to the Security Council, which has
the clear responsibility of giving it full satisfaction in the
overall regional context. Its decisions must help rather
than hinder the momentum of the Contadora process.
We clearly read this message in the important statement
of the representative of Mexico, in the 2527th meeting,
who has eloquently advocated that the countries of the
region be left to themselves to find a regional solution of
the complex Central American situation. Accordingly,
as we engage in the process of formulating a Security
Council response which satisfies the Nicaraguan concerns and at the same time does not prejudice the Contadora process, we look forward to the benefit of the
views of the countries of the region, and especially of
the members of the Group, whose co-operation is indispensable for peace in the region.

7. Recently the Central American region has been the
scene of extraordinary
diplomatic,
political and military activity, and the situation there continues to be
highly combustible. Nevertheless we remain convinced
that the endeavours of the Contadora Group hold out
the best hope of resolving the tragic conflict that afflicts
the region. The Contadora decisions provide the most
comprehensive and imaginative framework for an allembracing solution of the entire range of complex
issues in Central America. They include important
agreements embodying
political
commitments
designed to ensure peace in the region.

12. I wish to take this opportunity to declare our firm
support for the Government and people of Nicaragua in
their -endeavours to overcome the serious problems
with which they are beset at present. It is our hope that
all the States of the Central American region will help
the process of peace and coexistence, which would
permit them to build their respective, societies in
accordance with their aspirations and free from intervention and interference from outside.

8. Military activities in the region have assumed grave
proportions
and could spark a wider conflagration
with ramifications beyond the frontiers of Nicaragua
and Honduras or those of the region. Nicaragua has
expressed concern over military manoeuvres and exercises in the region, which it sees as a threat to its own
security. It has complained against increased guerrilla
and rebel activity on its territory, alleging that it is
sustained from outside, and has reported the mining of
its ports, which has caused damage to foreign shipping
in its waters.

13. Mr. LUNA (Peru) [interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
First I should like to express to you, Sir, the congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the direction of our work for this month. I am sure that under
your skilful and intelligent
leadership the Security
Council will achieve fruitful results this month. On
behalf of Mr. Javier Arias Stella, I should like also to
express thanks for the very.kind and thoughtful words
with which representatives have referred to his work as
President of the Council last month.

9. The mining of the Nicaraguan ports is a grave matter. It has already obstructed free navigation in Nicaraguan waters, and it amounts to a partial blockade of
its ports. Pakistan unequivocally
deplores this development, which is causing suffering to the Nicaraguan
people, and upholds the fundamental right’ of every
nation to develop its economy and socio-political
system free from outside coercion.

14. The Security Council has been convened once
again to consider both new and already expressed complaints by the Government of Nicaragua regarding acts
violating its sovereignty and territorial integrity, which
regrettably have resulted in the loss of life and damage
and, owing to their nature, have seriously harmed the
economic infrastructure of that fraternal Latin American nation.

10. As in the case of Nicaragua, every country in
the region has the right to embark on development
programmes of its own. At the same time these coun2

15. The. detailed presentation 1of ,the facts that the
representative of Nicaragua has given us on two occasions [252&h .and 2527th ,meetings] showed that the
situation confronted by his country not only still exists
but is .worsening at an alarming rate. The mining of
Nicaraguan ports that has taken place during the past
few months has damaged ships and inflicted injuries on
crews of various nationalities,
thus causing concern
and disrupting normal traflic off the Nicaraguan coast.
-I A.
16. My delegation has listened with attention to the
statements about the facts as they have occurred. There
has been no denial, ,of the allegations, and we may
deduce that their veracity is not being debated. Consequently, the delegation of Peru wishes to make the
following points.
‘2.
First,
we
reject
the intensification of hostile acts
17.
against Nicaragua and this new phase of operations
against its port installations,
the victim of which is
always its own people.

all the Central American republics, there must be strict
observance of the principles of non-intervention
in
internal and external affairs of States, the right to selfdetermination,
respect for international obligations, the
peaceful settlement,of:disputes
and the inadmissibility
of the threat or use of force against the sovereignty,
independence or territorial integrity of any State.
23. Furthermore,
it is obvious that, the deplorable
violations of Nicaragua’s security and stability are a
crucial link in the’broader political, economic and social
problems confronting Central America. The peoples of
that subregion are passing through a particularly critical
period. They are making choices regarding the future of
their nations and universal values, such as freedom,
democracy, well-being and justice, are all at stake. The
process requires not only the mature, devoted efforts of
the protagonists but also the international community’s
responsible and careful understanding,
especially by
those who for reasons ofgeography or history are called
to play more constructive roles.

18. Secondly, we are profoundly concerned at-the
serious accusations made in this debate regarding
actions aimed at obstructing
Nicaraguan
shipping
trade, which amounts to a defucto blockade and de jure
violation of free international navigation.

24. In the special case of Central America, the Contadora Group is the legitimate depositary of the confidence and ideals for the peace of Latin America, of the
non-aligned countries and of practically the entire international community.
Unanimous support at all levels
has been given to the efforts of Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela. Within the inter-American
system and in the United Nations, as we have said, documents have been adopted praising the efforts of those
countries and exhorting them to persevere. However,
as a number of representatives have wisely pointed out,
realities in the area-characterized,
inter aliu, by the
circumstances that have brought us together today and
by a mistaken, dangerous and simplistic view of the
Central American crisis-have
obstructed the dialogue
and negotiations that the Contadora Group has so conscientiously sought to achieve among the Governments
directly concerned.

19. Thirdly, we are convinced that the increase in the
foreign military presence and the irrational arms race
taking place in Central America will have the effect only
of encouraging distrust and tension and give substance
to the mutual charges by the nations of the isthmus
being levelled at one another about destabilization, traffic in arms, terrorism of all kinds.and support of insurgents, among other things.
20. Fourthly, we reaffirm our determined support for
Security Council resolution 530 (1983) and General Assembly resolution 38110. Both documents were adopted
by consensus and accurately reflect the principles’and
commitments
that the international community ‘hopes
will be honoured by the parties and factions involved in
this regrettable crisis.

25. Hence Contadora still has a long row to hoe, and
its peace efforts continue to require our firm and constant support. It is noteworthy that that group of countries is striving not only to bring about harmonious
coexistence among the Central American nations, in
keeping with the principles of international law and in a
climate of security and stability, but also to help the
parties establish a legal and institutional framework for
economic and social co-operation which will allow the
subregion to move again in the direction of integration
and complementarity.

21. Fifthly, we believe there is an urgent need for us to
express emphatically our support for the efforts of the
Contadora Group, which is endeavouring to reach a
negotiated comprehensive settlement that will provide
the guidelines for a consolidation of peace in the area.
If the Contadora Group is to reach tangible results,
obviously there must first be an immediate cessation of
all acts of hostility among and towards Central American countries-and
that applies to conduct both within
and outside the negotiations framework.

26. The Government of Peru hopes that this vision of
a final, comprehensive, peaceful settlement that takes
into account the legitimate
interests of all Central
American peoples-a
settlement under the auspices of
the Contadora Group within an exclusively regional
context-will
come true.

22. Sixthly, it is extremely important that we all renew our support for the vigorous appeal for the strictest
respect for the principles and norms of international law
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
other international
instruments.
With regard to the
complaints presented by Nicaragua, which bear upon

27. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Sir, you have assumed your
high office in the beautiful month of April, which nor3

mally brings in a welcome thaw from the cold winter
months. Today’s sunshine is a practical manifestation
of this climatic change. As I compliment you, therefore,
I venture to hope that, despite the formidable obstacles
that stand in the way, our debate on this item ‘under
your presidency will also herald an overdue thaw in the
International climate. Your *predecessor has already
made a valuable contribution in fhis regard by the way
in which, as befits his name, like a star inthe firmament,
he conducted the Council’s’work in the tempestuous
,.
month of March.

“They will accordingly
-_ refrain from any form of
armed intervention or threat of such intervention
against another participating State.
“They will likewise in all circumstances refrain
from any other act of military, or of political, economic or other coercion designed to subordinate to
“, their own interest the exercise by another particidating State of the rights inherent in its sovereignty
and thus to secure advantages of any kind.
“Accordingly, they will, inter alia, refrain from
direct or indirect assistanceto terrorist activities, or
to subversive or other activities directed towards the
violent overthrow of the regime of another participating State.”

28. Almost everything ‘that needs to be said on the
item before us has already been very aptly expressed in
the statements made before the Council, particularly at
yesterday’s and today’s meetings when, after having
heard the opening statements of the protagonists, we
benefited from the important viewi and preoccupations
of the countries in the region and of objective observers
who are really trying to encourage ‘the Contadora
Group’s peaceful approach.
~.

33. The second-refraining from the threat or use of
force-was defined as follows:
,.

“The narticioating States will refrain in their
mutual relations’, as well as in their international relations in general, from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations and with
the present Declaration. No consideration may be
invoked to serve to warrant resort to the threat or use
of force in contravention of this principle.

29. My own delegation has already intervened twice
in the Council on this subject; we find that the observations we made on those previous occasions remain
valid today and we therefore see no point in repeating
them. But there remains, in our opinion, one additional
consideration’which we wish to eniphasize.
30. When speaking before this Co&i! on 28 March
[2522nd meeting]. I stressed that “internationally re&
ognized principles have specific content and lay down
binding norms of inter-State behaviour’*. I added, “the
carefully defined words of each relevant principle constitute accurate descriptions of actual international
behaviour expected from and incumbent upon each one
of us”.

“Accordingly, the participating States will refrain
from any acts constituting a threat of force or direct
or indirect use of force against another participating
State. Likewise they will refrain from any manifestation of force for the purpose of inducing another
participating State to renounce the full exercise of its
sovereign rights. Likewise they will also refrain in
their mutual relations from any act of reprisal by
force.

31. The two principles that mainly appear to be at the
centre of our attention on this ‘item are those which
stipulate non-intervention in the internal affairs of
States and refraining from the threat or use of force..

“No such threat or use of force will be employed as
a means of-settling disputes, or questions likely to
give rise to disputes, between them.”

32. On 1August 1975, in those distant days when the
word detente-although perhaps at times abused:was
still considered a decent word, worthy of being
included in the political dictionary and in the discourse
of international relations, the countries of Europe,
together with Canada, the Union.of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America. signed the
Helsinki Final Act. Among the decalogue of principles
laboriously negotiated in a two-year marathon conference, the two principles I have already mentioned,
which are mainly applicable to. today’s debate, were
defined. The first-non-intervention
in the internal
affairs of States-was defined as follows: ..
‘“The participating States will refrain from any
intervention, direct or indirect, individual or collective, in the internal or external affairs falling within
the domestic jurisdiction of another participating
State, regardless of their mutual relations.

34. Those principles were so important that they bore
repetition. They were brief and to the point. They were
so firmly founded in international law that the participating States, after having stressed the primary significance and equal and unreserved applicability of all
the ten principles, felt the need to add that they declared
“their intention to conduct their relations with all other
States in the spirit of the principles contained in the
present Declaration**.
35. Because of their universality, these principles
bind all Members of the United Nations. The responsibility accruing therefrom weighs even more heavily,
perhaps, on those who have subscribed to the Helsinki
Final Act, andespecially the permanent members of the
Security Council.
36. That of course was almost 10 years ago. Many
unfortunate events have occurred since then
I. which
4

i.
have troubled the international scene. But the words of
the principles remain valid as standards which strictly
govern international behaviour. We therefore ask that
all concerned live up to those standards, not by the lipservice they pay them, but in their actual behaviour.
The standards remain valid in all circumstances, even if
other countries may have transgressed them in other
areas in the recent past, and even though Policy choices
may admirably be subject to free and open scrutiny in
national-debate.
I
37. Once again, even in the midst of the disheartening
news brought to our attention of events which have
culminated in serving to impede humanitarian assistance to Nicaragua, there have, nevertheless, remained
some positive elements. The Contadora Group forthrightly pursues its task, setting down the balanced
guidelines necessary for regional progress. Peaceful
overtures continue to be made by Nicaragua, even in
the face of the enormous difficulties placed in its way.
And there has also been a belated recognition by the
United States of the crisis in Central America, of compassion for its people and of hope for its future, in a bipartisan approach. As long as these elements aid in
practical terms the objectives set by the Contadora
Group they should be encouraged, to the same extent
that military adventurism should be condemned.
38. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretation from Russian]: Mr. President, first of all I should like to congratulate you and
welcome you to this important post of President of the
Security Council and express my conviction that your
great diplomatic experience will help the Council in its
work this month. I should also like to express appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Arias Stella, who so ably
and tactfully discharged his functions as President of
the Security Council in March. His diplomatic ability to
a considerable and significant extent promoted the successful work of the Council.

mot& Mora, a great’heal of evidence was laid before us
confirming these facts.
,,
,,:
41. Everyone is fully aware of who is behind these
terrorist activities and who is providing weapons, financingand guidance, Indeed, the leaders of the United
States not only do not attempt to cover.up their role in
such gross violations of peace and international law,
but in fact they.boast about their role. There is no need
to dispatch a commission of enquiry to establish the
truth, for it is hard to think ,of any other instance in
which any State has so openly acknowledged its participation in acts of aggression against another.
42. In the past few, days there has been a particularly
marked increase in Washington’s military activities in
the Central American region., On the pretext of regular
training exercises Marine units have been concentrated
,along the borders of Nicaragua, a non-aligned State,
and there has been an increase in air activity as well as a
redeployment of Marines. Runways are hastily being
constructed, as are ports and warehouse facilities for
storing armaments.
43. On 1April of this year manoeuvres unprecedented
in Ceutral America were begun. As stated by the
Pentagon, these will include the examination of “all
aspects of a’ scenario of contemporary warfare”,
including paratroop operations. Some particularly
alarming aspects of such developments are to be found
in United States press reports, according to which
American troops ‘will participate directly in these military operations.

39. The Soviet delegation responded with understanding to the urgent appeal from Nicaragua to the
Security Council. Disturbing developments around that
country justify its request and make it a correct one,
Just a few months ago the Security Council was obliged
to consider the question of aggressive actions against
Nicaragua, and yet the danger threatening its people
has not at all receded; on the contrary, that danger
continues to grow.

44. And what is the reason for all these events around
Nicaragua? The White House does not attempt to conceal the fact that the principal task is, as it has claimed
in the past and continues to claim, to force the Nicaraguan people to turn away from their path of independent development and to restore in that country-and,
indeed, throughout Central America-its own total
control. In July of last year Washington quite openly
stated that it did not believe in the possibility of a
peaceful settlement in the region as long as the Sandin-ist leadership’was in power there. Washington is quite
simply demanding that a sovereign State alter its
political and economic structure and change its foreign
policy. it would not be incorrect to say that such an
approach with regard to a sovereign State and a Member of the United Nations is, in the final analysis, a
threat to every developing; ‘non-aligned country.

40. In violation of international law and of the Charter
of the United Nations, a policy is being railroaded
through, expanding militaristic preparations around
Nicaragua. Areas in Central America adjacent to that
country have been turned into a staging ground for
armed operations, where many bases have been set up
and where Somozist terrorists’ have established their
camps. These groups are carrying out attacks, killing
civilians and trying to destabilize the economic life of
the country. In the very able statements in the Security
Council by the representative of Nicaragua, Mr. Cha-

45. Here in this chamber the delegation of the United
States enjoys moralizing about “violence”, “murder
and terrorism” and attempts to “obliterate the line
between peace and war, between civilian and military,
between politics and crime”. The people of Latin
America, however, know better than anyone else the
true nature of the actions of those moralizers who, for
their own hegemonistic ends, do not hesitate to resort
to teirorism and to overt violence. I shall not dwell
upon the past. Suffice it to recall the aggression committed against Grenada only six months ago.

46. It is hard not to recall here the heroic people of
Cuba. For 25 years they have withstood attempts to
stifle them by ,means of a blockage, of economic sabotage, of armed aggression and through ,plots to assassinate their leaders. We can be quite sure that the American adventure against Nicaragua will also, in the last
analysis, end as pathetically as did that of the Bay of
Pigs.

51. We should like to ask the United States delegation: does the present Administration
realize that it is
opening up a new and extremely dangerous chapter in
the history of international terrorism, one with unforeseeable consequences for many countries of the world?
Does it realize that it is playing with fire and that the
mining of the ports of other countries in peacetime is
not only a clear and flagrant violation of international
law but also a serious step towards creating a situation
of international anarchy, something against which the
Secretary-General
warned us in’his 1982 annual report?’ We would also point out the fact that the State
indulging in this terrorism is one that is highly vocal in
its support of free navigation. Moreover, the President
of that State openly voiced the need “to avert conflicts
which might threaten shipping lanes’*. It is not surprising that the United States Secretary of State,
Mr. Shultz, speaking on television on 1 April, was
unable to answer the question as to how mining the
waters off the shores of Nicaragua was different from
other acts of international terrorism.

47. It is perfectly clear to any unprejudiced observer
that as far as the imperialists are concerned freedom,
human rights and democracy stop at the point where the
peoples throw off the yoke of economic exploitation
and enter upon the path towards independent development, rejecting the policies of diktat and hegemonistic
control.
48. On 29 March this year the General Secretary of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Chernenko, stated the following:
“The value of all this talk about United States willingness to take action to ease international tension, to
act in a spirit of restraint and not to use or threaten the
use of force can be quite clearly seen in the case of
Nicaragua, against ‘which American special forces
and their henchmen have been waging an undeclared
war. They are sowing violence everywhere, killing
peaceful civilians. Do they really think in Washington that their policy of State terrorism and intervention in the affairs of sovereign States will be regarded
by the peoples as promotion of peace? Such a belief
would be a grave error indeed.”

52. In such a situation we can only express surprise
that some sea Powers allies of the United States prefer
to remain silent on this question in spite of the fact that
this new stage in the development of international terrorism creates considerable dangers for them as well.
53. The Soviet delegation considers that the Security
Council would be acting correctly and in fulfilment of
its obligations by condemning the mining of the ports
and territorial waters as an act of State terrorism.
54. The actions of the United States show that it is not
interested in a political settlement in Central America
and that it is deliberately pursuing a policy intended to
widen the conflict. Those actions constitute a gross
violation of the fundamental principles of international
law and of the Charter of the United Nations.

49. The Security Council ‘has recently been witnessing a new manifestation
of this ‘policy of State
terrorism. Actions are aimed against foreign merchant
ships en route to Nicaragua or sailing along its coastline. Mines have been laid in the waters adjacent to that
country and in its territorial waters and ports, and several foreign ships have already been damaged by them,
including the Soviet tanker Lugansk.

55. For its part, the Soviet Union declares its support
for the just cause of the people of Nicaragua, who are
defending their freedom and the independence of their
homeland.

50. The Government of the Soviet Union delivered a
firm protest to the Government of the United States and
warned that the United States would bear full responsibility for any consequences that might result from the
continuation of such actions. In the note by the Soviet
Government,
delivered to the United States Charge
d’Affaires by a member of the Politburo of the Central
Committee,
First Deputy President of the Council of
Ministers of the Soviet Union and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Andrei Gromyko, on 21 March, stated,
inter alia:

56. The Soviet Union is in favour of a peaceful settlement of the alarming situation in Central America.
The Soviet Union believes that the States of the Contadora Group should work actively-indeed,
more actively-in
that direction. It goes without saying that
the trend of future developments in the region-and
whether towards stabilization
or, as is happening at
present, towards a widening of the conflict-will
depend largely on the Security Council, on its members,
and on us, their representatives.

“The nature and scope of such criminal operations
leave no doubt that they are being carried out with the
direct participation
of departments
and persons
under the control of the United States Government,
which is thereby guilty of violating one of the fundamental principles of international law, namely, the
right to free navigation.‘*

57. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) [interpretation
from Arubit]: It gives me pleasure, Sir, to extend to you our
heartfelt congratulations
on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We’are certain
that your rich diplomatic experience and the seriousmindedness with which you approach problems will
6

guarantee the smooth functioning of the Council.’ I
should like also to reiterate our satisfaction with
and admiration for the exemplary manner in which
Mr. Javier Arias Stella discharged his responsibilities
as President of the Council last month.
*

tion on Peace in Central America [S/15877, annex], of
17 July 1983 and the Document of Objectives contained
in the annex to document S/16041. These are sincere,
creative initiatives springing from within the region. My
delegation considers that we are all duty-bound to lend
our positive support to the endeavours of the Contadora Group and to give the Group every opportunity
to continue its work and fulfil its mission.

58. The nature of the crises besetting the peoples of
Central America is but one more facet of human suffering in the third world, where people aspire to freedom, rights, their due share of prosperity and development and to the exercise of their political rights, free
from foreign intervention and internal oppression.

64. Egypt believes in and calls for the right of peoples
to choose their economic and political systems without
foreign intervention, and we believe in the inviolability
of borders between States. We call for renunciation of
the use of violence and threats and for efforts to be
made to establish a dialogue in order to provide all
peoples and legitimate Governments of Central America with the atmosphere that will enable them to face
their basic problems: the problems of development, of
overcoming the legacy of colonialism and exploitation,
and of achieving the legitimate hopes and aspirations of
the people of that region.

59. As a country of the third world, Egypt is. well
aware of the problems of the third world, with its heavy
legacy of economic and social underdevelopment
and
of the burdens and responsibilities
imposed on legitimate Governments and leaders by the legitimate aspirations of their peoples. Therefore, and owing to its
membership in the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, Egypt appreciates the nature of the problems
besetting the Government and people of Nicaragua and
the challenges faced by that country.

65. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

60. Having had the same historical experience, Egypt
can say that Central American States facing similar
challenges will not meet those challenges unless a regional climate is created throughout the area based on
renunciation of the threat or use of force and on abandonment of confrontation and intervention in the internal affairs of States, as well as on application of the
principles of good-neighbourliness
and respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
all States of the area and for the right of their peoples freely to choose their own political and economic
systems.

66.

Mr. BURWIN

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) [interThe delegation of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya has already had occasion to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to extend its gratitude to the
representative of Peru for his conduct of the Council’s
business last month.
pretation

from Arabic]:

67. The Security Council is meeting once again today
to discuss another chapter in the provocations and acts
of intervention
and aggression undertaken
by the
American Administration
against peoples that refuse to
submit to its hegemonic colonialist designs.

61. Egypt joins other delegations in expressing grave
concern about the recent escalation and spread of violence and counter-violence
in Central America. Besides its tragic and destructive effects on individuals
and whole peoples in the region, it increasingly threatens peace and security on a wider scale.

68. The Council recently began discussion of the acts
of aggression undertaken by the United States against
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the flagrant intervention in our affairs, and that consideration resumed yesterday [252&h meeting]. I wish to affirm that those
acts are a manifestation of the premeditated and everaggressive United States policy towards Libya. That
policy, which persists to this very day, dates back to the
emergence of our revolution in 1969, a year which
marked a new phase in the history of the Libyan people,
one in which that small people has been able, thanks to
its struggle and its faith, to effect the removal of American bases of aggression, to put an end to oil monopolies
in the area, to adopt the slogan of economic liberation
and nationalize its oil industry, to support the forces of
liberation in southern Africa and the struggle of the
people of Palestine and pursue a non-aligned policy
against colonialism, racism and Zionism.

62. We have therefore followed with great attention
and concern the news of damage to a number of ships
caused by the mining of Nicaraguan ports, which can
only impede access, to those ports, bring about new
tragedies, and deprive the people of Nicaragua of the
foreign assistance it deserves.
63. Along with the efforts and well-known positions
of the non-aligned countries, which are based on unchanging principles, and with United Nations resolutions-including
Security Council resolution 530 (1983)
and the General Assembly’s consensus resolution 38/10
-a pioneering constructive undertaking has been begun by the States of the Contadora Group. We endorse
that undertaking, which deserves our encouragement.
We should urge the Group to follow the long constructive road ahead of it. Already, important landmarks
have been erected on that road: the Can&n Declara-

69. Ever since that day, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
has been the victim of repeated provocations, threats
7

and acts of direct and indirect aggression bv the American Administration.
These a% of terrorism have
assumed several forms, as reflected in economic pressures, the deployment of air and naval forces off the
Libyan coast, the dispatch of AWACS aircraft to neighbouring States to undertake spying missions against
Libya, and the conduct of military manoeuvres near its
borders. From time to time the American Administration, in co-ordination
with its puppets in the area,
has fabricated certain incidents to expand its acts of
aggression and provocation against free, independent
peoples.

74. The responsibility for the human and material losses resulting from those and previous incidents-which
are nothing less than acts of terrorism directed against
the security of international navigation-must
be borne
by the United States Administration,
which, through
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), planned and
executed these incidents.
75. The aggression being committed against Nicaragua today falls in the context of a vicious imperialist
policy of hegemony pursued by the American Administration with a view to extending and consolidating its
influence over various parts of the world on the pretext
of protecting its strategic and economic interests. This
is demonstrated in the aggressive policy that Administration is pursuing, its military buildup and the establishment of the rapid deployment force, its provocations against those States, that do not follow its lead, its
opposition to national liberation movements, its creation of hotbeds of tension, its sowing of the seeds of
discord and dissension and its conduct of provocative
military manoeuvres.

70. Those acts of aggression have not been confined
to military provocations
but have included biased
media campaigns deliberately fuelled by the American
Administration
with misinformation
designed to distort
the honourable and principled positions of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya on the issue of freedom in the world.
71. As we have already declared in this Council, the
Jamahiriya will be neither the first nor the last victim
in the series of American acts of aggression. This view
has been supported by the majority of speakers on the
subject, and today’s meeting afftrms the validity of
that warning. The Council is meeting again to discuss
the escalation of provocations and acts of aggression
unleashed against another non-aligned State-Nicaragua. In its turn, that country will not be the last
victim of such acts; indeed, other States will fall victim
to American aggression.

76. Our Arab region has been the victim of a ZionistAmerican conspiracy against it and of the limitless
support provided to Zionism by the American Administration to pursue aggression and expansion. This conspiracy has culminated in Israel’s invasion of Lebanon
and in the, continued acts of aggression against the
fraternal Syrian people. The aid given to the aggressive
South African regime is another case in point.

72. The current American Administration
has done
everything to frustrate the legitimate aspirations of the
peoples of Central America and destabilize the region
in order to overthrow so-called unfriendly regimes,
including the progressive regime in Nicaragua.

77. The threat or use of force in international relations
undermines the confidence of the international
community in the principle of collective security. The
United States Administration
has trampled international instruments and conventions underfoot. It has
dome so, not to defend the rights of peoples struggling
for freedom, but to suppress freedom and kill people in
Namibia, Palestine, Lebanon, Grenada, Nicaragua and
in many other parts of the world.

73. The new phase of aggression against Nicaragua,
aggression which has continued uninterrupted
since
the emergence of the revolutionary progressive regime,
is no mere coincidence but has been planned by the
United States Administration
on all levels. In order to
implement its schemes, that Administration
has mobilized lackey Governments of the region and has been
financing and organizing campaigns of terror against
the people of Nicaragua and supporting all military
operations waged against that people. To implement
these schemes it has used certain States as bridgeheads
and has supported armed elements of the remnants of
the Somozist Guard stationed on Nicaragua’s borders.
Tremendous financial resources have been earmarked
for plans to organize opposition inside and outside
Nicaragua and to dispatch spy planes for the purpose of
relaying information to anti-revolution
forces. The violation of that country’s territorial waters, including the
mining of its ports, has resulted in many incidents. One
was the explosion on 20 March 1983, which damaged a
Soviet vessel bringing oil to Nicaragua; another was the
sinking of the Pescasa when it hit a mine upon docking;
yet another was the damage caused to the ship Znderchaser, flying a Liberian flag, as it was leaving the port
of Cot-into on 28 March.

78. Nicaragua today is a victim of terrorist acts of
aggression committed by the United States. We must
stand by Nicaragua and support it, because our support for that country signifies that we stand on the
side of right and justice. The position of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya in this regard is in keeping with the
relevant General Assembly resolutions, the declarations of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and
the efforts of the Contadora Group-all
of which call for
respect for the territorial integrity of Nicaragua and for
seeking solutions to the problems of Central America
by peaceful means, such as dialogue and co-operation
among the States of the region free from foreign intervention.
79. Finally, we reaffirm the solidarity of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya with the struggle of the Nicaraguan
people in defending its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
8

80. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from RussianI:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

86. How, when nothing less than the sacrosanct vital
interests of the United States are at stake, could we
expect the leader of the United States to fail to mount
his favourite battle horse, joke about his age, castigate
communism-which
is responsible for all the Earth’s
evils-and extol both the democratic exterminators of
the Salvadorian people and the charming, mild-mannered military men in Honduras, who will obligingly
simulate coups and substitute one puppet for another
when needed?

81.

Mr. ROA KOUd
(Cuba) [interpretation
from
Mr. President, I should like to thank you and
the other members of the Security Council for allowing
me to take part in the present debate.
Spanish]:

82. Once again the Security Council is meeting to hear
a complaint by the Government of Nicaragua. This is
exactly the sixth time the Sandinist revolution has had
to resort to the Council, whose primary responsibility is
the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Obviously, it does not come here just to engage in
rhetoric, or to tax the patience of the members, or to
stand in the way of its neighbours’ defending themselves from some imagined threat-as
some would
mischievously have us believe. it comes here because
the danger of aggression-or,
to be more accurate, the
relentless upsurge in aggressive actions on the part
of the Government of the United States of America
against that Central American country over the past
two years-makes
it abundantly clear that the United
States has neither relinquished its interventionist
policies nor given up its illusory aim of overthrowing Nicaragua’s Governing Junta of National Reconstruction.

87. I am sure the members of the Council appreciate
the grave danger hovering over this poor, defenceless
and peace-loving giant to the north. The threat of the
fighting cock bedecked with corn tortillas, the awesome
rumbling of volanoes, the uncontainable attack of the
rhythmic May pole all foretell the collapse of the dominoes; the bankruptcy of the American way and the end
of Billy the Kid, Madison Avenue and the legend of the
Alamo.
88. Surely it is not asking too much for Congress to
allocate $21 million for 1984 to mine a few more Nicaraguan ports or have another go at Corinto and El
Bluff; to destroy new oil tanks, settlements and
schools; to kill a few more children, like Etelvina Cardenas, or innocent fishermen in the Atlantic or Pacific;
or to damage ships flying Japanese, Panamanian, Liberian or Soviet flags.

83. As if butter would not melt in her mouth, the
representative of the United States laments that Nicaragua should once again have complained about the
daily abominations being perpetrated against its sons,
ports, factories, ships and villages from the occupied
territory of Honduras and, although against the will
of its Government,
from Costa Rica by mercenaries
,armed, trained and directed by the CIA, the Pentagon
and the United States Government.
She pathetically
‘alleges that Nicaragua has presented itself as “the
peaceable, innocent victim of an aggression that is
orchestrated by . . . the United States” [see 2525th
meeting, puru. 731. We are almost moved to tears by
this slander. Imagine: such evil words being used
against the blameless benefactors of mankind!

89. Who cares, after all, about freedom of navigation
when you come right down to it? Who gives a hoot
about free navigation or uninterrupted development of
international trade? What do these things matter in the
face of the terrible, awesome dangers detected by the
Kissinger Commission, Ambassador Stone, the head of
the CIA and even Dick Tracy?
90. Surely no one will believe that the warmongering
clamour, the sending of fleets to the Gulf, the beginning
of the Ocean Venture 84 manoeuvres and the declarations of the Southern Command in the so-called
Panama Canal Zone in the face of the hypothetical
“closing” of the Strait of Hormuz, the navigation channels of the Caribbean or the Panama Canal, so justified
and in keeping with the principles of law, could possibly
be compared to the unjustified and baseless protest
over the mining of Nicaraguan ports, no matter how
friendly may be the companies of Panama, Liberia and
Japan, whose ships were damaged and whose nationals
were wounded in the explosions. They do not care
about the Soviet ship because it belongs to the “evil
empire” and, as they say, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics had the gall to supply weapons to the Nicaraguan people so that it might repel aggression.

84. How, indeed, could the mere fact of a request for
$2 1 million from the American Congress to finance the
operations of the ex-Somozist Guards possibly be construed as “orchestrated
aggression”
against Nicaragua? Who could allege that the $60 million allocated
over the past two years, according to the American
press, to the financing of the covert operations against
Nicaragua are anything but a legitimate reduction in the
funds devoted to social welfare or in the personal financial operations of the high-level collaborators of
President Reagan which are reported from time to time
in the press?

91. On 25 February two Nicaraguan fishing boats
sank after hitting mines in the neighbourhood of Bluefields. The New York Times correspondent Stephen
Kinzec quoted officials of the Sandinist Government in
his dispatch that day, saying that “‘the most recent
attacks showed an unprecedented level of co-ordina-

85. Could the fact that the actions against Nicaragua
are clear violations of the Charter of the United Nations
and international
law be reason enough to spoil the
breakfast of the person in charge?
9

tion and training which could only have been supplied,
by the, CIA”.
: 1
r,

of National Reconstruction
but, in-the words of the
Inquirer, “to force it, through pressure, to adopt a more
conciliatory attitude towards the United States’?. In
other words, it is a question only of forcing, through
military, economic, political and diplomatic coercion,
this stubborn group of revolutionaries,
who insist on
being independent, to return to the fold of its trained
chorus. This, the Americans would say, is in perfect
harmony with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and does not deserve the
Council’s attention.

92. We,know, of course, that.the’fact that Mr. William
J. Casey, Director of that beneficent branch of the
American Government, confidentially
told the Armed
Services and Intelligence Committees ,of the House of
Representatives
and the Senate that,the CIA would
continue to support the rebels, also known as the Contras, and that for that .purpose it would need between
$20 ,million and $50 million this year and another
$30 -million next year does not, at all mean that the
United States Government wants to cause any.harm to
the independent and sovereign Government of a Member State of the United Nations, Nicaragua.

96. Neither should we be concerped about the,occupation and use of the territory of Honduras for “covert
operations” by the Contras or to send CIA operatives
to engage in sabotage or to mine Nicaragua’s ports. The
Granadero I manoeuvres, despite the replacement of
General Alvarez by another “friend of the United
States”, are being held without problems. According to
The Christian Science Monitor, six landing strips have
been built-“ five more than approved by Congress’*.
“The Seabees can do”-they
certainly can-in Trujillo, in the north, or in the south, 20 miles from Nicaraguan territory.

93. Nothing could be further from its pristine objectives. As the representative of the United States said
only’ a few days ago, the fact is that Washington really
loves the Miskito Indians and has asked the Contras
-those putative sons of Somoza, who did so much for
the Nicaraguan aborigines--to
destroy the schools,
hospitals, bridges ‘and highways built by the Sandinists because it wants to make them literate, educate
them, vaccinate them against disease, give them decent
housing and facilitate their communication
with the
other citizens. But that would go against the national
philosophy of the great Yankee democracy, which was
not only based on the hunting down, extermination and
plundering of the Sioux, Pueblos, Comahches, Dakotas
and other original inhabitants of that part of the continent, but which also is happy and secure only when,
like the blacks in the South African bantustans, the
Indians are crammed into “reservations”
or into prisons, where, together with the blacks and hispanics,
they swell the ranks of the majority’element
of the
regular residents. This is not because of discrimination,
which does not exist in this great empire, but because
freedom, under which all are equal before the law,
persists in playing tricks on them, and, just as the
citizens belonging to these “minorities”
have more
than their proportional
share of unemployment,
they
also have more than their share of .“crime”
and
poverty.
94. The Philadelphia
counter-revolutionaries

Inquirer

article

97. The CIA’s military turistic plans are going ahead. 1
According to Martin Francis in Honduras Update,
Vol. 2, No..6, of March this year:
“In order to enlarge the landing strip for the Big Pine
II exercises, the Seabees razed the houses and comfields of the population without compensating them
for their losses . . . Others, in Trujillo, complain that
prostitution has become a serious problem since Big
Pine II began and that the local economy has been
seriously damaged.”
98. The occupation of Honduras by Yankee forces,
recently reinforced .by the sending of large naval units 1
and contingents of the 82nd Airborne Division-which
invaded Grenada a few months ago-the ‘mining of
ports, the violations of Nicaraguan air space and the
incursions by Pirafia speedboats into Nicaragua’s territorial waters are not, as might be thought, the prelude to intervention in that country or in neighbouring
El Salvador. On the contrary, these are measures to
intimidate the Sandinist Government and to protect the
“Made in USA” Salvadoran democratic process with
death squads and electoral chaos.

says that the

“operate with a fund of $24 million approved by
Congress last year. It is expected that funds will run
,out in June, and this time the Congress has prohibited
the CIA from using its contingency fund, as it has
done before, to,finance,the rebels. This is part of the
compromise between the Congress ,and the Administration to make possible .the continuation
of the
covert operation even after the House of Representatives twice voted in 1983 to end it.”

99. Therefore, we should not pay much attention to
the, message of Honduran delegates of the Word of God
to Pope John Paul II, adopted at their national congress
on 15 November last year, saying:
“‘Wherever
we look there are warplanes; strange
vehicles described as tanks (but which we have never
seen), foreign soldiers and Honduran soldiers who
are our sons and brothers, sons of peasants, just like.
all of us. They want to teach.us to hate our brothers,
who, they say, ,are Communists,
in Nicaragua, El
Salvador, Guatemala and even in Honduras.”

95. The purpose of the so-called covert operation
-although
the press writes about it every day, only the
United States representative seems to believe that it
is still secret-is
not to overthrow” the’ Government
10

sage, the truth is ‘being shouted from the roof-tops
and in the squares when Mr. Casey, Mr. Weinberger,
Mr. Ikle and other government officials insist on the
need to finance ‘the counter-revolutionary
Somozist
activities and in general are taking measures in violation
of international
1awAwhich suggest preparation for a
Yankee intervention in El Salvador or in NicaraguaPresident Reagan, Secretary of State Shultz and the
Permanent
Representative
at the United Nations
proclaim, without blushing, that they advocate the
peaceful, negotiated solution proposed by Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, known as the “Contadora initiative”.

The letter continues:
“In our fields we have seen only humble, poor
people, living in poverty without land to work, with:
out housing, without medical centres, without drinking water, without highways and without light. Many
of our children die because of lack of proper food or
medicine. And the Word of God obliges us to love, to
serve and to build a better world.”
The letter concludes:
“Many of our companions who praise the Word of
God and some of the clergy who live with us, sharing
our poverty and our hopes, have been arrested and
even been killed because they taught us to put the
Gospel into practice and to live in our communities in
accordance with the teachings of Puebla”-a
reference to the Episcopal Conference held in Puebla,
Mexico, in 1979--“ and of our Honduran bishops”.

103. We have read, with renewed interest, the declarations by the Presidents of Mexico and Colombia
made during the former’s visit to the great Andean
country, repeating their unshakeable commitment to a
negotiated settlement to resolve -the Central American
conflicts and calling for an end to the inflow of military
forces to the area. This is the meaning of the statements
made by President de la Madrid in Brazil and throughout his journey in our America.

100. This, I say in passing, is the situation in a “representative democracy”,
one of those which Washington extols and favours. We are not so sure that those
who follow the Word of God will not be described
tomorrow by the United States delegation as cryptoCommunists or be condemned to perish in one of Mr.
Casey’s covert, but no longer secret, operations. After
ah, did not the pathological d’Aubuisson assassinate
the Archbishop of San Salvador to safeguard the military, pro-Yankee “democracy”,
over which he now
aspires to preside with the blessing of his friends in the
North?

104. It is not enough simply rhetorically to endorse
Latin America’s peace initiative. The Governments of
the Contadora Group, inspired as they are by a deep
desire to find a genuine solution of their own making for
the problems of Central America, must take urgent
steps to guarantee that all parties, especially the United
States, give real support to their efforts.
105. Military and naval actions aimed at intimidating
Nicaragua must cease. The mining of the ports, the
violation of borders, the growing military tyranny in
Honduras and the interventionist
designs of imperialism and any act by any State, within or outside the
region, which are contrary to the principles and
agreements of the Contadora Group, m,ust end.

101. The ways of “representative
democracy”
are
mysterious, but simple. Obvious examples are the common fates of the constitutional Governments of 3acobo
Arbenz, in Guatemala; Juan Bosch, in the Dominican
Republic; and Salvador Allende, in Chile. If the constitutional president undertakes truly sweeping economic and social reforms or changes, Mr. Casey’s
troopers will seek a willing brass hat and, in the name
of “representative
democracy”,
overthrow that president without great ado. If, on the other hand, a tyrannical, oppressive oligarchy is threatened by a people’s
movement, Mr. Casey, or whoever happens to be on
duty, will fasten on a so-called reformist president
-even if he is called “Napoleon’‘-who
may ask as
soon as possible for a large amount of military aid,
advisers by the dozens and-why
not?-if necessary
for intervention by the Marines from the good old days
of gunboat diplomacy and the “big-stick”
policy. They
are the same Marines, or Marines similar to, those who
carried out the Grenada operation and who today parade through the streets of Tegucigalpa in shirts bearing
crossed-sword emblems-no
doubt from their pirate
origins.

106. In our opinion the Council must condemn the
escalation of aggression against Nicaragua, must condemn the mining of its ports, which is a serious threat,
to international
navigation and free trade, and the
attempts of certain States, whose names don’t need to
be repeated, to bring about the failure of the Latin
American peace initiative while they accuse others of
doing the very things they are themselves doing.
107. We are confident that the members of this primary body of the United Nations will not be captivated
by the siren songs of those who have gone to our lands
to subject them and to plunder them-those
who, as
Herr Kissinger told Don Gabriel Valdes in a revealing
statement that showed his’great ignorance of history
and his fascist, arrogant essence, believe that we belong
to *‘a south that does not matter, from which nothing
important will ever come”. We trust the members will
adopt a resolution worthy of the principles and objectives that the founders included in the Organiiation’s
Charter.

102. In conclusion, we are witnessing a demonstration of overt “double-talk”,
“double-think”
and “double-act”, and indeed duplicity by the United States
Administration,
because while, as in the biblical pas11

F

108. The PRESIDENT ‘[interprefarion from Russiun]: The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
109. Mr. SAHNOUN (Algeria) [ithrpreration
frbti
French]: First of all I should like to convey to you, Sir,
the warmest congratulations of the Algerian delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. You certainly bring.to
that position the well-known qualities of a man who
understands dialogue and is an experienced diplomat.
You have taken over from our friend Mr.-Arias Stella of
Peru, to whom I should like to express my great appreciation for his excellent guidance of the work of the
Council at a time when it had a very heavy agenda.
110. This is the sixth time that Nicaragua has caused
the Security Council to study the dangerous situation
prevailing along the frontiers of that country, whose
people will this year celebrate but the fifth anniversary
of the Sandinist revolution.
111. The escalation in military action against the
population, the territory and the economic centres of
Nicaragua is assuming increasingly alarming proportions. In terms of the means used and the extent of the
damage cause, these military actions, increasingly frequent and murderous, in fact have assumed the characteristics of a conventional war, albeit an undeclared
one. At the international level they are accompanied by
laborious efforts to oversimplify the dimensions of the
situation to dull the vigilance of the international community and to ensure that Nicaragua’s appeals go unheard, lost in the incredulity of some and the indifference of others. Even if there were still the slightest
doubt as to the nature and the gravity of the situation
imposed on Nicaragua when its representative in the
Security Council reported a series of air attacks against
its territory, recent news of the damage caused by
mines in several Nicaraguan ports to merchant ships
flying different flags and to their crews bears witness to
the fact that the violence against Nicaragua is tangible
and limitless.
112. This latest development, which is particularly
significant in view of its objective and the particularly
serious consequences for the national economy of the
country and international shipping, is in itself sufftcient
reason for a strong position to be taken by the Security
Council. History both ancient and contemporary tells
us of many major conflicts that involved shipping. The
definition of aggression that was adopted by consensus
by the United Nations General Assembly in 1974,by its
resolution 3314(XXIX), specifically lists the blockade
of a State’s ports as one of the hostile actions that can be
described as “aggression”.

civilian population prove, were proof necessary, that
the ‘target is nothing less than destabilization of the
country and indeed of the entire region.
114. Faced with this situation, which carries the seeds
of a very perilous’development for Central America and
for international peace and security, the Security Council would not be rising to the level of its responsibilities
unless, on the basis of the established facts, it were to
recommend appropriate remedies, rather than encouri
age interminable exchanges of views on the relative
virtues of the various economic and social systems.
115. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has
constantly been at one with the people of Nicaragua
as the threat to the country from.outside has intensified. The various organs of the Non-Aligned Movement, including an extraordinary ministerial meeting
of the Co-ordinating Bureau at Managua in January
1983, have constantly called for full respect for the
cardinal principles of contemporary international law
as regards that country-for example, national Sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity,
non-interference and non-intervention. In the same
way our Movement has constantly lent encouragement
to the efforts of the Contadora Group to find the necessary peaceful settlement of the disputes between States
of the Central American region, trusting, as we’do, in
the inherent ability of the peoples of the region together
to build the harmonious future to which they aspire.
116. During an earlier debate of the Council on the
situation in Central America the Algerian delegation
had occasion to point out that, in response to the trust
placed in it by Nicaragua, this body had a precious
opportunity to implement the resources of diplomacy
for preventive action. In its consideration of the situation in Central America the General Assembly, at its
thirty-eighth session-at the 53rd meeting, over which
I had the honour to preside-adopted resolution 38/10
by consensus, expressing its unwavering commitment
in this regard.
117. In that resolution the General Assembly condemned:
“The attacks launched from outside Nicaragua
against that country’s strategic installations, such as
airports and seaports, energy storage facilities and
other targets whose destruction seriously affects the
country’s economic life.and endangers densely populated areas”
and urged:
“the States of the region and other States to desist or
to refrain from initiating military operations intended
to exert political pressure, which aggravate the situation in the region and hamper the efforts to promote
negotiations that the Contadorn Group is’undertaking
with the agreement of the Govemmentsof Central
America’ .

113. The spectacular support lent to subversion
against this country and the infiltration by armed
groups that do not balk at destroying what are basically
economic targets and committing crimes against the

12

States whose peoples have opted for the path of independent socio-economic
development
it is that the
United States Administration
is the main source of
tension, instability and the undermining of peace in the
entire world. That Administration
threatens the peace
and stability of a!! peoples yearning for freedom and
independence and of the emancipated States which are
struggling to consolidate their independence. ,It commits aggression against sovereign, independent States
and declares its hostility towards the aspiration of peop!es to independent socio-economic development and
political independence.

118. It is important tbr the dynamics of a search for
peace in justice and f&om
should immediately
replace this uncontrollable cycle of aggressive violence;
In this connection, the direct and indirect protagonists
in the regional conflict are duty bound to exercise restraint; and morally and politically, those in this body
who have a special responsibility in safeguarding international peace and security are a!! the more duty bound
to exercise such restraint.
119. The Security Council must be placed in a position where it can reverse the present course of events so
that finally the peoples of Central America will be’able,
to enjoy the fruits of peace and promote their own
economic and social development.

126. While the .main principle of the Charter of the
United Nations imposes the obligation not to threaten
the sovereignty of other States, their political independence or territorial integrity and provides for the nonuse of force, we find that the forces of imperialism,
headed by American imperialism, violate this principle
in their overall policies of aggression and flagrantly
commit acts of invasion .and aggression against independent States and struggling peoples. Those forces
also seek to undermine world peace, create hotbeds of
tension and jeopardize the international situation. As
a result of this American policy of aggression, various parts of the world are still suffering from volatile
situations.

120. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]: The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the. Council
table and to make his statement.
121. Mr. AL-ALFI (Democratic Yemen) [interpretation from ‘Arabic]: We are pleased to’see you, Sir,
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, especially since you represent a friendly country known for its impartial and constant support for a!!
peoples struggling for freedom and the preservation of
their independence in the face of aggressive po!icies
and conspiracies ‘undertaken by the forces of imperialism in various parts of the world. We areconfident that,
with your wisdom and ability, the Council’s work will
be crowned with success.

127. Nicaragua, a peaceable country in Central America which is building its new society in difftcult economic conditions, is being subjected to a variety of
provocations, threats and military, economic and political pressures by the United States and its lackeys.
These acts of provocation and aggression have culminated in the dispatch of American fleets to the Nicaraguan coast, the mining of its ports, the threat of force
against the Sandinist revolution, acts of sabotage and
military manoeuvres that threaten the security and
stability of the Nicaraguan people.

122. I cannot fail to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the representative of Peru, for his wise
conduct of the Council’s work during his presidency of
this body last month.
123. Only yesterday [2526rh meeting] the Council was
seized of the complaint by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
of American
provocations
aimed at jeopardizing
Libya’s independence and sovereignty. The delegations which participated in that discussion were unanimous in their strong condemnation
of American
provocations against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
affirmed their solidarity with that country in the face
of the terrorist, aggressive policy pursued by American
imperialism
against the people of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya in the context of the continuous escalation
of the Zionist imperialist
conspiracy and aggression
against our Arab peoples in an attempt to bolster the
direct American military presence in the region and to
extend American hegemony over it.

128. The Council has witnessed broad condemnation .
by the international
community
of those aggressive
operations, which not only contravene the Charter and
the principles of international
law and constitute a
threat to international
peace and security, but have
resulted in the death of many innocent Nicaraguan
citizens and inflicted much material loss on the vita!
economic infrastructures.

124. Today the Council is considering the complaint
lodged by Nicaragua against American aggressive practices and policies aimed at undermining
Nicaragua’s
independence
and sovereignty and threatening
its
security and stability.

129. While reiterating its solidarity with the people
and Government of Nicaragua in the face of American
military acts of aggression and provocation,
Democratic Yemen calls upon the international community to
stand by Nicaragua in confronting a!! American plots
aimed ,at undermining its independence, sovereignty,
and territorial integrity, and al! intervention in its internal affairs. We also condemn any American attempt,
directly or through its lackeys of the mercenary remnants of the Somoza regime, to commit aggression
against Nicaragua.

125. If there is one established fact to be concluded
from these discussions and complaints lodged by two

130. The Council is called upon to affirm its support
for the people and Government of Nicaragua and the
13

other peoples of Latin America which face threats of
‘military.buildup,
economic blockade and intervention
in their internal affairs by the .American Administration, and to put an end to the United *States’ cynical
disregard for the international community and deter its
aggressive policy in the service of which it enlists its
entire military, political and material potential.

those responsible for the violation of international -law
terminate
their illegal activities
immediately..
The’
Council is charged with the primary responsibility for
international peace and security. It should exercise that
responsibility.
138. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]: The next speaker is the representative of El Salvador. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

131. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from RUS;
Sian]: The,next speaker is ,the representative of Seychelles..I invite her to take a place at the Council table
and to make her statement.

139. Mr. MARTiNEZ
(El Salvador) [interpretation
from Spanish]: Sir, on behalf of my delegation and on
my own behalf allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also express congratulations to Mr. Arias
Stella for the very wise manner inwhich he conducted
the proceedings of the Council in March.

132. Ms. GONTHIER
&eyche!les):
Mr. President,
first of all let me say how enormously gratified I am to‘
see you so ably directing the work of .the Security
Council. I would also like to congratulate the representative of Peru for the diligent manner in which he served
as President of the Council last month.’

140. My Government has always supported the right
all countries have to live in peace and security, free
from any foreign interference. Accordingly, our concern is directed towards ensuring unreserved respect
for the self-determination
of our neighbours and at the
same time at defending our own right to self-determination in order to lay the bases of the peace and security
we all yearn for.

133. The Republic of Seychelles has a tradition of
making short statements at the United Nations and
keeping to the point. We intend to maintain that tradition.
~
134. Today I have come once again to denounce the
aggressive policy of foreign forces towards Nicaragua
characterized by all sorts of threats such as attempts to
blockade Nicaragua’s coastlines, thereby violating the
most basic principles of international
law.
:
135. The people of the Republic of Seychelles depend
on the sea for their livelihood and for their survival. If it
were not for civilized behaviour in international navigation, we would be strangled. Therefore the news of the
mining of Nicaragua’s harbours and coastlines, with
loss of life and damage to several foreign ships, is of
great concern to us. The level of sophisticated equipment and technology employed is alarming. Acts of this
sort are’disturbing
because they always run the risk
of retaliation and an -ensuing snowball effect causing
damage to other ships and aggravating already existing
tensions. We would protest no matter what area was
being mined, even if it were the Strait of Hormuz. The
rule of law, the norms of international law and civilized
behaviour must be respected and practised by all members of the international
community.

141. Regrettably,
the complex situation in Central
America makes it difficult to attain this aspiration,
which is the inalienable right of peoples. My country
has experienced hard and tragic times in striving for this
objective, and it has only been able to emerge victorious thanks to the’ determined and manifest democratic will of the majority of the Salvadorian people and
to the assistance, understanding and solidarity offered
by friendly countries. That is in contrast to the open
foreign intervention,
such as that practised .by Nicaragua, in our internal affairs, embodied in propagandistic, military and logistic support for the armed
groups that in my country are trying to overthrow
through the force of arms a legitimately
constituted
Government based on the sovereign will of the people.
Nicaragua, a country whose concern for its own security has given rise to the convening of this meeting of the
Council, has repeatedly been denounced by my Government for adopting clearly interventionist
attitudes
with respect to our internal affairs, seeking to destabilize a Government that has been legitimately elected
by the Salvadorian people.

136. Those who are patrolling the Indian Ocean today
to guarantee free and safe passage when the peaceful
situation there does not warrant protection should, out
of a moral obligation,
move their ships to Central
America in order to implement
the concept of the
freedom of navigation that they so cherish-freedom
of
ships of all nations to use the various oceans in peace.
The perpetrators of terrorism on the international high
seas should be caught and punished.

142. We have heard the statement of the representative of Nicaragua where he called our electoral process a “false democratic facade” [see 2525th meeting,
para. 601. Such utterances and expressions, that have
also come from the highest-ranking
Sandinist leaders
and have given rise to protests from us, contribute to
increasing tension in the area.

137. The Republic of Seychelles will continue to support Nicaragua’s right to independence, and we ask the
Council not only to express its grave concern over the
situation in Central America, but also to demand that

143. Nicaragua’s position of seeking a special political solution to our internal conflict, as well as constituting a further example of clear interference in our
14

.

internal affairs, disregards the people’s wish democratically to elect their own leaders, as expressed in the
elections on 28 March 1982 and again in a’clear demonstration of community spirit in the elections of 25 March
last. It also disregards the wish of the Salvadorian people to promote harmony and national understanding by
inviting all social and political sectors to participate in
the elections as a political formula for the attainment of
a peaceful and eminently Salvadorian solution to our
‘.
own conflict.
144. Therefore we reject ,the Nicaraguan claim that
dialogue with those who have taken up arms on the
formation of a government in El Salvador is the solution
that would help get to the bottom of the crisis in the
region. We believe, on the contrary, that to get to the
source of the crisis in the region all foreign interference
must cease and Nicaragua must adopt a respectful,
conciliatory attitude and put an end to its support for
the guerrilla groups.
:
145. As palpable proof of the validity of our arguments we should like to mention that only last month
the Government of El Salvador sent various protest
notes to Managua rejecting the disobliging statements
made with regard to the elections in our country by the
President of the Council of State and by the Minister
of Defence. We made a formal protest with regard to
the statements of support for the Salvadorian guerrilla
activities made by Commander Henry Ruiz. The’recent
statement by the Nicaraguan Minister of Defence with
regard to the laying of sound-activated mines in the
region’s ports, from Panama to Guatemala, by members of Central American movements has also been met
with a protest from our Government, which has once
again denounced the close linkage in co-ordination and
logistics that exists between guerrilla groups and the
Sandinist Government.
146. It is obvious that, in addition to contributing’to
deepening the climate of distrust in Central America,
the political manoeuvres and statements of that Government are aimed at disguising the social deterioration
and the serious economic situation that prevails inside
Nicaragua, one that, as we all know, is the result of
failure to abide by the political and democratic commitments made to the Organization of American States in
1979 and of the monopoly on political and military
power held by the Sandinist leaders.

by day and that there is a’need for awareness and firm
‘determination on the,part of its leaders to achieve and
preserve that peace. IWith this thought in mind we’have
agreed, to the dialogue proposed by the,countries of the
Contadora Group, and we are working hard within the
Technical Group to achieve agreement on the 21 points
in the Document of Objectives [S/16042, annex], which
include the objective to “promote national reconciliation efforts wherever deep divisions have taken place
within society;with a view to fostering participation in
democratic political processes in accordance with the
law”. The 21 points also envisage a broad range of
measures to bring peace to the region, such as to “prevent the installation on their territory of foreign military
bases or any other type of foreign interference” and to
“establish internal control machinery to prevent the
traffic in arms from the territory of any country in the
region to the territory of another”.
149. We regret Nicaragua’s continuing efforts to disregard the Contadora forum by convening this world
body, which has also lent its support to’tlie regional
efforts for peace, for-all Nicaragua’s fears and claims
can be dealt with in discussions within the Contadora
Group. We would urge Nicaragua to strengthen that
regional body and to adopt a conciliatory attitude as a
way towards resolving
our problems.
.. .
150. El Salvador does not support the draft resolution
that has been unofficially circulated and that has been
put forward exclusively by Nicaragua.
151. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]: The next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
152. Mr. IBRAHIM
(Ethiopia): Let me begin by offering you, Sir, the sincere felicitations of the Ethiopian delegation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April. While
expressing to you my best wishes for a successful tentire, I should, like to convey, through you, our equally
sincere congratulations to the representative of Peru for
the brilliant manner in which he steered the work of the
Council last month.

147. El Salvador has on a number of occasions
adopted a cautious and watchful attitude with regard to
the hostile conduct of the Sandinist Government towards the Salvadorian Government. Nevertheless, we
should like to take this opportunity to inform the Sandinist Government that before it sets forth solutions to
the internal conflicts in other countries it should try to
find formulas that can enable it to solve its own social
conflict.

153. Whenever military threats and acts of aggression
against it from the all-too-familiar
sources are escalated, Nicaragua invariably brings its case to the Security Council. This time too, the situation is no different. The recent mining of the sea ports of Nicaragua,
which has so far caused loss of life and extensive material damage, constitutes both an escalation of the conflict and a virtual blockade of the country. With his
customary eloquence and lucidity, and supported by
ample evidence, the representative of Nicaragua has
explained to the Council this serious development and
the overall situation in Central America. He has indeed
expounded a case based on justice and reason.

148. The Government of El Salvador wishes to state
that peace is an aspiration of society that is built up day

154. Unfortunately,
however, the responses to that
statement have not even attempted to address them-

selves to the charges, let alone disprove them. Instead,
the responses have attempted to divert attention from
the charges by focusing on issues that have little or no
relevance to the substance of the debate and fall exclusively within the domestic jurisdiction
of Nicaragua.
Once again we have been told that the Government of
Nicaragua has failed to fulfil its promise to hold free
elections and “restore democracy”.
If such a promise
was ever made it could only be made to the Nicaraguan
people, and the legitimate right to demand the fulfilment of such a promise could only come from the
Nicaraguan people. No other Government,
however
powerful, could possibly substitute for the people of
Nicaragua in this regard or claim guardianship over
their interests. What we saw last Friday in this Council was therefore nothing but a confrontation between
reason and power.

as imperial ambitions for world domination persist and
so long as the rule of law and the just causes of the
peoples of the developing world continue to be subordinate to the perceived strategic objectives of the powerful. We in Ethiopia consider the threat facing Nicaragua as a threat to our own country and people. We
sympathize and empathize with their concerns, for we
also could face similar problems and could be menaced
by the same powerful adversary. We therefore not only
extend our solidarity to the people and Government of
fraternal Nicaragua but also vehemently condemn all
acts of subversion, aggression and intimidation
against
that country.
158. We would have liked the Security Council, in the
discharge of its primary responsibility for international
peace and security, to play a more active and positive
role in regard to the many complaints brought to its
attention by the Government of Nicaragua. While we
acknowledge the positive influence the debates in the
Council have had on public support for the Nicaraguan
cause, there is no gainsaying the fact that the Council
has yet to adopt a meaningful measure to dissuade those
responsible from threatening and using force in Central
America, particularly
against Nicaragua.
That, of
course, is not without a cause: the very membership of
the United States in this body, as it has done in numerous other instances, has paralysed the Council and
prevented it from taking any action.

155. Today Nicaragua is facing internally the destructive and murderous activities of the counter-revolutionary bandits organized, financed, trained and armed by
the Government of the United States. Externally, in
addition to many economic and financial pressures, it is
also confronted with the ever-present threat of invasion
by the armed forces of the United States and Honduras.
The continuing so-called joint military manoeuvres
by the United States and Honduras not only pose an
increasing danger to the peace and stability of Nicaragua but, indeed, give military manoeuvres new dimensions and added objectives. Thus, in our times
military manoeuvres can no longer be considered as
mere exercises in military preparedness but have, regrettably, come to represent a sophisticated form of
pressure and intimidation.

the United
States, with its
159. Furthermore,
immense political, economic and military power and
influence, has also partially succeeded in halting the
Contadora process, its verbal support for the Contadora Group and the Contadora process notwithstanding. This is indeed very regrettable. The Govemments of the Contadora Group need all the support they
can get. We urge them not to despair; we encourage
them instead to harness their collective will and weight
and to advance the peace process they have so courageously launched. We also appeal to all the parties to
the conflict in Central America, particularly the Government of the United.States, to give the peace process
their genuine support and collaboration.

156. What is more regrettable, however, is the willing
and active participation of the Government of Honduras in such lawlessness. Honduras today is one vast
military base with a network of military camps, depots,
airfields and numerous other installations, the political
objectives of which are none other than the forcible
overthrow of the legitimate Government of Nicaragua.
That the Government
of one developing country,
whose people have such strong historic and cultural
ties, face similar problems of under-development
and
share common aspirations with the people of Nicaragua, could collude with a super-Power against a small
and weak neighbour is, I submit, a historic mistake.
And, as such, the judgement of history is bound to
weigh heavily upon those responsible.

The meeting

rose at 6.45 p.m.

NOTE

157. To put things in their proper perspective we have
to realize that Nicaragua is not the only target of imperialist military interventi,on; nor will it be the last so long

’ Official
Records
of the General
sion. Supplement
No. I (A/37/1).

16

Assembly,

Thirty-seventh

Ses-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
mnnde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de ias Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

004cn3

9%61313~Jammy

1993-2.050
