S/2016/631

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 July 2016
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twenty-ninth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165
(2014), paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 2191 (2014) and paragraph 5 of
Council resolution 2258 (2015), in which the Council requests the Secretary General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Repu blic,
other Syrian sources and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 30 June 2016.
More recent data have been included when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Developments on the ground
3.
During the reporting period, military activities continued to threaten the
viability of the cessation of hostilities. Military activities, including air strikes,
continued, mainly in the northern part of the country, as wel l as in Rif Dimashq and
other governorates. In line with resolution 2258 (2015), the following description of
developments on the ground reports on the compliance by all parties in the Syrian
Arab Republic with resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). This
information is without prejudice to the work of the International Syria Support
Group Task Force on the Ceasefire.
4.
Fighting continued throughout the reporting period in Damascus and Rif
Dimashq governorates, particularly in eastern Ghutah, where clashes between
Government forces and non-State armed opposition groups continued along several
fronts. Air strikes and shelling resulting in civilian casualties and injuries were
reported in several towns, including Duma, Maydaʻa, Marj, Hammurah, and Utaya.
According to information received by reliable sources, on 29 June, ground strikes

16-12345

210716

*1612345*

S/2016/631

hit an ambulance which was en route from Duma to Hammurah. A female
physiotherapist was reportedly killed. On 30 June, air strikes struck residential
buildings in Utaya, reportedly killing at least 18 civilians.
5.
In western Ghutah, Government forces conducted an offensive on the besieged
town of Darayya. After the delivery of humanitarian aid on 1 June, Darayya town
witnessed a military escalation and was reportedly hit with air strikes and ground
attempts to advance inside the town. On 6 June, air strikes hit residential areas of
Darayya, allegedly killing one civilian and injuring five others. A second
humanitarian convoy with food aid went into Darayya on 10 June and the town
came under ground strikes and air strikes while the convoys were still on the
ground. On 19 June, non-State armed opposition groups reopened a corridor with
the neighbouring town of Muʽaddamiyah al-Sham, before Government forces
restored control over the area several hours later. Meanwhile, in Muʽaddamiyah
al-Sham, three civilians were reportedly killed and at least two others injured when
residential areas of the town were hit by ground strikes on 21 June.
6.
Government forces reportedly intensified air strikes and artillery shelling on
Khan al-Shih area of Rif Dimashq almost on a daily basis during the reporting
period, resulting in multiple deaths and injuries to civilians, as well as damage and
destruction to civilian homes. For example, according to information received by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
on 29 June, air strikes hit two civilians’ houses in Khan al-Shih, allegedly killing six
civilians, including a five-year-old child and a woman, and injuring at least 10 other
civilians.
7.
In Yarmuk camp, fighting resumed between Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the Nusrah Front in June, placing civilians at further risk. The
Nusrah Front made slight advances after launching co unter-attacks to recapture the
areas it lost in April. As noted in my most recent report ( S/2016/546), on 11 June, in
the Damascus suburb of Sayyidah Zainab, two explosions resulted in the death of at
least 12 people and wounded many others. ISIL claimed responsibility for the
attacks through its Aamaq Twitter posts. The attack was the fourth such incident
perpetrated by ISIL against the Sayyidah Zainab shrine area in 2016.
8.
Military activity intensified in Aleppo governorate in June. Government and
pro-Government forces launched attacks on non-State armed opposition groupcontrolled eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo city. OHCHR received reports of
scores of civilians, many of them children, being killed in June. For example, on
8 June, an air strike reportedly hit Bayan Hospital, allegedly killing at least
15 civilians. On 14 June, 26 civilians were allegedly killed after air strikes hit
several neighbourhoods in eastern Aleppo city, according to information received by
OHCHR. On 18 and 20 June, air strikes reportedly hit two health-care centres in
Fardous and Tariq al-Bab, causing substantial damage to the facilities, although no
casualties were reported.
9.
Non-State armed opposition groups continued their attacks on Governmentheld areas of Aleppo city. The neighbourhoods of Maydan, Salah al -Din and
Sulaymaniyah, as well as other areas of Government-controlled Aleppo, were
repeatedly hit with mortars and other explosives, killing and injuring many
civilians. In a note verbale dated 6 June addressed to OHCHR, the Permanent
Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic reported that “terrorist” groups fired hundreds
of mortars and other explosives on 3 and 4 June on several neighbourhoods,

2/16

16-12345

S/2016/631

allegedly killing more than 110 civilians, including 40 children. On 23 June,
according to information received by OHCHR, four civilians were reportedly killed
and others injured when the Khalidiyah and Nil street neighbourhoods were hit by
mortars reportedly fired from eastern Aleppo city.
10. Fighting continued along the Castillo road, the last remaining access road in
and out of eastern Aleppo city, on a near daily basis, with air strikes and artillery
fire reported throughout June and early July. Civilians were reportedly killed an d
injured while attempting to use the road. For example, an air strike reportedly hit a
bus carrying civilians, reportedly killing 10 people, including three children. On
5 June, three civilians were allegedly killed on the road by artillery shells. As of
17 July, the Castillo road has been rendered impassable, cutting off humanitarian,
commercial and civilian movement to the eastern part of Aleppo city. According to
estimates, between 200,000 and 300,000 people reside in eastern Aleppo city, many
of whom are reliant on the humanitarian assistance that was transported along that
road to meet their basic needs. Price increases for food and basic goods have
already been reported in eastern Aleppo city.
11. The towns of Huraytan, Kafr Hamra, Anadan and Hayyan, in rural areas north
of the Castillo road and Aleppo city, were subject to intense aerial bombardment
during June. On 5 June, five civilians were allegedly killed when an air strike hit a
residential building in Kafr Halab town. OHCHR received reports tha t, 10 minutes
after the first strike, another air strike on the same location injured first responders
attending the scene. On 13 June, air strikes on Anadan and in Kafr Hamra reportedly
hit a residential neighbourhood, allegedly killing at least three civ ilians and injuring
a dozen more. On 14 June, 11 civilians were allegedly killed and 21 more wounded
in air strikes that hit a number of residential facilities in Kafr Halab and Shaykh Ali.
12. Fighting continued in northern Aleppo governorate during the reporting
period, leading to civilian casualties, injury and displacement. During June,
non-State armed opposition groups made gains against ISIL, taking control of
several villages, and breaking ISIL encirclement of the towns of Azaz and Mar ’e.
Meanwhile, the Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the United States -led
coalition, continued their offensive against ISIL, gaining control of several villages,
and entirely encircled the town of Manbij in the eastern countryside of Aleppo,
which was held by ISIL. Owing to the fighting, ISIL allowed hundreds of families
to leave through a humanitarian corridor from the city of Manbij, established by the
Syrian Democratic Forces. An estimated 50,000 civilians remain trapped in the town
as of 17 July. According to information received by OHCHR, on 3 June, a series of
air strikes hit the village of Uj Qana southeast of Manbij town. One of the strikes hit
a residential area and reportedly killed at least 22 civilians, including 12 children. In
its briefing on 4 June, the United States Central Command noted that on 3 June,
coalition military forces had carried out eight air strikes near Manbij.
13. In Idlib governorate, mutual shelling between the parties and intensified
pro-Government air strikes continued throughout the reporting period. On 12 June,
air strikes on a market in Idlib city allegedly killed at least 37 civilians, including
11 children. On 12 June, an air strike on the town of Ma’arrat al-Nu’man hit a
residential home, reportedly killing a woman and her five c hildren. On 14 June,
helicopters dropped at least five bombs on Jabal al-Zawiyah town, hitting a house
and allegedly killing six civilians. Some 45,000 people have reportedly fled the
aerial bombardment in Idlib city over the past few weeks. Meanwhile, non -State

16-12345

3/16

S/2016/631

armed opposition groups continued shelling the besieged towns of Fuʻah and
Kafraya in Idlib governorate throughout June, reportedly resulting in civilian
casualties and injury.
14. Fighting continued between ISIL and Government forces around Dayr a l-Zawr
governorate. ISIL continued to hit besieged neighbourhoods of Dayr al -Zawr city
with sporadic mortar fire, such as the strike on 2 June, which fell close to Sami
Jassim school in the Jurah neighbourhood. OHCHR received reports that a child was
seriously injured and the buildings damaged. On 12 June, four civilians, including a
woman and a child, were reportedly killed by mortar rounds hit close to their home.
15. OHCHR reported a noticeable increase in civilian casualties resulting from air
strikes across eastern and rural parts of Dayr al-Zawr governorate in June. On
2 June, three women and three children were allegedly killed when air strikes hit
their houses located close to a mosque in Diban town. The following day, aircraft
carried out strikes on a residential area of Albu Layl village, reportedly killing at
least 10 civilians. On 6 June, the first day of Ramadan, air strikes hit residential
areas in Asharah town in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr, allegedly killing 26 civilians.
On 25 June, air strikes hit residential areas in ISIL-controlled Qurriyah town.
OHCHR received reports of 41 civilians allegedly killed, including 22 children.
OHCHR was unable to verify those responsible for the attacks.
16. In Raqqah governorate, fighting, including air str ikes, was reported during the
reporting period. On 1 June, air strikes struck a residential area in the Mashlab
neighbourhood located on the outskirts of Raqqah city. OHCHR received reports
that 11 civilians, including two women, were allegedly killed. On 19 June, air
strikes hit residential areas of Tabaqah town located in western rural Raqqah. The
strikes reportedly killed 10 civilians, including one woman, and injured at least
22 others. On 21 June, air strikes struck residential areas in the centre of Raqqah
city, allegedly killing 21 civilians. OHCHR was unable to verify the parties
responsible for those attacks. Meanwhile, ISIL reportedly occupied two schools in
Raqqah city, forcibly evicting a number of internally displaced persons from
Tadmur, Homs governorate, who had used the schools as a shelter.
17. Elsewhere in Raqqah, on 14 June, a car bomb was detonated near the
Democratic Union Party’s (PYD) People’s House in the centre of Kurdish forcesheld Tall Abyad, in the northern rural part of the gove rnorate. At least seven
civilians were reportedly killed and 25 others injured. ISIL claimed responsibility
for the attack through its Aamaq Twitter posts. According to local sources, on
29 June, ISIL detonated a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in the town of
Tall Abyad in the northern countryside of Raqqah, killing more than 10 persons and
injuring several others.
18. The United States Department of Defense confirmed that in June, the United
States-led coalition carried out 335 strikes against ISIL targets in the governorates
of Aleppo, Raqqah, Hasakah, and Dayr al-Zawr, with over 70 per cent of the
incidents taking place in Manbij in Aleppo governorate. The Ministry of Defence of
the Russian Federation provided no information on its operations i n June. While
OHCHR has received reports of air strikes, allegedly conducted by international
actors, which resulted in civilian deaths and injuries, the Office was unable to verify
the parties responsible.

4/16

16-12345

S/2016/631

B.

Human rights
19. OHCHR continued to receive reports of serious violations in Government -run
detention facilities, as well as of abuses by non-State armed opposition groups,
including the arbitrary deprivation of liberty, torture and killings. Approximately
35 prisoners who had recently been transferred from Saydnaya prison to Adra prison
in late 2015 and early 2016 reportedly disappeared from Adra between 7 and
14 June. Their whereabouts remain unknown. OHCHR is gravely concerned that
those individuals are at risk of enforced disappearance.
20. The situation remained tense in Hama central prison, where authorities
appeared to be staggering their implementation of the release of detainees, which
was agreed in a verbal deal reached with the political detainees, following the riots
that took place in May in the facility. Prison authorities released some detainees in
the early part of the month, but no releases took place between 5 and 21 June. As of
30 June, more than 170 detainees had been released by the authorities, with onl y
24 released in June, out of the 500 detainees in total who are to be released in
accordance with the verbal deal.
21. On the morning of 5 June, Government forces and their allies allegedly raided
the homes of three women in the Jurah neighbourhood of Da yr al-Zawr city and
arrested them for communicating with ISIL. The three were neighbours, whose
husbands were outside the besieged area and unable to return. They reportedly
chatted online with their husbands and were subsequently arrested. Their
whereabouts remain unknown.
22. Government forces and their allies raided the Thib Antar school in the Jurah
neighbourhood of Dayr al-Zawr city on 8 June and reportedly arrested at least
150 students who were sitting exams. Most of the students were around 17 year s old
and it is believed they were detained for the purpose of military recruitment.
23. On 14 June, Kurdish forces reportedly demolished approximately 200 houses
belonging to Arab tribe members and families of Mu ’amra in the villages of Jalal,
Tall Barak, and in Alwah Sharqiya in Hasakah governorate. The homeowners had
fled the area five or six months earlier to escape harassment.
24. OHCHR received reports that on 14 June, ISIL publicly whipped two men
with 300 lashes at Dalla roundabout in Raqqah city. Accused of smuggling civilians
to Turkey, the men were released after the flogging, although their vehicles were
confiscated.
25. On 13 June, ISIL allegedly stoned to death the imam of Khalid bin al -Walid
Mosque in Buqrus village in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. He was accused of
committing adultery. The imam had been held in ISIL custody since being abducted
six weeks previously.
26. On 16 June, ISIL reportedly stoned to death a woman in public, after accusing
her of adultery. The stoning took place close to Fayhaa roundabout in Albu Kamal
town in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. On the same day, six male civilians in Mayadin
town were allegedly punished with 70 lashes for not fasting during Ramadan.
27. ISIL released a video on 28 June allegedly showing the killing of five men
from Albu Kamal town in rural Dayr al-Zawr, whom they claimed had been New
Syrian Army fighters who had launched an offensive against ISIL the day before,

16-12345

5/16

S/2016/631

although OHCHR received reports that the men had been detained several months
previously on grounds of spying against ISIL.
28. According to credible sources, on 2 June, an unidentified suicide bomber on a
motorcycle detonated close to Al-Khulfah Al-Rashdin mosque in the Daʻtur district
of Ladhiqiyah town, as people were leaving after prayers, killing at least three
civilians and injuring several others. No group claimed responsibility.

C.

Humanitarian response
29. In June, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach
millions of people in need, through all modalities, from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and
2258 (2015). Non-governmental organizations also continued to deliver assistance
to people in need, in line with previous months. The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic continued to provide basic services to areas under its control as well as in
many areas beyond its control.
Table 1
Number of people reached by United Nations system organizations in June 2016
Organization

Number of people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

21 000

International Organization for Migration

103 800

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund

275 000
1 800 000

United Nations Development Programme

71 257

United Nations Population Fund

96 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

383 792

World Food Programme

4 100 000

World Health Organization

1 300 000

30. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. In June,
14 consignments consisting of 558 trucks crossed from Turkey and Jordan to the
Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and
2258 (2015) (more information on United Nations cross-border convoys in June is
found in annex I to the present report). Shipments through the Ramtha crossing
from Jordan were suspended by the Jordanian Government at the end of June owing
to the security situation along the Syrian-Jordanian border.
31. In line with Security Council resolutions, the United Nations notified the
Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including of its content, destination
and number of beneficiaries. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism f or the
Syrian Arab Republic continued its operations, monitoring 558 trucks in the
14 consignments in May, confirming the humanitarian nature of each, and notifying
the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit
from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.

6/16

16-12345

S/2016/631

32. In June, inter-agency convoys to the besieged and hard-to-reach locations
listed in table 2 below were completed by the United Nations and partners. The
World Food Programme (WFP) successfully completed 18 airdrop rotations,
delivering almost 304 tons of food, which are being used to complement rations for
the second distribution cycle for 18,000 households (see also annex II for more
information on access to besieged and hard-to-reach locations). United Nations
agencies also undertook single agency deliveries to cross-line and hard-to-reach
locations or reached those locations through their regular programmes during the
reporting period.
Table 2
Inter-agency convoys in June 2016
Date

Location

Number of beneficiaries

Type of assistance

1 and 9 June

Darayya

2 400 (food);
4 000 (other supplies)

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, education, non-food items, health

1 and 3 June

Muʽaddamiyah
al-Sham

45 000

Food and health

10 June

Duma

24 000 (food);
40 000 (other supplies)

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
non-food items, health.

13 June

Dar al-Kabirah,
Ghantu, Tayr Maʻlah

33 500

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, education, non-food items, health.

16 June

Afrin

50 000

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, non-food items, health

16 June

Waʻr

37 500

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, education, non-food items, health

19 June

Kafr Batna subdistrict

25 000

Food, nutrition, health.

21 June

Bludan

25 000

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
non-food items, health

23 June

Jayrud

37 500

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, education, non-food items, health

23 and 28 June

Shaykh Maqsud

27 000

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, non-food items, health

27 June

Qudsaya

30 000

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, education, non-food items, health

29 June

Irbin and Zamalka

21 500

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, education, non-food items, health

29 June

Western Harasta

12 500

Food, water, sanitation and hygiene materials,
nutrition, education, health

Humanitarian access
33. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need of assistance in the
Syrian Arab Republic remained extremely challenging in many areas of the country
as a result of deliberate restrictions by the parties on the movement of people and
goods, active conflict and shifting conflict lines.
34. On 23 June, the Emergency Relief Coordinator announced that the number of
people living in besieged and hard-to-reach areas stood at 5.47 million, an increase
of some 900,000 people from the previous estimate of 4.6 million. The increase is

16-12345

7/16

S/2016/631

based primarily on the inclusion of areas in parts of Aleppo, Raqqah and Hasakah
governorates, as a result of insecurity, as well as constrained access for
humanitarian actors both from within the Syrian Arab Republic as well as v ia crossborder operations. Access to the millions of people living in besieged and hard -toreach locations remained of critical concern. Overall, the United Nations agencies
and partners reached 64 of the 154 besieged and hard -to-reach areas (41 per cent) 1
through either inter-agency convoys or single agency deliveries. Details of
assistance to those areas, by sector, in June are contained in table 3. Meanwhile,
non-governmental organizations continued to provide limited medical, education
and protection services, as well as some support in other sectors, in hard -to-reach
locations, under extremely challenging circumstances.
Table 3
United Nations deliveries to hard-to-reach, besieged and priority cross-line
locations, June 2016
Sector (United Nations delivery only)

Number of people reached
(percentage of 4.6 million) a

Food security

590 000 (12.8)

Health (treatments)

715 000 (15.5)

Non-food items

210 000 (4.6)

Water, sanitation and hygiene materials

150 000 (3.3)

a

Reporting against the new total of 5.47 million people in besieged and hard-to-reach areas
will commence in July 2016.

35. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance, as well as people’s access to essential services. Markets,
schools, medical and other civilian infrastructures were damaged as a result of
fighting in June, reducing the availability of basic and essential services in critical
areas. For example, the electricity supply in Aleppo city remains limited to 10 hours
a week and the water supply to 1 day out of 10. The lack of electricity and fuel are
disrupting the functioning of the two main water pumping stations in eastern
Aleppo, which are halted as a result, depriving over 2 million people of drinking
water in Aleppo city. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) continues to
provide fuel to power both water-pumping stations, providing over 3 million litres
of safe drinking water for over 2 million people.
36. Fighting also disrupted humanitarian supply lines to communities at risk. For
example, the security situation along the Castillo road in Aleppo city resulted in the
suspension of humanitarian deliveries to the eastern part of Aleppo city, from
mid-June onwards. The prevailing security situation also hindered the vaccination
campaign for thousands of children in Aleppo city. Meanwhile, on 5 June, non -State
armed opposition groups attacked the Homs-Salamiyah road at Snidah junction and
closed the road temporarily, negatively affecting United Nations missions to Hama
and Aleppo. Elsewhere, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
__________________
1

8/16

Since the revision to the number of people in besieged and hard -to-reach areas was completed
during the reporting period, data for the month of June are based on the previous number of
people in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.

16-12345

S/2016/631

Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was unable to conduct any mission in June to
Yalda, owing to ongoing negotiations with local actors.
37. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties also continued to prevent
aid delivery. For example, WFP continues to be unable to access populations in need
in ISIL-controlled areas of the country, as all plans to deliver assistance to those
areas have been suspended owing to the inability to work independently and
monitor activities. This is preventing WFP from reaching hundreds of thousands of
people in Raqqah and most of Dayr al-Zawr governorates (except the
neighbourhoods in the city receiving assistance via airdrops), a s well as certain
areas in rural Aleppo, rural Hasakah, western rural Darʻa, some villages in Riq
Dimashq and north-western rural Hama. Meanwhile, in June, over 10,000 children
from besieged and hard-to-reach areas were supported by UNICEF and partners in
order to be able to travel to sit for the national examinations. However, some of the
children and their families who sought to cross the conflict lines were stopped and
questioned by armed groups at checkpoints. They were prevented from leaving and
thus were unable to sit the national exams.
38. The United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for June contained requests to
reach 1.1 million people in 34 besieged, hard-to-reach and priority cross-line
locations. Access to 16 locations was approved in full, to reach 365,250 people;
14 were partially approved, with restrictions on the type of assistance and/or a
reduction in the number of approved beneficiaries to 396,200 people (a difference of
176,800 between the number requested and the total approved); and ac cess to four
locations, for reaching a total of 208,500 people, was not approved. Two hard -toreach locations, Bludan and West Harasta, were added to the June humanitarian
convoys upon the request of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. Overall,
the inter-agency convoys reached 374,900 beneficiaries in June, in 19 locations.
Increased insecurity and delays in administrative procedures at the national and
local levels, as well as a lack of agreement between the parties of the Four Towns
ceasefire agreement covering Zabadani, Madaya, Fuʻah and Kafraya and
surrounding areas, prevented the United Nations agencies and other partners from
fully implementing the plan for June. Medical items continued to be removed from
convoys (see para. 59).
39. On 19 June, the United Nations submitted its inter-agency convoy plan for
July, which included requests to reach 1.2 million beneficiaries across 35 besieged,
hard-to-reach and priority cross-line locations. By 4 July, in response to the plan,
the Syrian authorities granted approval in full to 17 locations for 556,250 people; an
additional 17 locations were approved, with a reduction in the number of approved
beneficiaries to 354,000 (a difference of 282,500 between the number requested and
the total approved); and one location, Qabun in Rif Dimashq, aiming to reach a total
of 28,000 people, was not approved, with no official reason provided. Of the
18 besieged areas included in the request, the United Nations has approvals to reach
all 18, either to assist the entire population in need or part thereof. On 10 July, the
United Nations submitted a written request to the Syrian authorities reiterating its
request for full approval to deliver overland assistance to areas that had been partially
approved or not approved under the plan. The Syrian authorities have also approved
38 additional locations, not included in the request by the United Nations, for convoy
deliveries; many of those locations are already reached by regular programmes.

16-12345

9/16

S/2016/631

40. The Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing in Hasakah governorate has been temporarily
closed by the Turkish authorities owing to security concerns since 27 December 2015.
Hasakah governorate also remains largely inaccessible by road for United Nations
agencies from within the Syrian Arab Republic. WFP stocks of monthly general
food rations in the governorate have now been completely exhausted, preventing
partners from assisting a projected 275,000 beneficiaries via land access. On 9 July,
WFP commenced airlifts from Damascus to Qamishli airport. The first WFP-chartered
flight carried 35 tons of food, including rice, bulgur, pulses, salt, vegetable oil,
sugar and other items. WFP is targeting 75,000 people for food assistance over the
first four weeks of the airlift operation; most of those families have not received any
food assistance from the United Nations for the past six months.
41. As of 30 June, the United Nations had submitted 41 new visa applications for
United Nations staff; 13 of which have been approved and one of which was
rejected, while 27 remain pending. Of those pending, 10 have exceeded the limit of
15 working days.
42. A total of 17 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government to operate in the Syrian Arab Republic. Four more international
non-governmental organizations are in the process of completing registration. Such
organizations continued to face a series of administrative hurdles and restrictions
that have an impact on their ability to operate, including in ga ining permission to
undertake independent needs assessments.
Besieged areas
43. The number of people living in areas designated by the United Nations as
besieged currently stands at 590,200. Humanitarian conditions in besieged areas
continue to be dire. In besieged areas, the flow of commercial supplies through
official routes remained largely blocked, leading to high prices for commodities
reaching besieged areas through unofficial and irregular supply lines. Freedom of
movement remained heavily restricted, though limited numbers are sporadically
allowed to exit and re-enter some besieged areas.
44. Recent inter-agency convoys to besieged areas have highlighted numerous
critical protection concerns beyond physical protection from ongoing fighting and
lack of freedom of movement. A number of families have been separated, including
children from their parents. Indications of severe trauma were observed, with
children being particularly affected. People in all locations expressed serious
concerns about the unavailability of civil registration and documentation services.
Boys and girls are particularly exposed to protection risks. Access to education has
been severely affected and significant numbers of children appear to have been
recruited into armed groups, with many boys aged under 18 having been observed,
both in uniform and in plain clothes, brandishing weapons. While early marriage
was a pre-existing practice, the age of marriage has considerably decreased,
affecting girls in particular.
45. In June, the United Nations assisted approximately 237,800 people in besieged
areas (40.3 per cent of the total besieged population) through inter -agency
operations. With the delivery to Irbin and Zamalka in June, all 18 besieged locations
designated by the United Nations have been reached at least once in 2016, with
partial or full assistance for some or all of their inhabitants.

10/16

16-12345

S/2016/631

46. In eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, some 282,500 people remain besieged by
government forces in the following locations: Duma, Eastern H arasta, Irbin,
Zamalka, Ayn Tarma, Hammurah, Jisrayn, Kafr Batna and Saqba. On 10 June, the
United Nations and partners completed the first phase of a multiphase delivery to
bring food for 24,000 people, as well as nutritional items, health, hygiene and ot her
humanitarian supplies for some 40,000 people in Duma. Some medical items were
not permitted on the convoy. On 29 June, an inter-agency convoy reached Irbin and
Zamalka with multisectoral assistance for some 20,000 people, the first United
Nations inter-agency convoy to the area since November 2012.
47. In Darayya in Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besieged by
government forces. On 1 June, an inter-agency convoy to Darayya delivered initial
assistance of medical supplies, vaccines and nutritional items for children. On
9 June, the United Nations and partners delivered food for 2,400 people, as well as
nutritional, health and medical items, water, sanitation and hygiene materials and
education assistance for 4,000 people to Darayya. The town came u nder ground
strikes and air strikes following both convoys. Some medical assistance was not
permitted on the convoys.
48. In Madaya (and Buqayn) in Rif Dimashq governorate, some 43,000 people
remain besieged by government forces. An inter-agency convoy with multisectoral
assistance for 40,000 people is pending the parties’ consent to facilitate safe passage
of the convoys, as part of the Four Towns agreement. Reports of rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian conditions have been received from Madaya, including
of cases that require urgent medical care and evacuation.
49. In Zabadani, Rif Dimashq governorate, some 700 people remain besieged by
government forces. Although not approved under the plan for June, a multisectoral
convoy to Zabadani is pending the parties making final arrangements to facilitate
safe passage, as part of the Four Towns agreement.
50. In Fuʻah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate, some 20,000 people remain besieged
by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front. An inter -agency convoy
with multisectoral assistance for 20,000 people is pending the parties’ consent to
facilitate safe passage of the convoys, as part of the Four Towns agreement. Reports
of rapidly deteriorating humanitarian conditions have been received from Fuʻah and
Kafraya during the reporting period, including cases that requir e urgent medical care
and evacuation.
51. In Muʽaddamiyah al-Sham in Rif Dimashq, about 45,000 people remain
besieged by government forces. On 1 and 3 June, inter-agency convoys were deployed
to Muʽaddamiyah al-Sham to deliver food and health supplies for 45,000 people.
The third phase of the convoys was approved on 7 June, but has yet to take place.
52. In Yarmuk, in Damascus governorate, some 10,000 people are besieged by
government forces and non-State armed opposition groups. UNRWA humanitarian
missions into Yalda, from which Yarmuk residents could come and receive
assistance, were suspended during June owing to ongoing negotiations with local
actors. Meanwhile, Syrian authorities gave permission for 45 grade 12 students from
Yarmuk camp to travel to Damascus to sit their national examinations.
53. In the government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city,
some 110,000 people are besieged by ISIL. From 10 April to 13 July, WFP
completed 70 high altitude airdrop rotations, delivering 1,23 3 tons of mixed food

16-12345

11/16

S/2016/631

commodities. Quantities airdropped so far are sufficient to provide 110,000 people
besieged in the government-held part of Dayr al-Zawr city (18,000 households
registered by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent) with a 41 kg food ration. Ongoi ng
airdrop deliveries are being used to provide all 18,000 households with a second full
ration. In addition, UNICEF delivered, through the same airdrops, high -energy
biscuits for around 3,600 children and pregnant and lactating women for a month,
and enough water purification tablets to purify water for around 20,000 persons for
a month (based on an estimation of two l of drinking water per person per day).
54. In Waʻr neighbourhood in Homs governorate, about 75,000 people are besieged
by government forces. On 16 June, a United Nations/Syrian Arab Red Crescent
convoy delivered multisectoral assistance, reaching half of the 75,000 residents in
the area, who were last reached in March. For the first time ever in cross -line
convoys from Homs, the United Nations hub was able to deliver complete health
kits (without any surgical items being removed).
Attacks on medical facilities and free passage of medical supplies, personnel
and equipment
55. Primary, secondary and tertiary health-care services continue to experience
severe gaps in performance and service delivery, owing to the extensive damage
caused to health-care facilities, the rapid turnover of health staff and the lack of
qualified professionals in the different medical specialties. Paediatric and maternal
health-care services, including routine vaccinations, remain negatively affected,
particularly in the governorates of Aleppo, Hama, Homs and Darʻa as well as in the
besieged areas of Rif Dismashq.
56. In blatant disregard for the special protected status of health-care facilities
under international humanitarian law, and for Security Council resolution 2286
(2016), adopted on 3 May, medical facilities continued to be damaged or destroyed
as a result of fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations and health
partners received credible reports, which are in the process of being verified by the
United Nations and partner organizations, of scores of attacks on health -care
facilities during the month of June, including hospitals in Aleppo and Idlib
governorates, as well as the deaths of several medical workers. Further attacks on
health-care facilities in early July have been reported.
57. The World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF continued to implement
the nationwide vaccination campaign. The first round of the cross-border component
of the nationwide campaign had reached about 772,000 children by the end of June,
equivalent to a coverage rate of 53.6 per cent. Significant access challenges have
been experienced in several areas: the cross-border campaign was temporarily
suspended in Dayr al-Zawr, Raqqah and parts of Aleppo governorate owing to the
security situation, as well as access challenges. Efforts are ongoing to reach those
areas. Moreover, the volatile security conditions caused a low turnout of families to
have their children vaccinated, in some locations where access was otherwise
possible.
58. Since the beginning of 2016, WHO has filed 25 requests with the Syrian
government to access 89 locations in 10 governorates (two of the requests were
submitted in June). The Syrian government has approved eight of the 25 requests.
The approval received in June was to access four locations in Darʻa. Meanwhile,
17 requests remain unanswered, for which WHO has sent four reminders.

12/16

16-12345

S/2016/631

59. The removal of life-saving medicines and medical supplies continued. Serum
drugs, renewable items (razors, scalpel blades, gauzes) and surgical equipment
(forceps, scissors, needles) are consistently removed from midwifery kits,
inter-agency emergency health kits, paediatric kits and diarrhoeal disease sets. The
treatments and supplies removed from convoys during June are outlined in table 4.
Table 4
Medical items removed from convoys
Location

Number of items

Darayya

12 606

Analgesics and neuropathic pain relievers. Treatments for 80 trauma cases were
removed

Muʽaddamiyah
al-Sham

5 942

Reduced quantities of basic inter-agency health kits. Treatments for 20 trauma
cases and medical equipment such as basic X-ray units, steam sterilizers,
ventilators for adults and ventilators for infants were removed

Duma

1 963

Medicines for analgesic injections, dialysis sessions, psychotropic medicine and
antibiotics injections. Reduced quantities of inter-agency health kits (basic).
Treatments for 20 trauma cases and medical equipment (ventilator and sterilizers)

Hammurah

2

Type of item

Medical equipment (spectrophotometer and steam sterilizer) was removed

Bludan

2 033

Burn kits, medicines removed from inter-agency health kits (supplementary) and
from pneumonia A kits. Treatments for 30 trauma cases

Jirud

1 025

Burn kits, pneumonia B kits, analgesic injections and surgical consumables.
Treatments for 20 trauma cases

Safety and security of staff and premises
60. A total of 27 United Nations staff members, 25 of whom are UNRWA area
staff, one from the United Nations Development Programme and one from UNICEF
continue to be detained or missing. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of
humanitarian workers have been killed, including 17 staff members of the United
Nations, 53 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and eight
volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society. In addition,
scores of staff members of international non-governmental organizations and
national non-governmental organizations are reported to have been killed.

III. Observations
61. The toll that the brutal conflict has taken on the Syrian people has gone far
beyond anything we could have imagined. Tragically, over the past month, an
escalation of fighting and violence in several parts of the country has resulted in the
senseless killing and maiming of hundreds of innocent men, women and children.
Attacks on hospitals and schools, on mosques and public markets, on ethnic,
religious and confessional groups remain an almost daily occurrence, inflicting
brutal suffering on the innocent. I am deeply alarmed by the escalating violence in
and around Aleppo city, putting hundreds of thousands of people at further risk of
death and injury, particularly those in eastern Aleppo city, who are effectively
trapped, as the fighting closes in and their access to basic commodities runs out.
62. The plight of those in Aleppo and elsewhere across the country underscores
that civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic are as much at risk as they have ever been

16-12345

13/16

S/2016/631

owing to the continued blatant disregard for humanitarian law by all parties to the
conflict. Ongoing sieges are depriving civilians of the most basic items necessary
for their survival, such as water and food, and strikes are launched on heavily
populated areas from both air and ground, without regard fo r civilian presence.
Parties to the conflict must immediately abide by international humanitarian law and
individuals who fail to do so should be brought to account. Civilians must not and
cannot ever be a target and all efforts should be made to protect c ivilian lives,
including at the expense of gaining a military advantage.
63. While serious challenges remain, I recognize that some degree of progress has
been made on humanitarian access to besieged and hard -to-reach areas over the first
half of the year. So far, the United Nations and partners have reached each of the
18 besieged locations at least once in 2016, providing assistance to nearly two thirds
of those living in besieged areas. Those small breakthroughs are proof that when
there is enough political will, it is more than possible to reach people in desperate
need of life-saving assistance.
64. Nevertheless, much more access is required. Access cannot be a one -off, or
even an occasional event, and it cannot be limited to a segment of the population or
specific kinds of aid. The current levels of access still leave civilian s starving and
without proper medical care. Despite receiving approval from the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic to reach nearly all requested besieged and hard -to-reach
areas requested by the United Nations as part of its plan for July, access to ma ny of
those areas continues to be constrained by increased fighting and insecurity,
differences in the estimate of the number of beneficiaries and other administrative
delays. Such delays are leading to unnecessary loss of life and compounding the
suffering of civilians during the hot summer months. I call on the parties and those
that support them to lift these barbaric sieges once and for all and ensure
unconditional, unimpeded and sustained access to the millions of people in all
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. Granting access should never be conditional nor
dependent on political negotiations or used as a bargaining chip in talks. The
humanitarian imperative must prevail.
65. As has been the case since the formal launch of the International Syria Supp ort
Group process, the three-track approach of cessation of hostilities, humanitarian
access and the political process remains inexorably intertwined. In preparation for a
new round of formal talks, my Special Envoy has continued to conduct technical
discussions with the opposition and continues to develop proposals and options to
bridge the gaps on issues that remain subject to agreement between the opposition
groups and the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. He also continues to
engage civil society on issues such as reconstruction, human rights, detainees and
constitutional reform, and with the Women’s Advisory Board and other women’s
groups on elements of political transition and on ways to ensure meaningful gender
participation in both the current negotiations and the transition itself. The ongoing
engagement of civil society groups in the process is testament to the will of Syrians
to seek an end to the conflict and begin the political transition. In support of their
efforts, I urge members of the International Syria Support Group, and in particular
the co-chairs, to expend all efforts to agree on measures to end the violence and the
suffering of the people of the Syrian Arab Republic and to advance a political
transition.

14/16

16-12345

16-12345

Annex I

S/2016/631

15/16

S/2016/631

16/16

Annex II

16-12345
