United Nations

S/PV.5905

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5905th meeting
Thursday, 5 June 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Khalilzad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Stagno Ugarte
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Arias
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-36743 (E)

*0836743*

S/PV.5905

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Opening remarks
The President: I should like at the outset of the
meeting to extend on behalf of the Security Council a
warm welcome to the new Permanent Representative
of Belgium to the United Nations, His Excellency
Mr. Jan Grauls. We are looking forward to working
closely with him in the work of the Council.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: I welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Moreno-Ocampo to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: As in the past, I am
grateful for this opportunity to give the Council clarity
on the activities undertaken by my Office and on the
activities planned.
This is an historic opportunity. As I brief the
Security Council today in the Council Chamber, the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court is in session in New York,
and Security Council members are in Africa. They have
just met with the Government of the Sudan in
Khartoum.
2

This is an historic opportunity. Ten years ago,
countries from all over the world adopted the Rome
Statute creating the International Criminal Court (ICC).
They sent a new and powerful message: there can be
no impunity for perpetrators of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.
But three years ago, the Security Council referred
the Darfur situation to the Court and thus sent an even
more concrete message: there can be no impunity for
perpetrators of massive atrocities in Darfur.
Today we have an historic opportunity to confirm
those messages, to move from principles to action.
Massive crimes are still being committed in
Darfur. Girls are still being raped. Children die as their
schools are bombed. The entire Darfur region is a
crime scene. Over the last five years, despite promises
and denials, millions of civilians have been targeted by
officials who vowed to protect them. Impunity reigns.
Today we have an historic opportunity to
confront those massive crimes.
My Office received a mandate from the Council.
This mandate is justice. I will fulfil my mandate. I have
collected compelling evidence. The evidence will
identify those most responsible for crimes against
civilians in Darfur, in particular the Fur, Masalit and
Zaghawa communities. I inform the Council that I will
present a second case to the Judges of the International
Criminal Court in July.
My Office has a duty not to intervene when
national
authorities
are
conducting
national
proceedings. That is the principle of complementarity.
The Sudan claimed that it would investigate and
prosecute perpetrators of crimes in Darfur. Various
courts and investigative mechanisms were created.
However, the Office has found no trace of Sudanese
proceedings in relation to crimes in Darfur during the
last three years. The Government itself has clarified
that there were none.
In April 2007, the Judges of the International
Criminal Court issued arrest warrants against Ahmad
Harun, former Minister of State for the Interior, and Ali
Kushayb, a militia/Janjaweed leader, for crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
It was an opportunity for the Sudan to break the
criminal system unveiled by the Court, to surrender the

08-36743

S/PV.5905

indictees, to start proceedings against
perpetrators. This opportunity was lost.

lesser

investigation, we focused on the Haskanita attack,
attributed to rebels. Let me give you further details.

The Sudan, a State Member of the United
Nations, has the legal obligation and the ability to
arrest and surrender Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb. I
report today that the Government of the Sudan is not
cooperating with the Court. There has been no
improvement since December.

In Darfur, the evidence shows an organized
campaign by Sudanese officials to attack civilians,
with the objective of physically and mentally
destroying entire communities. Over a period of five
years, they have been relentlessly attacked throughout
Darfur: attacked in their villages, attacked in the
camps, their land usurped. The first phase of attacks in
2003 to 2004 affected 4 million people. Since 2005,
villages are still being attacked.

The Government of the Sudan is not complying
with resolution 1593 (2005). The Government of the
Sudan does not recognize the jurisdiction of the Court,
a jurisdiction that the Security Council granted. As of
today, and even to Council members in Khartoum,
Sudanese officials insist that “the ICC has no
jurisdiction over Darfur”.
Impunity is not an abstract concept. Ahmad
Harun is attacking the victims in the camps today. As
Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs, he is
hindering humanitarian aid. As a member of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) oversight committee, he is affecting
the deployment and safety of peacekeepers. As a
member of the National Congress Party-Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement Committee, he was sent
to Abyei to manage the conflict. Abyei was burned
down, and 50,000 citizens were displaced.
The Sudanese Government accepted UNAMID
peacekeepers and aid workers in Darfur. The same
Government is promoting Ahmad Harun. The Sudanese
Government tolerates the firefighters and promotes the
arsonists at the same time. The international
community cannot ignore the arsonists; if they remain,
there will never be enough firefighters.
The Security Council has the power to ensure the
cooperation of the Sudan. The issue of arrests has to be
central in any conversation with the Sudan. It is the
first step. The Council must make publicly clear that
the two fugitive indictees and those who protect them
will not benefit from any lenience or any support from
the international community.
In December, I informed the Council that my
Office was opening two new investigations. In our
second investigation, we collected evidence showing a
pattern of attacks by Sudanese officials against
civilians, in particular against those 2.5 million people
forcibly displaced into camps. In our third

08-36743

What is the difference between those two phases?
A simple one: there are fewer villages left to burn and
loot, fewer civilians to terrorize and kill. But the tactics
remain the same: the Sudanese army, in coordination
with the air force and militia Janjaweed, attacks
civilians. In 2008 alone, it has displaced more than
100,000 civilians from the villages of Abu Suruj, Sirba,
Seleia, Aro Sharow, Kandare, Kurlongo and Sheged
Karo. Schools, markets and water installations have
been hit. Homes have been burned. Such attacks are
sufficient to demonstrate to the 2.5 million people
displaced their total vulnerability. Such attacks are
calculated to drive entire groups to inhospitable areas,
where they die immediately, or into camps, where they
die slowly.
In the camps, crimes and insecurity are
organized. Far from being disarmed, the militia
Janjaweed are integrated into the Sudanese security
apparatus and stationed in the vicinity of camps. Rapes
of women are systematic. The health consequences and
the perceived shame of rape are, in effect, destroying
physically and biologically the communities.
Destitution is organized. Surveys — when Sudanese
officials agree to their release — indicate that
malnutrition rates exceed emergency thresholds,
especially for children under five. Community leaders
and teachers are the first to be targeted during attacks.
This is a policy to ensure that all links binding
communities together are torn.
Usurpation of land is systematic. Sudanese
officials are not facilitating the return of displaced
people. Sudanese officials are facilitating the
settlement of groups affiliated with militia Janjaweed
on Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa land. The census is
crystallizing the situation, potentially creating a new
demography. Displaced persons are concerned that new
occupants could gain rights to the land, and are

3

S/PV.5905

resisting the census. In Kalma, Karandj and Abozr
camps, violence has been used to force the population
to accept the census. Combined with the impunity of
perpetrators and the official denial of the crimes, the
resulting mental harm to victims is devastating. The
groups disintegrate.
Sudanese officials are protecting the criminals
and not the victims. Denial of crimes, cover-ups and
attempts to shift responsibility have been another
characteristic of the criminal plan in Darfur. We have
seen it before. The Nazi regime invoked its national
sovereignty to attack its own population, and then
crossed borders to attack people in other countries. In
my own country, Argentina, the military dictatorship
had a well-documented strategy to disguise the
criminal system of disappearances. They denied the
crimes, they minimized their crimes, they denied the
involvement of members of the Government in the
crimes, and finally they proposed to forget the crimes
and focus on political solutions. Remember also
Karadzic’s Directive 7, instructing his army to create a
situation of total insecurity with no hope of survival for
the people of Srebrenica, while making sure to avoid
international outcry. The main instruction was to
discreetly reduce support to the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR).
There is no end to the imagination employed in
such cover-ups. In my written report I have provided
statements of Sudanese officials to the effect that the
situation in Darfur is stable, that the provision of aid
and the deployment of peacekeepers is proceeding
smoothly, that only 10,000 people have died since the
beginning of the conflict, that all attacks find their
origin in rebel acts or even mistakes by UNAMID and
that political negotiations will solve all problems. The
evidence shows a different picture.
The evidence shows that the commission of such
crimes on such a scale, over a period of five years and
throughout Darfur, has required the sustained
mobilization of the entire Sudanese State apparatus: the
coordination of the military, security and intelligence
services, the integration of the Janjaweed militia, the
participation of all ministries, the contribution of the
diplomatic and public information bureaucracies and
the control of the judiciary.
Let me now address our third investigation: into
the crimes committed against peacekeepers and aid
workers, those who came to help Darfuris. The list of

4

attacks is long. On 29 May in Al Fashir, the memorial
for the 61 African Union (AU) peacekeepers who lost
their lives in Darfur was unveiled. My Office is
determined to bring those responsible to justice. The
evidence is not yet sufficient to go to the judges, but
we have information that the October 2007 killing of
10 African peacekeepers in Haskanita was committed
by two rebel splinter factions. That requires
corroboration. Requests for additional information
were sent to the AU and the United Nations, as well as
to individual States and others. Such requests are
confidential, but allow me to request publicly that all
actors respond as early as possible. The 23 May attack
on Nigerian peacekeepers and the killing of a Ugandan
peacekeeper make it all the more urgent to ensure
accountability. Increased attacks targeting aid
personnel and peacekeepers could lead us to extend the
scope of the third investigation.
I am concerned as well about allegations of the
recruitment of child soldiers. Child recruitment is a
crime that can engulf entire generations in conflict. The
first trial of the International Criminal Court will start
this month, and it is precisely about child soldiers.
Let me now clarify for the Council the next
judicial steps. I will proceed to the judges in July and
present my evidence on who are those most responsible
for the crimes described. It will be a public application.
The decision will rest with the judges. In previous
cases, the judges have taken from one to three months
to decide on the merits of the evidence.
Before I conclude, let me address the issue of
international cooperation. I want to thank all those who
have responded to our requests for information —
including on tracing the indictees — and all those who
have publicly or in bilateral meetings with the
Sudanese explained the importance of enforcing the
warrants. Those States have helped the victims, the
Court, the Council and the Sudan.
I am grateful for AU Chairperson Konare’s
efforts, and I look forward to working with his
successor, Jean Ping. Deputy Prosecutor Bensouda has
been invited to Sharm el-Sheikh. I have met, and will
again meet with, the Foreign Minister of Tanzania, who
is a steadfast supporter and the current President of the
African Union.
I would like to underline the efforts of the
Secretary-General to address with President Al-Bashir
the obligation to execute the arrest warrants. Secretary-

08-36743

S/PV.5905

General Ban Ki-moon, in working for a comprehensive
solution in Darfur and the Sudan, has consistently
shown his vision and conviction that respect for the
lives of Sudanese citizens is at the centre of any such
solution.
On 16 June, I will address the General Affairs and
External Relations Council of the European Union. The
Slovenian presidency and the European Parliament
have been outstanding in putting impunity at the
forefront of the European Union’s agenda.
I have also met with the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, as well as with many of its
member States. They have played a key role as friends
and neighbours of the Sudan and as supporters of
international law and justice for all the citizens of the
world. They provide aid to the victims, they provide
resources to the peacekeepers, and they have lost
soldiers. I confirmed to them that I will fulfil my
mandate independently and impartially. Their respect is
crucial to my Office.
Security Council members and all countries with
strong ties with the Sudan can do more to bring justice
to the Darfuris and the Sudanese people.
Let me conclude. A rebellion is going on in the
Sudan. Under international law, a Government has the
right and the responsibility to maintain control of its
territory. There is no doubt about that. But there is no
military justification for bombing schools, and no legal
excuse for raping women. Those crimes have been
carefully prepared and efficiently implemented. They
are not mistakes. They are not inter-tribal clashes. They
are not cases of collateral damage. They are, quite
simply, criminal acts against civilians — unarmed
civilians. Citizens from the Sudan are being
deliberately attacked by Sudanese officials. In the
words of Harun, the people of Darfur are the enemy.
Their own State is attacking them. If the international
community does not protect the Darfuris, they will be
eliminated.
It takes a lot to commit massive crimes. It takes
planning and organization. It takes commanders and
many executioners. But mostly, it requires that the rest
of the world look away and do nothing. The Council,
when it requested my Office to intervene in Darfur,
acted in a decisive way, thinking of the Darfuris but
remembering also Rwanda and Srebrenica. At the
Council’s request, my Office will present new evidence
exposing the facts and identifying those most

08-36743

responsible. Based on those facts, I ask the Security
Council to send a strong message to the Government of
the Sudan and to issue a presidential statement,
requesting that it stop the crimes; requesting that it
arrest Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb; requesting that
all parties assist the Court; and requesting, simply,
compliance with resolution 1593 (2005). A presidential
statement will send such a message.
Silence has never helped or protected victims.
Silence only helps the criminals.
The President: I thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour for me to participate in this
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the
Sudan, while just steps away from this chamber, 106
States Members of the United Nations are
simultaneously meeting as an assembly of States
parties of the International Criminal Court. In effect,
just steps away from this chamber, there is a firm
commitment to eradicating impunity for the most
atrocious crimes perpetrated by evil. Just steps away
from this chamber, there is a firm commitment to fight
the banalization of evil.
Thus far, Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo of the
International Criminal Court has submitted seven
reports to the Security Council. Seven times, the
Prosecutor has come to enumerate the atrocities that
have occurred and are occurring in Darfur —
coordinated and planned atrocities carried out against
civilians who were not participants in any conflict. In
the report he has submitted today, the Prosecutor has
laid out the facts with absolute clarity. These are not an
incidental by-product of war; they are a calculated
crime. Seven times he has shared with the Council the
degree of cooperation — or, to be more precise,
non-cooperation — that the Government of the Sudan
has offered. Seven times, pursuant to a mandate of this
Council under resolution 1593 (2005), the Prosecutor
has thoroughly fulfilled his responsibility.
We would like to be able to say the same of this
Council. The actions of the Council, and thus of the
member States gathered around this table that give life
to it, have clearly been inadequate to the situation in
Darfur. Internal differences and political calculations

5

S/PV.5905

have thus far impeded effective action by the Council.
What we can agree on, although it is not of much
comfort, is that the Council has complied with the final
paragraph of resolution 1593 (2005), in that it has
remained seized of the matter. However, the
perpetuation of the situation is in and of itself part of
the problem, because as time passes, the Council runs
the risk of accommodating evil as the graves continue
to be filled in Darfur.
I exhort the Council to find a solution that
adequately addresses the imperatives of both peace and
justice. It certainly cannot continue with what, as time
passes, seems to be a policy of appeasement of
Khartoum and of indifference to the atrocities that are
occurring in Darfur. The Council must stop delaying
and subordinating the imperatives of justice to political
calculations, or, to cite the Prosecutor, thinking that
political negotiations will solve everything. Just as, in
adopting resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
had the political will to refer the situation in Darfur to
the International Criminal Court, it must now act
accordingly and demand surrender by Khartoum of the
accused, Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb. By blatantly
and repeatedly failing to comply with its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005), the Government of the
Sudan is not only affronting the Court, but openly
defying the authority of the Council and the binding
nature of resolutions adopted under Chapter VII.
The Government of the Sudan is toying with us,
toying with human dignity, toying with the authority of
this Council. The appointment of Ahmad Harun as
Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs, as a
member of the negotiating committee of the National
Congress Party-Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Army and as supervisor of the population census in
South Darfur, among other responsibilities, is concrete
evidence of the cynicism of the authorities in
Khartoum. We can no longer afford to appease such
cynicism.
The facts speak for themselves. We cannot plead
ignorance. If, through indifference or for the sake of
political convenience, this Council does not make its
best effort to enforce the cooperation of Khartoum with
the International Criminal Court and its surrender
without further delay of Ahmad Harun and Ali
Kushayb in conformity with resolution 1593 (2005), in
the not-too-distant future we will once again be
invoking our promise of “never again”. We, the
civilized world, made that same promise following the

6

Holocaust, and more recently following events in
Kampuchea, Bosnia, Rwanda or Kosovo, and are
currently putting it to the test in the Sudan.
It may be uncomfortable to raise the failures and
ghosts of the past, but at times we must recall them in
order to avoid making the same mistakes. I therefore
take the liberty of quoting some of the conclusions
contained in the landmark independent reports
prepared by the United Nations in response to previous
situations in which the Security Council, above all, had
the opportunity and responsibility to act.
Because of the limited time available, I will refer
only to two reports and two previous situations, and
make abbreviated references to some of the lessons
learned from a past that we do not have the luxury of
forgetting, no matter how uncomfortable it may be. I
turn to those independent reports not only because
Costa Rica endorses their conclusions and believes in
their full applicability to the situation now before us,
but also because we believe that they are the result of a
dispassionate and detailed analysis of the errors of the
past. We do so because we believe that, despite the
specificities of each case, the lessons of Srebrenica and
Rwanda, for example, should resonate with full force
within this chamber. The ghosts of Srebrenica and
Rwanda should awaken us to the fact that in the Sudan
there are some who believe that the graves in Darfur
are not yet sufficiently full.
Here is the first ghost. The Security Council
should recall the contents of the report of the
Secretary-General on Srebrenica of 15 November
1999. I would like to quote the conclusion of the
report:
“The cardinal lesson of Srebrenica is that a
deliberate and systematic attempt to terrorize,
expel or murder an entire people must be met
decisively with all necessary means, and with the
political will to carry the policy through to its
logical conclusion.” (A/54/549, para. 502)
Allow me also to refer to the following words of
repentance contained in the report, which accurately
describe what I hope many of us here think of the
situation in Darfur:
“Through error, misjudgement and an inability to
recognize the scope of the evil confronting us, we
failed to do our part to help save the people from
the Serb campaign of mass murder. No one

08-36743

S/PV.5905

regrets more than we the opportunities for
achieving peace and justice that were missed. No
one laments more than we the failure of the
international community to take decisive action
to halt the suffering … Srebrenica crystallized a
truth understood only too late by the United
Nations and the world at large: that Bosnia was as
much a moral cause as a military conflict.” (ibid.,
para. 503)
Lastly, fearing that we are heading towards a
repetition of the past, allow me to highlight the
following paragraph of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Srebrenica:
“In the end, the only meaningful and lasting
amends we can make to the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina who put their faith in the
international community is to do our utmost not
to allow such horrors to recur. When the
international community makes a solemn promise
to safeguard and protect innocent civilians from
massacre, then it must be willing to back its
promise with the necessary means. Otherwise, it
is surely better not to raise hopes and
expectations in the first place.” (ibid., para. 504)
Second ghost. History repeats itself. The report of
the Independent Inquiry commission of 16 December
1999 on the genocide in Rwanda clearly attributes the
failure of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda to “a lack of resources and a lack of will to
take the commitment which would have been necessary
to prevent or to stop the genocide” (S/1999/1257,
p. 30). Although, since in the specific case of the
Sudan we have budgeted some $2.126 billion for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
peacekeeping operations, no lack of resources seems to
apply, we still need, starting yesterday, to muster
within the Security Council the political will needed to
face up to the responsibilities that the tragedy in Darfur
calls for. As the report also demonstrated — and I
believe this to be particularly pertinent in light of the
mission that has taken some Council members to
Khartoum — it is a cause for concern that more
“emphasis [was placed] on a cease-fire, more than the
moral outrage against the massacres, which was
growing in the international community” (ibid, p. 41).
Similarly, the report of the Independent Inquiry
commission emphasized the dilemma that we are once

08-36743

again facing as to whether to negotiate with those in
control, irrespective of the acts they may have
committed. The commission did not doubt that, in its
view,
“the United Nations had an obligation to make
absolutely clear to the members of the …
Government the individual responsibility which
accompanies the commission of genocide and war
crimes” (ibid., p. 39).
Finally, in a situation that is painfully similar to the
one before us, the commission considered that “[t]he
Security Council bears a responsibility for its lack of
political will to do more to stop the killing” (ibid.,
p. 37).
In Costa Rica, currently a non-permanent member
of the Council, we refuse to believe that we, the
international community, are inevitably heading
towards a new “never again”. We are worried,
however, by the apparently boundless capacity of some
to face shame. We are likewise worried that the
inability of the Council to respond to evil with dignity,
promptly and with the full moral authority of the
Charter of the United Nations could also be boundless
in this specific instance. The Council knows of the
evidence of the crimes committed; it knows that the
guilty parties have been identified; and it knows which
Government authorities protect and shelter them. All
we need is for the States members of the Security
Council to have the decency to muster the political will
necessary to enforce the full compliance of resolution
1593 (2005) by the authorities in Khartoum. Enough
appeasement — the time has passed to continue
accommodating evil.
Allow me to end by highlighting the final
paragraph of the report of the Secretary-General on
Srebrenica, as it explicitly establishes that the
imperatives of peace and justice are mutually
supporting.
“The men who have been charged with this crime
against humanity reminded the world and, in
particular, the United Nations, that evil exists in
the world. They taught us also that the United
Nations global commitment to ending conflict
does not preclude moral judgements, but makes
them necessary.” (A/54/549, para. 506)
Costa Rica trusts in the International Criminal
Court and would also like to trust in the capacity of the

7

S/PV.5905

Security Council to address this complex situation.
That, however, will depend on the States members of
the Council. As they know, Costa Rica is coordinating
the drafting of a presidential statement on the issue
before us. We hope that all — and I stress, all — States
members of the Council will cooperate with us in
sending a forceful message commensurate with the
tragic events unfolding. The confidence that Costa Rica
would like to have in the Security Council’s
effectiveness in this specific case will depend on
whether or not we muster the decency to acknowledge
the facts, to enforce full compliance with resolution
1593 (2005) and not to appease those who still feel that
the graves in Darfur are not sufficiently full.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for your words of
welcome and to express my pleasure at taking my place
at the Security Council table. You can rely on my full
support and that of my delegation.
I should also like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for his
briefing. Belgium is particularly alarmed by the
information it contains, as conveyed to us by the
Prosecutor.
Belgium’s position on the issue of Darfur is well
known. The search for a comprehensive solution
entails an approach comprised of four dimensions: the
political, the military, as represented by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), the humanitarian and the legal. We view
the elements of that four-fold approach as being
complementary to one another.
The fight against impunity is undoubtedly an end
in and of itself, but it is not just that. The
condemnation of those responsible for the most serious
crimes — war crimes and crimes against humanity —
may contribute directly or indirectly by promoting
progress with respect to the other pillars of the
comprehensive approach. It can do so directly by
ensuring that no more harm can be done by those who,
for example, impede the distribution of humanitarian
assistance, the deployment of UNAMID or the political
process. It can do so indirectly through the deterrence
effect.
We must once again deplore not merely the lack
of cooperation from the Government of the Sudan but
even outright support for individuals who are the
subjects of arrest warrants, in particular Mr. Ahmad

8

Harun. I need hardly recall that resolution 1593 (2005),
by which the situation in Darfur was referred to the
International Criminal Court, was adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter. On the basis of the
evidence presented by the Prosecutor, the Court
decided — in full independence and based on the
criteria set out in the Rome Statute — that the Sudan
had undertaken no proceedings with respect to
Mr. Harun or Mr. Kushayb in relation to crimes that are
the subject of proceedings under way at the
International Criminal Court.
The overall context in Darfur is of great concern.
The prospects for the political process remain
discouraging, and the recent escalation of violence,
both by the rebels and by Government forces with the
support of Janjaweed militias, targeting civilian
populations, is particularly disturbing. People are
undergoing
unspeakable
suffering,
including
displacements, killings, rapes and other violence.
It is at this difficult juncture that, for the reasons I
have enumerated, the judicial path must be followed
with determination. Crimes must not be denied: they
must be identified through a rigorous, authorized
judicial process. The Prosecutor’s conclusion that a
criminal plan, involving the entire State apparatus,
exists is particularly alarming. If the existence of such
a plan is established, those responsible must be brought
to justice.
My delegation has taken note of the Prosecutor’s
intention to submit his evidence to the judges of the
International Criminal Court soon. My delegation urges
the Sudanese authorities to cooperate fully with the
Prosecutor and the Court, as they are obliged to do
under resolution 1593 (2005), by apprehending and
transferring to The Hague the two individuals who are
subjects of arrest warrants. More than a year after those
arrest warrants were issued, it is time for the Security
Council to remind the Sudanese Government of its
obligation, under resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate
with the Court.
I recall too that this is also the position of the
entire European Union, which, in its 31 March 2008
declaration, called on the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate unconditionally with the Court. Belgium
thus fully supports the draft presidential statement
submitted by Costa Rica to that end.
The first indications from the Security Council
mission that is currently in the Sudan do not make it

08-36743

S/PV.5905

possible to detect any change in the position of the
Sudanese authorities. Whatever the future decisions of
the Court, and without prejudging such decisions,
Belgium will continue to robustly urge the Security
Council, consistent with its own decisions, do
everything in its power to ensure that the decisions of
the Court are implemented.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): I would like to welcome
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, to the Security Council
and to thank him for his briefing and his detailed
report. My delegation has listened carefully to the
Prosecutor’s message; he has left no doubt about who
he believes is responsible for the situation in Darfur.
Croatia is very disappointed by the continued
failure of the Government of Sudan to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court. The appointment of
the indicted ICC fugitive Mr. Ahmad Harun as Minister
of State for Humanitarian Affairs in the Government
serves as the most tangible proof of this and underlines
a blatant disregard for the victims — but also for the
Court and its Prosecutor and, not least, for the Security
Council, which referred the situation in Sudan to the
Court in its Chapter-VII resolution 1593 (2005).
Considering the gravity and clarity of the
Prosecutor’s report, my delegation takes the position
that strong action by the Council is needed to solicit
the cooperation of the Government of Sudan. In that
regard, we support the Costa Rican draft presidential
statement that has been circulated, and we thank the
delegation of Costa Rica for its timely preparation.
My delegation reiterates its dismay at the
situation, as expressed by the European Union
declaration of 31 March 2008. It reiterates that the
International Criminal Court is an essential means of
promoting respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights, thus contributing to freedom,
security, justice and the rule of law, as well as
contributing to the preservation of peace and the
strengthening of international security.
We understand the sensitivities on the ground and
the importance of keeping all tracks on the move,
including the political one. But we strongly believe
that there can be no lasting — and especially, no
comprehensive — peace without justice. Allowing
impunity to persist is not a prudent way to seek
political settlements.

08-36743

So, once again we call on the Government of
Sudan to comply with all relevant Security Council
resolutions and to cooperate unconditionally with the
ICC, as is requested in resolution 1593 (2005).
Finally, we would also like to reiterate the
European Union announcement that the Union will
support further measures against those who bear
responsibility for Sudan’s failure to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court if that failure to cooperate
continues.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
for introducing the striking — to say the least — report
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which
examines in detail the implementation of resolution
1593 (2005). I take this opportunity also to welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Costa Rica, my good friend His Excellency Bruno
Stagno Ugarte, and to assure him that Panama shares
the commitment of Costa Rica — and his own personal
commitment — to the purposes of the United Nations
and of the International Criminal Court; I thank him for
his statement this morning.
I wish also to convey a warm welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador Jan
Grauls.
In March 2005, through the adoption of
resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council, for the
first time, referred a specific case to the International
Criminal Court under article 13 of the Rome Statute.
That historic event gave the International Criminal
Court the responsibility to ensure that the war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed in Darfur
would not go unpunished. The Court fully accepted the
task and has undertaken a detailed investigation of
those violations.
The result of the investigation led to arrest
warrants being issued against Minister Harun and
Mr. Kushayb for their alleged commission of war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We trust that those
investigations will identify those guilty of all crimes
committed in Darfur, without distinction between
authorities and rebels. However, after one year since
the issuance of the warrants, the Government of the
Sudan refuses to arrest and hand over those individuals
in compliance with due process. Prosecutor MorenoOcampo has told us that, in addition to failing to
enforce the decisions of the Court, the highest levels of

9

S/PV.5905

the Government of the Sudan are taking decisions to
commit, deny and cover up crimes.

bringing to trial and judging those responsible for war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

In that context, we must emphasize that all
resolutions of the Council are legally binding for all
States Members of the United Nations. The obligations
that arise from resolution 1593 (2005) require the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court, regardless of whether or
not it is a signatory of the Rome Statute. That is why
we demand once again that the Government of the
Sudan comply with its responsibility to the
international community by arresting and placing those
individuals in the Court’s custody as soon as possible.
On the other hand, as the Court’s report has suggested,
failure to do so and its consequences will lead to the
perception of total impunity, which will only provoke
more violence and complicate efforts to establish the
conditions necessary for peace and security in Darfur.

Finally, Panama unconditionally supports the
draft presidential statement presented by the
Government of Costa Rica.

Last October, in this very Chamber, we
condemned the attack on the African Union mission
base in the city of Haskanita, presumably by groups of
rebels. The Council has also reiterated its concern at
the ongoing violence in Darfur. Accordingly, Panama
fully supports the decision of the Court to investigate
two new cases to determine those responsible for
persistent attacks on the civilian population, especially
the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa tribes, as well as the
African Union and United Nations personnel
responsible for protecting them. It is precisely such
dedication, impartiality and integrity that will make the
Court’s work more relevant and welcome.
Panama cannot disregard Prosecutor MorenoOcampo’s clear and dramatic description of the seizure
of lands to which the people of Darfur have been
subjected, or his warning that the violence against
unarmed civilians, the impunity of the perpetrators of
the violence and their protection by the Government
could lead to the disappearance of the people of Darfur.
If that is not genocide, I do not know what else to call
it.
Panama calls on those countries that have signed
the Rome Statute not just to comply with their
obligations under it, but also to ensure that there is an
end to impunity for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We also call upon those countries that have
not signed the Rome Statute to do so. The International
Criminal Court is an appropriate mechanism for

10

Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, I would like to
extend a very warm welcome to the Foreign Minister
of Costa Rica, Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte. This is, for
many of us, an opportunity to welcome Mr. Ugarte
back to the Council for a day. As Permanent
Representative of Costa Rica, Bruno Stagno left a very
clear footprint that we are still following today. I think
that, with his statement today, he has also left a deep
footprint.
I also offer a warm welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador Jan
Grauls. We welcome him among us as a member of the
family.
I wish to express my very sincere thanks to
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for his very clear,
focused and appalling briefing.
Let me reiterate Italy’s full and strong support for
the International Criminal Court and the work of the
Prosecutor. Italy fully appreciates the very difficult
environmental circumstances in which the Prosecutor
and his staff are conducting their investigation and
wishes to renew its full confidence in him and his staff.
More than three years have elapsed since
resolution 1593 (2005) was adopted, and we are being
told once again that serious crimes continue to be
committed against civilians in Darfur by all parties in a
climate of impunity — total impunity.
Today’s briefing is a source of deep concern for
us. On the one hand, it reconfirms the need for a more
robust and effective approach to the conflict in Darfur
encompassing the humanitarian, security, political and
rule of law dimensions. However, the pursuit of such a
comprehensive approach cannot be grounds for further
postponing full compliance with resolution 1593
(2005). We share the Prosecutor’s view that bringing to
justice those who are responsible for serious and
continued violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law will greatly contribute to peace
in Darfur.

08-36743

S/PV.5905

Peace and justice are precisely what the victims
are seeking and what the population of Darfur is
expecting after more than 40 years of conflict. We can
no longer fail to heed their call.
What is at stake is our credibility as an
Organization and as States Members of the
Organization. What is at stake is our responsibility.
What is at stake is our accountability. Today, now, a
few hundred yards from here, a round table is taking
place that has been organized by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women on resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security. They are
addressing the accountability gap, but to whom are we
accountable? We are accountable to the women who
are subject to the crimes that the Prosecutor has
described. We are accountable to the children. We are
accountable to those who suffer, as the Prosecutor has
told us. It is therefore a question of consistency with
the principles to which we have subscribed in the
Charter of the United Nations, in the preamble of
which we reaffirm our faith in the dignity and worth of
the human person. As the Prosecutor said, given our
responsibility and accountability, we have to move
from principle to action. Therefore, we have here, in
the words of the Prosecutor, an historic opportunity.
Since the establishment of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the
Security Council has consistently made it clear that
massive human rights violations are per se a threat to
peace that must be addressed by punishing individual
perpetrators, as Foreign Minister Stagno Ugarte has so
eloquently recalled. On that basis, as we know, the
Council referred the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court under resolution 1593
(2005) in March 2005. That resolution must be fully
implemented — and of this there has to be a strong
awareness — including its provision that
“the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate
fully with and provide any necessary assistance to
the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to this
resolution”. (para. 2)
We are strongly concerned by the report we heard
of continued lack of cooperation and by the fact that
the arrest warrants have not yet been executed.
Moreover, one of the individuals on the investigations
still holds a prominent position in the Government.

08-36743

As recalled by my Belgian colleague, on
31 March the European Union issued a declaration on
the occasion of the third anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1593 (2005), calling on the Government of
Sudan to cooperate unconditionally with the
International Criminal Court and to surrender the two
individuals for whom it has issued arrest warrants.
Italy too calls on the Government of Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to comply
with their obligations under all Council resolutions.
Members will not be surprised if I recall here
Article 25 of the Charter, which says; “The Members
of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council in accordance with
the present Charter”. What I ask myself — and what I
think all of us have to ask ourselves — is whether we
are in the process of modifying the United Nations
Charter by acquiescence, because what is now at stake
is a modification of Article 25, an erosion day by day
through acquiescence. And we know that acquiescence
is a source of international law. So let us not be
responsible for such an erosion.
Fighting impunity has rightly become one of the
priorities of the international community, but that
principle, which is at the core of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, has yet to be
translated into consistent practice. Darfur is a major
test case of our ability, as I said before, to pass from
words to actions, and I call on all stakeholders to make
sure that this opportunity is not missed.
Finally, Italy fully supports a response by the
Council to the Prosecutor’s briefing in the form of the
draft presidential statement presented by Costa Rica,
which reaffirms resolution 1593 (2005) and the duty of
all parties to the conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully
with the ICC. We fully support that draft text.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me start by joining
previous speakers in welcoming the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Luis MorenoOcampo, to the Council, and thanking him for his
briefing on the implementation of resolution 1593
(2005). We would like also to welcome the presence of
Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, Foreign Minister of Costa
Rica. We also warmly welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Belgium in our midst.
Since the Prosecutor’s last briefing, on
5 December of last year (see S/PV. 5789), the security
and humanitarian situation in Darfur has continued to

11

S/PV.5905

deteriorate. The international community’s efforts to
help Sudan to address the Darfur situation are facing
mounting challenges, the primary one being the
intensifying armed clashes. All armed conflicts
everywhere, without exception are accompanied by
criminal acts, including serious crimes. Failure to
achieve peace produces not only prolonged suffering
but also the continuation of those crimes. Indonesia
strongly condemns all gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. We condemn those
who commit war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Impunity must not be tolerated, and the perpetrators of
those crimes must be brought to justice without
unnecessary delay.
Here, we share the profound concern expressed in
the Prosecutor’s report with regard to ongoing crimes
by all parties. The Prosecutor’s briefing today noted
intensifying criminal acts in Darfur, including the
violent targeting of civilians, peacekeepers and aid
workers, as well as their premises and equipment.
However, the realities of both peace and justice will
have to be taken into account in order to achieve a
comprehensive and durable settlement in Darfur.
We therefore deeply regret the refusal by some of
Darfur’s rebel movements to participate in the political
process led by the Special Envoys of the African Union
and the United Nations. As a result, the political
process initiated in Sirte more than seven months ago
has faltered, while discussions of security at the
technical level are being hampered by those same rebel
movements.
We recall in this regard that the Security Council,
in its presidential statement of 24 October 2007
(S/PRST/2007/41), had underlined its willingness to
take action against any party that seeks to undermine
the peace process, including by failing to respect such
a cessation of hostilities or by impeding the talks,
peacekeeping or humanitarian aid. The Council may
indeed consider it timely to act upon that willingness.
My delegation regrets that no progress has been
made in the cooperation between the ICC and the
Government of Sudan. In the interests of justice in the
long run, cooperation between the ICC and the
Government of Sudan will have to be resumed if
judicial processes in the Sudan and by the ICC are
going to take place.
We note that the Prosecutor is proceeding with
two new investigations, namely on crimes committed

12

against peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel and
on the mobilization of State apparatus to plan, commit
and cover up crimes against civilians. We encourage
investigations that are not only thorough but also
comprehensive. Crimes committed by Darfur armed
rebel movements, including the Haskanita incident, as
well as other attacks against peacekeepers and
humanitarian
organizations,
require
thorough
investigation as well. The international community,
including the ICC, needs also to be seen as impartial in
order to continue to play a constructive role.
My delegation strongly believes that Sudan’s
sovereignty must always be respected, but that
sovereignty also comes with rights and responsibilities.
In this regard, we underline the obligations of the
Government of Sudan to comply with the provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005). At the same time, it is
Indonesia’s position that the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005) and actions of the Prosecutor
shall neither nullify the principle of complementarity
nor absolve Sudan’s national court of its responsibility
regarding the perpetrators. We are confident that
Sudan’s national court will take up that responsibility.
Cooperation with the ICC will be essential if Sudan is
expected to investigate and prosecute the cases selected
by the prosecutors. Indonesia strongly believes that the
issue of cooperation by the Government of Sudan with
the ICC should be addressed in a comprehensive
manner, in the context of achieving durable peace and
security.
Finally, my delegation stresses once again its
appreciation of the Court’s independence, as well as
the Prosecutor’s efforts to implement resolution 1593
(2005). It is our long-held view that once the Security
Council refers a case to the ICC it should be obliged to
respect the Court’s independence and allow its legal
processes to take their due course.
Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): At the outset, let me warmly welcome His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica. I also warmly welcome His Excellency the new
Permanent Representative of Belgium, who has just
joined us. I wish him every success in his new
functions.
Let me also welcome Mr. Moreno-Ocampo and
thank him for the briefing he has just given us. My
delegation takes note of the report he has submitted to
us. As a party to the Statute of the International

08-36743

S/PV.5905

Criminal Court and as a member of the Security
Council, Burkina Faso has closely followed the
activities of the Court. It attaches the greatest
importance to its efficient functioning and to
compliance with Council resolutions.
Given the complexity of the conflict in Darfur
and the seriousness of the crimes at issue, the task of
the Court is very delicate and difficult. That is
evidenced by the fact that almost two years elapsed
between the opening of the initial inquiry, on 1 June
2005, and the issuance of the first arrest warrants, on
27 April 2007. It is for that reason that this matter as a
whole must be addressed with the highest degree of
caution, rigour, impartiality and patience, while the
approach must be strictly legal.
We regret the delays experienced by the
mechanisms established by the Government of the
Sudan to prosecute the perpetrators of crimes. Given
that those mechanisms must play an important role in
revealing the truth and prosecuting the guilty, we call
on the Government of the Sudan to take all the
necessary steps to ensure that they begin to function
quickly and effectively.
My delegation believes that no solution must be
excluded and no effort spared to shed light on the
crimes committed in Darfur and to prosecute the
perpetrators. However, those goals cannot be achieved
unless the Government of the Sudan and the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court maintain a
constructive dialogue and strengthen their working
relationship.
As indicated in paragraph 46 of the Prosecutor’s
report, a number of States and international
organizations — including the African Union and the
League of Arab States — are cooperating with the
Court. That proves that the international community is
concerned about the crimes committed in Darfur and
the crucial need to ensure the protection of civilians in
the region and throughout the Sudan.
Despite numerous efforts by the United Nations
and the whole of the international community, the
conflict in Darfur is continuing, with civilians being
the first and principal victims. We therefore once again
appeal to all actors to respect the lives of civilians and
to allow humanitarian access, in accordance with their
obligations under legal instruments on the protection of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

08-36743

In that regard, we recognize that the Government
of the Sudan is primarily responsible for the security of
its civilians. We nevertheless believe that significant
progress in the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur will
contribute to alleviating the suffering of civilians in
Darfur.
The crimes committed in Darfur, as elsewhere,
should not go unpunished. To that end, all parties
should cooperate with the International Criminal Court
in order to render justice to the victims and to ensure
that the perpetrators are punished.
Nevertheless, the only way to put an end to those
crimes continues to be the advent of lasting peace in
Darfur, in the Sudan in general and in the subregion.
We urge the participants in the various conflicts to
dedicate themselves to that goal; and we call on
neighbouring countries, regional and subregional
organizations and the entire international community to
assist them in good faith to that end.
Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to welcome the presence among
us today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica and the new Permanent Representative of
Belgium. I should also like to join speakers who have
preceded me in welcoming Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
as well as to thank him for his briefing.
There is no need to emphasize my country’s
commitment to combating impunity and its rejection of
compromising with perpetrators when it comes to
enforcing the law. However, we know how difficult it
is to achieve those goals, as we are aware of the
delicate and confidential responsibilities entrusted to a
prosecutor’s office required by a legal mandate and
professional obligations to carry out a sober
prosecution that avoids condemning prior to trials,
presents findings immediately following thorough
investigations and closely scrutinizes diverse pieces of
evidence, whether corroborating or exculpatory in
nature.
The report that has been presented to us refers to
ongoing investigations. Many paragraphs of the report
contain diverse legal and political accusations against
the highest organs of a State and its military and
security machinery. In many cases, those accusations
are based on press and political reports. To date, there
have been no findings or conclusions with regard to

13

S/PV.5905

investigations into the practices of the rebel
movements. In short, the issue has been presented as if
it had to do with the pattern of behaviour of a State
obsessed solely with the destruction of the basis for its
existence, namely, its people and their tribal and social
fabric.
My country’s experience has taught us that the
intensity of the language used in the statement
invoking resolution 1593 (2005) will undermine the
environment of cooperation and assistance called for
both by the resolution itself and the report that has
been presented to us. It also risks undermining
opportunities to strengthen cooperation in our work in
the context of the Council’s current mission to the
Sudan. We know that, by its very nature, cooperation is
a dynamic process that can take place only through
calm dialogue and mutual confidence, regardless of
differences with the Sudan and its positions or the
Sudan’s commitment to the Rome Statute and its
application. There is no hope that mutual confidence
will prevail while national legal proceedings are being
marginalized. In conformity with the Rome Statute, the
competency of the ICC complements the national legal
system.
Along with the Sudan’s cooperation, we had
expected that the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor would have made additional efforts to
promote the rule of law, protect human rights and
combat impunity in Darfur. The resolution encouraged
it, highlighting the universality of the ICC and its
proceedings and furthering its goals.
The Council’s referral of the Darfur case to the
Court, in our view, was not prompted by political
motivations or with the intention of interfering in the
Sudan’s affairs through a technical legal process, the
politicization of which is in no one’s interest. That is
particularly true since the referral was not made at the
expense of a comprehensive consideration of the
situation by the Council that would take into account
the balancing of its numerous political, security and
humanitarian priorities.
We agree that peace and justice are indivisible.
Yet how can justice be achieved? How will the
Sudanese people view such justice, meted to all its
factions, without exception, including the victims of
the rebel movements? It is a political process led by the
United Nations, which respects the sovereignty of
Member States, that will achieve harmony, stability

14

and security by addressing in all earnest the underlying
causes before the symptoms.
The strong message expected of the Council
today must, in our view, focus on that process and its
progress by all means and inclusive of all parties. That
is what my country has tried to achieve in the course of
recent years; it is what we are trying to achieve in
Geneva in the framework of noble regional and
international efforts, which we hope will succeed and
bear fruit.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): At the outset, allow
me to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica for his participation in this Council meeting
today. We also wish to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the Council.
Allow me to express the appreciation of my
delegation to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his
statement before this Chamber and in particular for the
important work that he is doing.
South Africa is a member of the ICC and we
remain committed to supporting its work. As we have
stated before in this Chamber, we see the Court as
central to ending impunity for international crimes and
to establishing conditions under which justice and the
rule of law can be maintained. The ICC, through its
ability to deter the further commission of international
crimes, serves as an advocate of adherence to the rule
of law, and thus we expect cooperation with its work.
We are acutely aware of the challenges facing the
Prosecutor, arising primarily from the fact that the ICC
does not have its own police force or army to execute
its warrants of arrest and is therefore entirely
dependent on the cooperation of States in that regard. It
would seem to us that there is a responsibility
incumbent upon the Security Council to demand the
cooperation of States, particularly in instances in which
the Council has referred cases to the Court.
In resolution 1593 (2005), the Council called
upon the Government of the Sudan and all other parties
in Darfur to cooperate fully with and provide necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor. In that
regard, we note with regret that there has not been any
progress with regard to the ICC-issued arrest warrants.
We therefore urge the Government of the Sudan and
other parties involved in Darfur to cooperate fully with
the ICC. There can be no sustainable peace without

08-36743

S/PV.5905

justice in Darfur, and it is vital to bring to justice those
accused of bearing the primary responsibility for the
crimes committed.
We also note with disappointment that, since the
Prosecutor’s previous report to the Council, the
situation in Darfur has not improved and civilians
continue to be targeted. South Africa continues to
support a comprehensive approach towards the
resolution of the conflict in Darfur, including the
political, security, humanitarian and judicial processes.
Only progress on all those fronts will secure
sustainable peace for the people of Darfur as they are
subjected to persecution, abuses and violations of
fundamental human rights.
It is for that reason that we support a declaration
from the Security Council on this issue.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his
briefing. China has noted that the Office of the
Prosecutor has pursued its communication with the
neighbouring countries of the Sudan and the African
Union and is continuing its investigation in the case of
a peacekeeper who was attacked in September 2007.
China appreciates the efforts of the Office of the
Prosecutor to seek solutions to impunity in Darfur.
China follows closely the situation in Darfur. It is
regrettable that the conflict has continued in Darfur. It
is all the more heartbreaking to see, as a result, the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. China
condemns atrocities against human rights and
international humanitarian law and supports a
constructive role for the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in appropriately resolving the problem of
impunity in Darfur.
As the Prosecutor points out in his report, the
ICC is a supplement to the domestic judicial system of
the State. China hopes that the Sudanese Government
will, under the precondition that the domestic judicial
system be the main channel, enhance its
communication with the ICC, strengthen cooperation,
establish mutual trust and jointly resolve the problem
of impunity in Darfur.
We believe that only with the improvement of the
situation and political stability can there be a solution
to the problem of impunity and can judicial fairness be
fundamentally realized. At present, the situation in
Darfur does not allow for optimism. Work in all fields

08-36743

faces challenges. The international community should
continue its two-track strategy and focus on the
political process and peacekeeping deployment. Work
in all fields needs mutual cooperation and
reinforcement rather than division and isolation.
China understands that some countries are eager
to resolve the question of impunity, but it is not
realistic to do so in a hurry. In the broader picture,
other areas are facing difficulties, and it is thus
impossible for the judicial sphere to achieve isolated,
quick and substantive progress. China hopes that all
parties will cooperate with one another and move in the
same direction so as to achieve a comprehensive
solution to the question of Darfur as soon as possible.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for
his briefing and his seventh report on measures to
investigate the situation in Darfur in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005). We commend the efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor to strictly abide by its
mandate, to assess events in that Sudanese province
from an exclusively a legal standpoint, and to
independently and impartially carry out its functions to
establish the truth.
The fight against impunity is important.
However, in our view, it must be carried out in direct
linkage with the overall efforts to restore peace in the
Sudan.
Carefully weighed and prudent action is called
for if we are to avoid further complications on the path
towards a settlement in Darfur. In each individual case,
the right balance must be struck between the
requirements of personal responsibility and the
interests of the peace process. In our view, that is not
an easy task, but it is possible.
The Russian Federation deeply regrets and is
concerned by the information contained in the report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court with
respect to ongoing violence in Darfur. We anticipate
that the outcome of the current Security Council
mission to countries in Africa, including the Sudan,
will give us a more detailed picture of events there. A
great deal has been said today about problems in
establishing cooperation between the Court and the
Government of the Sudan, which leads us to conclude
that there are several reasons underlying the current
situation. Instead of increasing unilateral pressure on

15

S/PV.5905

the Sudanese authorities at this politically sensitive
phase, we might perhaps do better to focus our efforts
on measures to restore mutual trust and establish
dialogue.
The principle of objectivity calls for a
comprehensive assessment of the actions of all parties
to the conflict. In that regard, we listened most
carefully to the information provided on the steps taken
by the investigation to clarify the circumstances of the
attack on African Union peacekeepers in Haskanita. We
note that the attack was only one among several
episodes that have threatened the lives of those who are
on a noble mission in the region. There must be a fullfledged investigation into all such incidents. The initial
steps taken by the Office of the Prosecutor in that
respect clearly deserve support. At the same time, we
are of the view that the bulk of the effort lies ahead.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Costa Rica for his participation in this debate, and to
pay tribute to his country’s activities on behalf of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the fight
against impunity.
I join with those who have welcomed the new
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador Jan
Grauls.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for the very
detailed and specific briefing he made in compliance
with resolution 1593 (2005). I would recall that the
Security Council sought, in adopting that resolution, to
make the fight against impunity and crimes committed
in Darfur essential elements of the solution to the
threat to peace and security in the Sudan and the
region. It was in the spirit of justice, and to accomplish
its mission to re-establish peace and security, that the
Council referred the issue to the ICC and requested the
Prosecutor to investigate the situation in Darfur since
1 July 2002, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter
and his mandate under article 13 of the Rome Statute.
France fully supported that decision, which
demonstrated that the missions of the Security Council
and the International Criminal Court are deeply
complementary. Indeed, resolution 1593 (2005) is
based on the fact that the crimes committed in Darfur
are of such gravity that, according to the preamble of
the Rome Statute, they threaten the peace, security and
well-being of the world.

16

Unfortunately,
the
picture
painted
by
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo’s report is very similar to that of
last December. Crimes that fall under the International
Criminal Court’s competence and within the scope of
resolution 1593 (2005) continue to be committed in
Darfur. The Sudanese Government is not cooperating
with the Court and has taken no measures to execute
the arrest warrants of 27 April 2007 against Ahmad
Harun, former Minister of State for the Interior and
current Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ali Kushayb, a militia Janjaweed leader, for crimes
against humanity and war crimes. Mr. Harun has even
been given new and important official responsibilities
and is active publicly. Ali Kushayb is under no
investigation and is now back on active duty. Those
two people continue to be involved in operations
against civilians.
In paragraph 2 of resolution 1593 (2005), the
Security Council decided “that the Government of
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur,
shall cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor”. The
Prosecutor’s report makes it clear that the Sudanese
Government is not complying with that obligation. Its
discussions with the Security Council’s mission to the
Sudan in recent days confirm that it intends not to do
so. It thereby not only refuses to bring two major
criminals to international justice, but is also rejecting
the Council’s authority and flouting its obligations as a
Member of the United Nations. That is doubly
unacceptable.
The Security Council must support the
Prosecutor’s activities in the context of the mission
with which it has entrusted him, especially now that he
has announced the introduction to the Court of new
evidence against those responsible for crimes against
civilians in Darfur. The Security Council must also
firmly defend its authority and that of the Charter of
the United Nations. It must demand respect for
resolution 1593 (2005), cooperation from the Sudanese
Government with the Court, and the execution of the
arrest warrants against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb.
The delegation of France is thus in favour of the
Security Council’s adoption of a statement clearly
recalling the Sudan to its obligations. More generally,
we expect the Sudan to implement all the Council’s
resolutions that concern it.
Finally, I emphasize that France fully supports
the European Union statement of 31 March, issued on

08-36743

S/PV.5905

the anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1593
(2005), which remains fully valid. I recall that, in its
statement, the European Union called on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate unconditionally
with the International Criminal Court and to hand over
the two individuals subject to arrest. It also affirmed
that, in the case of non-compliance with resolution
1593 (2005), the Union would support the adoption of
further appropriate measures against those responsible
for the Sudan’s lack of cooperation with the Court.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First, please
allow me to join others in conveying our warmest
welcome to the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica and to
the new Permanent Representative of Belgium.
My delegation wishes also to thank Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting his seventh report
to the Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Together with the latest reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the Sudan, in document S/2008/267, and on
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, in document 2/2008/304,
the information brought to the attention of the Security
Council by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo today further
underlines the fact that the situation in Darfur, as well
as the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in the Sudan, remain highly complicated.
My delegation shares the assessments in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports and expresses its grave concern over
the reported attacks against civilians and humanitarian
forces in Darfur. We also fully acknowledge that
continued efforts are needed to create conditions
favourable to the peace process, including promoting
the trust and cooperation of all concerned parties in the
Sudan. We strongly support the United Nations
activities, including the missions mandated by the
Security Council to help bring about peace, security
and stability in the Sudan.
Fighting impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur is
part of the comprehensive endeavour for peace and
national reconciliation in the Sudan. We agree that
justice for the victims of such violations is a
component of a long-term and sustainable peace in the
Sudan. At the same time, we believe that the
application of justice must respect legal principles and
should be sensitive to the complex and volatile
situation in the country.

08-36743

By resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the
ICC Prosecutor and requested the Government of the
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to
cooperate with the Court. The Council also encouraged
the Court, as appropriate and in accordance with the
Rome Statute, to support international cooperation with
domestic efforts to promote the rule of law, protect
human rights and combat impunity in Darfur. For this
judicial process to be successful, the international
community should try to find appropriate ways to help
promote further cooperation and participation by the
Sudan, as a sovereign State, with the ICC, as an
independent international judicial body which, in
accordance with its Statute, has a jurisdiction which is
complementary
to
national
jurisdictions.
Confrontational attitudes and mistrust are not helpful
and should be avoided.
Viet Nam encourages the Government of the
Sudan to step up the efforts of judicial bodies in the
Sudan in exercising national criminal jurisdiction
relating to violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law in Darfur, including through
cooperation with the ICC and with other countries. We
call on all parties to armed conflict in Darfur to abide
by national and international law and to participate in
the Darfur Peace Agreement and in the peace process
jointly led by the United Nations and the African
Union. The achievement and consolidation of peace
and stability in the Sudan will provide favourable
conditions for promoting the rule of law and combating
impunity.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): We join others in
welcoming His Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Costa Rica to today’s briefing. His presence reflects
Costa Rica’s strong leadership on this issue. We also
welcome the new Permanent Representative of Belgium.
And, of course, we welcome Prosecutor MorenoOcampo back to the Security Council today. We thank
him for his briefing and for his written report. We
commend him for his continued and untiring efforts,
together with his team, to implement the mandate
conferred upon the International Criminal Court (ICC)
by the Security Council in resolution 1593 (2005) to
investigate violations of international humanitarian law
in Darfur. The United Kingdom fully endorses the
Prosecutor’s observation, which was also stressed by
many Council members in our debate six months ago,
that ending impunity is an essential component of a

17

S/PV.5905

solution in Darfur. That was the primary reason for the
adoption of resolution 1593 (2005).
It is therefore deeply disturbing to read, and to
hear in detail again from the Prosecutor today, reports
of continuing violence in the region. It is clear that the
humanitarian situation remains very grave. There is an
urgent need to end the cycle of violence in Darfur,
including the ongoing targeting of civilians, sexual
violence, attacks on peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel and the hindrance of humanitarian aid.
As the Prosecutor notes in his report, there can
never be any excuse for bombing schools or raping
women and girls. All parties to the conflict should
cease acts of violence and work together towards the
creation of a lasting peace. The ICC, as an independent
judicial institution, has a vital role to play in efforts to
combat impunity, through its investigation of crimes in
Darfur. Those accused of the most serious crimes must
be brought to justice. We endorse what His Excellency
the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica said about impunity
and the principle of “never again”.
We call upon all parties in the conflict in Darfur
to cooperate fully with, and provide all assistance to,
the ICC and its Prosecutor, as they are required to do
by resolution 1593 (2005). That obligation extends to
the Government of Sudan, so we are gravely concerned
to hear that there has been no change, since the
Prosecutor’s last report, in the Government of Sudan’s
attitude towards the ICC investigation. It is now more
than a year since the arrest warrants for Ahmad Harun
and Ali Kushayb for alleged crimes against humanity
and war crimes were issued, yet no action has been
taken by the Government of Sudan to execute the
warrants: the individuals remain at large. We call upon
the Government of Sudan to immediately execute the
arrest warrants for both of those suspects and to
provide all necessary cooperation to the Court.
As I said at the outset, the Security Council
conferred a mandate on the ICC to investigate the
situation in Darfur. The Prosecutor has to work
strenuously to implement that mandate. The Security
Council should respond by demonstrating clearly and
publicly through a presidential statement that the ICC
Prosecutor has the full backing of the Security Council
in his efforts to implement resolution 1593 (2005).
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

18

We appreciate the report of Prosecutor MorenoOcampo. The violence in Darfur must end, and those
who have committed atrocities, genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Darfur must be held
accountable and be brought to justice. With that in
mind, I would like to make three points.
First, we share the Prosecutor’s assessment that
the situation in Darfur remains alarming and that
accountability for past and present crimes against the
people of Darfur is needed to enhance security and to
send a warning to individuals who might resort to
brutality as a way of achieving their aims.
Secondly, we also share the concern about the
continuation of attacks, not only on displaced persons
and other innocent civilians, but also on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
United Nations personnel and international aid and
relief workers. Violence and criminality against those
who came to help the suffering people of Darfur is
barbaric and intolerable. Impunity for such acts, as the
Prosecutor’s report notes, is an element in feeding the
climate of violence, and it must end.
Thirdly, the United States continues to be deeply
committed to peace, stability and the provision of
humanitarian aid for the people of Sudan. Since the
start of the Darfur crisis, the United States has
provided more than $4 billion in humanitarian and
peacekeeping assistance to Sudan, including more than
$400 million to build 34 base camps for peacekeepers
in Darfur and $100 million to train and equip African
peacekeepers in Darfur.
The United States strongly believes that those
responsible for the acts of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in Darfur must be
held accountable and be brought to justice. We look
forward to continuing to work with other members of
the Council on necessary steps, including working with
Costa Rica on a draft presidential statement to achieve
that important objective.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

08-36743
