S/PV.8114

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8114

th meeting
Tuesday, 28 November 2017, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-40016 (E)
*1740016*

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Filippo
Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees; and Mr. William Lacy Swing, DirectorGeneral of the International Organization for Migration.
Mr. Grandi and Mr. Swing are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Grandi.
Mr. Grandi: The grave abuses perpetrated against
migrants and refugees along the central Mediterranean
routes can no longer be ignored. I am glad that the
Security Council has decided to turn its attention to
this compelling matter.
More than 116,000 people have crossed the sea to
Italy alone in 2017. We should not forget that many of
those arriving, or who end up stranded or dying along
the way, are refugees who are fleeing conflict and
persecution — which is of direct concern to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).
As I said in my statement to the Security Council
just a few weeks ago (see S/PV.8083), the international
community’s inability to prevent and resolve conflict
is at the root of their plight. Compelled to flee,
but without legal pathways to safety, refugees are
exposed to appalling harm, together with migrants,
including torture, rape, sexual exploitation, slavery
and other forms of forced labour, which proliferate
where governance is weak and transnational criminal
networks take root. That requires a comprehensive
approach encompassing countries of origin, transit
and destination.
2/21

28/11/2017

Strengthening refugee protection and offering
solutions along the routes, including in Chad and the
Niger, is key. UNHCR is stepping up its work, but
dramatic funding gaps persist, especially in sub-Saharan
Africa. In Libya, some 17,000 refugees and migrants
are in detention; many more are held by smugglers and
traffickers, who are protected by well-known militias.
Tackling these is linked to progress on political
solutions and functioning governance structures.
Meanwhile, UNHCR is playing its part, together
with the International Organization for Migration.
Progress is discernible, though still modest. Security
remains volatile and access to key locations is still not
possible, yet, working closely with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and with the support of some
donors — to whom I am grateful — we are making
progress towards expanding our scope of action. We are
helping the authorities to address the needs of displaced
Libyans and others affected by conflict, which is an
important priority. We have also secured the release of
almost 1,000 asylum-seekers and refugees this year,
and reception and protection mechanisms are being
incrementally strengthened. Plans to establish a transit
centre in Tripoli are progressing positively.
Rescue at sea, in line with international maritime
law and human rights standards, remains imperative.
Support for Libyan border-management authorities,
including the coast guard, must be accompanied by
building adequate reception and asylum systems. I
commend the Governments of Libya and the Niger
for enabling a first transit evacuation by UNHCR
of 25 refugees, who will be resettled in France.
Additional evacuation platforms, resettlement places
and other safe and legal pathways are needed along
the entire route. I have called for 40,000 additional
resettlement places in the 15 countries affected by
these movements. To date, we have indications of just
10,500 places — an encouraging but still insufficient
number. Council members will recall that UNHCR
has also made specific recommendations for tackling
trafficking, including by freezing assets, instituting
travel bans, disrupting the supply of revenue and
materials, and ensuring robust prosecutions.
Too often, measures pursued in relation to the
Mediterranean routes have centred on how to control,
deter and exclude. This can have a dehumanizing
effect and, more importantly, alone it does not help
refugees and migrants to avoid exploitative, deeply
harmful situations. A comprehensive set of political,
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

security, humanitarian, human rights and development
investments is needed. The Security Council’s attention
is welcome because its leadership is critical to ensuring
that this happens.
The President: I thank Mr. Grandi for his
interesting and comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swing.
Mr. Swing: I want to come at this issue from the
angle that it is primarily about smugglers and making
money. We have been working over many years, since
the fall of Al-Qadhafi in February 2011, to try to take
people out of the detention centres, to improve the
detention centres and to clean up the matter in a manner
that would destroy the smugglers’ business model. We
have been able to take 13,000 migrants home from the
detention centres this year — 8,000 from our centre in
Agadez, in the Niger — rather than have them cross
the Mediterranean.
It is all about saving life, and that, I think, is why we
are here today. We are not trying to stop Africans from
getting to Europe. We are working with the African
Union, the European Union and the Libyan authorities.
In my experience, it is rather rare to have all of the
elements of a solution come together at the same time.
Since the breaking of the story of the slave trade — in
fact, we broke the story in April and it has now been
carried forward in major media — it has all been about
breaking up the smugglers’ business model.
We lost 5,000 people in the Mediterranean last
year, and have lost 3,000 this year. We put out a press
release on that yesterday. We are all under pressure:
the Libyans, the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) — our
traditional partner — the African Union, the European
Union and the source countries. We all want and need a
solution, and I believe that, frankly, all of the elements
are there now. We have had good discussions with the
African Union Chairperson and the High Representative
of the European Union. Everybody seems to agree that
it can be done.
What we, the IOM and its traditional partner,
the UNHCR, plan and hope to do is to empty the
30 Government-controlled detention centres, with
about 15,000 people still in them. We do not know
how many of the militia groups have centres; we know
they do, but let us focus on the Government effort now,

S/PV. 8114

because we will need Libya’s help. We believe that, in
very short order, if everybody is willing to help out and
compromise, what we will need from the Libyans is an
agreement that we can empty these centres. I think they
will agree to that. We need them to give us overflight
and landing clearances. We need to be able to bring
in large, non-Libyan aircraft. The Libyans have been
extremely helpful. We have used all Libyan aircraft
up to now, but they are too few and too small. We are
talking about large operations.
We would obviously need to have the support of
the African Union and the main source countries by
sending consular officers to Tripoli, in particular, to
help identify, register and provide travel documents to
everyone so that we can then take them home. There
will be some who will need a third country to go to
until they can be properly documented, but for the vast
majority — that is, those who want to go home, as we
will do only voluntary repatriations — it can be done.
We will need financing. I had good conversation
about that yesterday. I think that the European Union
trust fund that we are using for other purposes can also
be used for this. We have assurances in that respect,
and we can augment it as we go along. The key thing is
to come up with an agreement that we all believe is in
our common interest and where everybody comes out
a winner.
We will then need commitments on the part of the
source countries to help reintegrate these migrants.
They may come back with a little money in their
pockets to get life started again, but they will need the
commitment of their home countries to helping them
to reintegrate so that they do not have to take off on an
irregular migration route again.
The elements are there. We are ready to go.
Mr. Grandi and I have had conversations about it and
we think we can work together. The majority of the
people are probably economic migrants, but there will
be many refugees in there, too, probably from Eritrea
or maybe fleeing Boko Haram persecution in northeastern Nigeria. I believe that we can move ahead
with this plan rather quickly if we can get all of the
agreements I am talking about. We will need help from
Libya, and the Libyans have been very supportive on
this. We will need help from the African Union, whose
Chairperson has been very helpful. The European
Union has also been very helpful.

17-400163/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

28/11/2017

All of us feel the pressure, because this is an
enormous human tragedy. We can stop it if we talk
in practical terms and put into place the programme
that I have just described. I am happy to take questions
on it, but this is one, I believe, where the elements are
coming together in a rather favourable manner.

and operate trafficking networks for their own gains,
including through the illegal detention of migrants.
We will continue to support the Libyan authorities in
improving conditions in the centres currently under
their control, and in establishing oversight over the
remaining ungoverned centres.

The President: I thank Mr. Swing for his briefing.

The Council has seen recent progress in revitalizing
the Libyan political process and taking steps forward to
stabilizing the country. We are clear that the human
rights situation in Libya can be improved sustainably
only under the stability of a united and representative
Government. A safe, secure and prosperous Libya that
is able to confidently tackle the challenges in the region
is in all our interests, and we continue to support the
United Nations action plan for Libya.

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for updating us following the disturbing news footage
that we all saw last week, showing migrants being sold
into slavery in Libya.
Today, let us stand together as an international
community in our commitment to eliminating the
abhorrent crime of modern slavery and human
trafficking, and to safeguarding the lives and dignity
of those who are most vulnerable. Like many Libyans, I
share the disgust and grave concern at the news footage
from last week. I am deeply concerned that civilians
continue to suffer inexcusably from the conflict in
Libya and that, in the absence of the rule of law, they
can suffer human rights abuses of the worst kind. I
welcome the announcement by the Government of
National Accord of Libya of an immediate investigation
into that matter and its commitment to ensuring that
those involved are brought to justice and that this vile
practice is stopped.
We reaffirm our support, working alongside Libya
and international efforts, to bring to account those
responsible for such crimes, and we encourage all
Member States to continue to work with the Libyan
authorities in pursuing allegations of human rights
abuses to ensure that those individuals responsible are
held to account.
After several debates, the Security Council is well
informed of the challenges that we face in tackling
unmanaged migration, including through Libya. We
are aware of the real vulnerability of migrants to
trafficking and modern slavery. We want migration to
be safe, legal and well managed. We have discussed the
need for a comprehensive approach that addresses the
root causes of migration, as well as its consequences.
With resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017), we are
now well equipped to take action.
Instability creates a permissive environment in
which criminal networks exploit civilians and migrants
4/21

We must all recognize that it is not only the
trafficked individuals and their loved ones who are
directly affected by that horrendous crime. Violent
extremists profit financially from the trade in human
misery and use it to fund terrorist activity that
affects us all. We must integrate our understanding
of trafficking and modern slavery with our efforts to
combat terrorism, and we must eradicate the use of
slavery as a means to resource terrorist groups.
Human-rights monitoring and the capacity-building
of police are central to efforts to build stability and
address trafficking by field missions. More broadly,
we should consider how anti-trafficking is part of the
sustaining peace agenda, which is all about using a
cross section of United Nations tools to prevent conflict
and build peace. It is clear that trafficking itself can be
addressed only through a holistic cross-pillar approach
on the part of the United Nations.
As is always the case with today’s frantic news
cycles, the reports from Libya that have so shocked
us all will soon be displaced by other headlines and
eventually drop off the news agenda all together. While
that is to be expected, we should hold ourselves to a
higher standard of responsibility. The fact that slavery
continues in the twenty-first century, despite all the
progress that has been made in defending human rights,
is reprehensible. Let us commit to working together to
preserve our attention on this issue and sustain our
action in order to ensure that this practice does not
continue in Libya or anywhere else; it is only by doing
so that we can hope to succeed in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

If members of the Council consider that a statement
would be helpful, we would be happy to work with them
on such a text.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the representatives of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, and the International
Organization for Migration, Mr. William Swing, for
their detailed, significant and unambiguous briefings
on the situation of migrants in Libya. I also thank
the Italian presidency for its engagement on this
central topic.
Following the very constructive debate on
trafficking in persons in conflict situations was
organized by the Italian presidency on 21 November
(see S/PV.8111), President Emmanuel Macron took the
initiative of calling for this emergency meeting of the
Security Council against the exploitation of migrants
in Libya and trafficking in persons. The purpose of this
important meeting of our Council is twofold.
First, we of course must seek not only to condemn
but also to publicly denounce that barbaric practice,
which is profoundly shockking to our universal
conscience and constitutes a crime against humanity,
so that it can be put to an end. Secondly, such action
must follow specific concrete responses to the scourge,
in both the immediate and the long terms, by using
all resources within the framework of the law. That
of course hinges — and I will revisit this point in a
moment — on greater cooperation with the Libyan
authorities and on a relentless fight against impunity,
including through the International Criminal Court
and through the imposition of sanctions against all
individuals and entities that contribute to those barbaric
acts. In that context, France naturally calls for a strong
response from the Security Council.
The images that have been circulated by the media
in recent weeks are shocking. They highlight the
urgent need to improve our global policy in the light
of the migratory crisis and to put an end to this human
tragedy. We strongly condemn the inhumane treatment
and violence suffered by all individuals in Libya,
particularly migrants and refugees, as a result of their
vulnerability. We must all keep in mind that trafficking
in persons includes many forms of exploitation:
kidnapping, forced labour, torture, arbitrary detention,
sexual servitude and rape, to name but a few. Those
despicable practices are not only morally unacceptable,

S/PV. 8114

but they also constitute crimes against humanity and
must not and cannot be allowed to go unpunished.
In the face of such crimes, we have a duty not only
to protect victims, but also to respect international and
humanitarian law. The Security Council bears a special
responsibility to combat this scourge, as trafficking in
persons thrives in and fuels conflict areas. It is also
used as a means to sow terror among peoples and has
become a major source of funding and an instrument of
retribution, for armed groups and even terrorist groups.
For those reasons, trafficking in persons clearly
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Resolution 2388 (2017), which we adopted last Tuesday,
is a further step forward in our common fight against
trafficking and the exploitation of human beings, but
we are all aware that much remains to be done, and that
we must act with a sense of urgency.
We must act at several levels. We must first
strengthen our cooperation with the Libyan authorities
and help them in assuming their heavy responsibilities.
We must urgently respond to the situation by putting
an end to arbitrary detention and, in particular, the
atrocities suffered by migrants in certain detention
centres. We must also improve the sanitary conditions
in those centres. We welcome the opening of an
investigation by the Libyan authorities, and hope that
it will be completed as soon as possible.
The Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, met in Tripoli with the Libyan
Minister of the Interior on 4 September. The Libyan
authorities are aware of their duty to protect and assist
migrants in their territory and to fully cooperate with
the international organizations, to which France extends
its full support. At the same time, we must take into
account today’s reality of the Libyan State as a State in
a precarious situation and a country that has endured
several years of conflict and which has limited ability
to act regarding the majority of migrants ensnared by
trafficking networks, which are beyond the reach of
Government centres. Our response will be ineffective
if we do not acknowledge this complexity.
We also call for the strengthening of dialogue
with the Libyan authorities on the status of refugees
and the right to asylum in Libya, as well as support
for the development of economic alternatives in a
country that has been a destination country for foreign
labour in the past and remains so in part today. The
development of Libyan capacities in this regard is

17-400165/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

therefore indispensable. Action on the part of the
United Nations and by the European Union through
EUNAVFOR Sophia seeks to strengthen the Libyan
State, as well as its security and judicial institutions,
with the aim of enabling Libya to better manage the
migration crisis and to uphold international standards
in the field of human rights.
As I said, we must also leverage all the resources
available to international law and justice, to which
perpetrators of crimes against migrants in Libya must
be held accountable. Impunity is simply not an option
in the face of such horrors, and we will not accept it.
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
indicated, during her briefings here in November and
May (see S/PV.8091 and S/PV.7934), that she continues
to receive information and evidence relating to alleged
crimes against migrants transiting through Libya and
that some such crimes may fall within the jurisdiction
of the Court. She has our full support. It is important
that Libya and all States concerned fully cooperate
with the International Criminal Court, in line with
resolution 1970 (2011).
As per the recent call of the Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs, Mr Jean-Yves Le Drian, we must
not hesitate to use the framework of the sanctions
regime on Libya against traffickers and the individuals
implicated in such inhumane practices. The regime,
created by resolution 1970 (2011), enables us to impose
targeted sanctions against individuals involved in the
smuggling of migrants owing to their responsibility for
grave violations of human rights.
France will offer to assist the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
chaired by Sweden, in identifying the individuals and
entities responsible for trafficking through Libyan
territory. We count on the support of the members of
the Council to make resolute progress in this direction.
We must also work with countries of origin and transit
to develop enhanced cooperation with the authorities
of the countries concerned so as to encourage them to
develop their asylum policies, in cooperation with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We
must also encourage countries of origin to strengthen
consular protection for their nationals and to support
International Organization for Migration (IOM)
initiatives for voluntary return whenever possible.
It is clear that a lasting settlement to this tragedy
is inextricably linked to an inclusive political solution
6/21

28/11/2017

to the conflict in Libya that places the Libyan State
in a position to respond fully to it. This requires the
establishment of a unified army under civilian authority
and, initially, by strengthening the Libyan coast
guard. In that regard, it is critical that Libyan political
actors recognize the importance of moving quickly
to implement the plan of action of the United Nations
Special Representative to put an end to a conflict in
which the primary victims are Libyans themselves.
The exploitation and violations of the fundamental
rights of migrants on Libyan territory are fuelled by
political and security instability, feeding back into
the dynamics of the conflict. To break this vicious
circle, we reaffirm our full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, and for his action plan, which remains the sole
valid framework for the negotiations under way. In
the immediate term, this requires the adoption of the
necessary amendments to the Skhirat Agreement.
Finally, in accordance with the commitments made
at the Paris summit on 28 August, we shall continue
to fight alongside our European and African partners
against the trafficking of migrants in all its forms
by targeting criminal organizations and smuggling
networks and acting decisively to dismantle and destroy
the economic model of the traffickers. Subsequent to
this agreement, it is possible to work concretely with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the IOM, in collaboration with
the Libyan authorities, in order to improve living
conditions for migrants in official camps, facilitate
the efforts of these organizations with the Government
of National Accord, and promote the transfer of the
most vulnerable to the Niger with a view to their
resettlement. We hope to identify, as we have begun
to do in connection with our African partners, the men
and women who can benefit from the protection of the
right to asylum and enable the most vulnerable to find
refuge in Europe. The President of the Republic, who is
currently in Ouagadougou, has just confirmed his desire
to see other Europeans join France in this initiative.
In conclusion, Mr. President, you can count on
France to pursue its mobilization in favour of a unified
and decisive approach on the part of the Security
Council. On this crucial and vital issue, the Council
must adopt a strong position with specific measures and
tangible measures commensurate with the challenges
we face.
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are grateful to the
Italian presidency for convening this briefing upon
the request of the French delegation, and we wish to
thank them both. We also wish to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo
Grandi, and the Director General of the International
Organization for Migration, Mr. William Lacy Swing,
for their briefings.
The situation of African refugees and migrants
in Libya has indeed been a matter of serious concern
for quite some time. The Central Mediterranean route
through Libya continues to be used by migrants and
refugees, mainly from sub-Saharan Africa, to cross to
Europe. It has become a popular route for traffickers
and smugglers, who continue to exploit the current
situation and weak law enforcement institutions.
The recent media reports on the auctioning of
African migrants and refugees as slaves have caught
the attention of the entire world. The video clips
circulating on social media and the harrowing stories
of some of the African refugees and migrants who
described their suffering and pain in the detention
camps at the hands of human traffickers and smugglers
have sent shockwaves across the continent and beyond.
This inhumane and despicable act is not only
unacceptable but has no place in the twenty-first
century. It must be condemned in the strongest terms,
and we reiterate our support for the statements issued
by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of United Nations. We
believe that it is only appropriate that the Council adopt
a statement along the same lines, demonstrating the
seriousness with which it is following the matter. We
therefore believe what the United Kingdom and France
have suggested in this regard to be very proper. As
we stated during the briefing on Libya last week (see
S/PV.8104), we believe that there are two important
approaches to handling this matter.
First, there is a need for urgent action to dismantle
the slavery camps and destroy the criminal networks
involved in this inhumane practice. All necessary
measures must also be taken to identify all those
responsible for that unspeakable and barbaric crime
and to bring them to justice. The Libyan Government
has already expressed its commitment to undertaking
the necessary investigation, and those efforts must
be supported. Strengthening the capacity of Libyan

S/PV. 8114

institutions, law enforcement and judicial bodies is
very important in that regard.
We welcome the steps taken by the African Union
to urgently launch an investigation in support of the
measures announced by Libyan authorities and dispatch
an envoy to Libya for consultations with the Government
and other stakeholders to agree upon practical steps to
address the plight of African migrants in Libya. All
the relevant United Nations agencies must be actively
engaged in support of those efforts, and international
cooperation must also be enhanced to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons and to protect the rights
of victims, particularly women and children.
Secondly, it is absolutely imperative to tackle the
root causes of forced displacement, migration and
trafficking in persons in a comprehensive and holistic
manner. At the root of that is poverty and hopelessness.
Situations such as those should remind us to what extent
there is virtually no alternative to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, as we mentioned on a
previous occasion, hence the need to accelerate efforts
to address the multifaceted challenges that are forcing
young people to flee in search of a better future. We
therefore echo the call made by Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, last week (see S/PV.8111), to move from words
to action, and ensure that we meet the goal set for 2030.
However, pending the implementation of sustainable
solutions to address the root causes of migration and
forced displacement, much more certainly needs to be
done to provide life-saving humanitarian assistance
for refugees and migrants, irrespective of their status.
States should also be encouraged to continue opening
up their borders to refugees in accordance with the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
to further strengthen international assistance based
on the principle of border-sharing and solidarity
with refugee-hosting countries. The expansion of
resettlement opportunities as a means of international
protection for refugees and the expansion of regular
channels for migration should be encouraged, as it
could significantly contribute to the prevention of
trafficking in persons and smuggling.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
profound appreciation for the noble initiative taken by
the Government of Rwanda to receive 30,000 of those
facing the danger of modern slavery in Libya. That is

17-400167/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

a demonstration of commitment put into practice for
which Rwanda should be lauded.
With regard to the situation in Libya in particular,
we understand the complexity and rapidly changing
humanitarian challenge that the country is facing
within a very difficult political environment. There is
an urgent need for the political situation to be sorted
out so that the rule of law might prevail throughout
the country under an authority whose legitimacy is
recognized by the Libyan people. We believe that
the United Nations action plan with its sequential
components provides a useful framework to end the
current political impasse and meet the legitimate
demands of all Libyans. We welcome the continued
efforts of the Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to engage
all Libyans based on the United Nations action plan,
including in bringing together the main political
actors to mend the Libyan Political Agreement, which
remains the only viable framework in which to resolve
the Libyan crisis.
Lastly, auctioning migrants as slaves is an affront
to humankind, and we should do everything possible
to combat that scourge. We hope that the Council will
send the right message to demonstrate our collective
commitment to addressing the immediate and longterm challenge through a comprehensive and holistic
approach, and a in a very robust manner, as the
representative of France just mentioned — through
effective global and regional partnerships.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings to the Security Council.
Criminal networks and various groups continue to
exploit ongoing conflicts and the absence of the rule of
law in many regions throughout the world to traffic in
persons so as to fund their criminal activities, especially
through exploiting the most vulnerable groups,
including women and children, whether through sexual
exploitation, forced labour, organ harvesting slavery or
other activities. That is fuelling those conflicts, and we
are in need of concerted international efforts to confront
the phenomenon. Egypt has been following closely and
with grave concern media reports of criminal groups
in Libya exploiting illegal migrants and committing
crimes involving human trafficking. Egypt rejects and
condemns that criminal act, which runs counter to the
most basic human values.
8/21

28/11/2017

Egypt welcomes the efforts of of the Libyan
authorities, who have condemned those acts and
announced that the relevant Libyan entities have
launched an investigation to unearth the truth. They
are determined to punish everyone involved in those
practices if the allegations prove to be true. We are
fully prepared to provide all forms of support to the
brotherly Libyan people so as to support the Libyan
authorities in confronting the situation in all its aspects.
That shocking and terrifying phenomenon
highlights once again the importance of strengthening
Libyan institutions so as to confront the grave
challenges facing the country and enhance their
national capacity to protect the most vulnerable groups
of persons, especially women and children. Egypt has
spared no effort to unite the armed forces of Libya.
In order to support the efforts of the United Nations,
the Egyptian Committee on Libya recently hosted a
group of Libyan officers in Cairo. We are also making
every possible effort to support the political process,
aimed primarily at enabling the Libyans to reach their
own comprehensive and sustainable solutions to the
situation in their country.
We cannot discuss the risks confronting Libya
without discussing the security, economic and social
situation in the Sahel region. The security vacuum, the
difficulty in controlling borders in the remote desert
areas and the countries of the region, and the fact
that the latter are now safe havens for terrorist groups
and organized criminal gangs — thereby facilitating
their illegal activities and ability to terrorize
civilians — has led to a difficult security situation now
confronting Libya.
In that regard, we stress the importance of the role
played by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel in confronting those risks. The international
community has a responsibility to support that
ambitious initiative. Investing in support for the Joint
Force will bear fruit in the form of enhanced security
and stability in the region and around the world.
The wide-ranging systematic violations of
human rights that accompany large flows of refugees
and migrants, including human trafficking and
the smuggling of migrants, require us to redouble
international efforts to enhance the management of
those flows. In that regard, we believe that we need
to adopt a comprehensive approach to addressing the
root causes of migration, including economic, political,
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8114

cultural and humanitarian measures, while focusing on
the development dimension in countries of origin and
host countries.

complete impunity. We all have a responsibility to act;
now is not the moment to pass the buck. Let me set out
a number of concrete measures to move forward.

We must also open a new legal path for accepting
migrants and refugees; we must do more than merely
close borders, which contravenes the 1951 Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees. We welcome
efforts to adopt the global compact on refugees, in
addition to the global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration.

First, the Council must demand accountability.
We reiterate Secretary-General Guterres’ call on
the competent authorities to investigate the reported
slavery and slave trade. We note the announcement
of an investigation by the Libyan Government of
National Accord and we welcome to United Nations
initiative to work with the Libyan authorities to set
up a transparent monitoring mechanism in order to
safeguard migrants and refugees against human rights
abuses and violations.

In conclusion, we stress that Egypt supports
the central role of the United Nations in enhancing
international efforts to combat human trafficking.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2388 (2017)
a few days ago to that end, in addition to resolution
2331 (2016); the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
and the political declaration on the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution
72/1). We call on Member States to enhance those
efforts in the upcoming period.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): I thank High Commissioner
Grandi and Director General Swing for their sobering
briefings this morning. We welcome France’s initiative
to request an urgent Council meeting on this important
topic, as it is essential that today’s meeting lead to
swift and decisive action, including through a strong
statement by the Council.
Like others, we have been horrified and outraged
by the video footage released last week of human beings
reportedly being bought and sold as slaves in so-called
slave markets in Libya. All States have an obligation to
prevent, deter and penalize the crime of slavery; it is
always prohibited and may very well amount to crimes
against humanity. We condemn any such act in the
strongest terms.
Sadly, these revelations are only the latest in the
litany of indignities and abuses seen in the conflict in
Libya. In every Security Council meeting on Libya
this year, Sweden has raised the widespread and
well-documented human rights violations and abuses
suffered by refugees, migrants and internally displaced
person, including arbitrary detention, rape and other
forms of sexual and physical abuse, and forced labour.
Those terrible crimes continue to take place with

We also support the Secretary-General’s call on
20 November for all United Nations actors to actively
pursue the matter of slavery, and we would welcome a
report by the Secretary-General to the Council on the
results of those efforts. The Council should join him,
as well as the African Union and the European Union,
in clearly and unambiguously demanding that these
crimes be fully investigated in a swift, credible and
independent manner. To that end, we call for the urgent
establishment of a fact-finding mission to look into the
matter of slavery in Libya.
In addition, we support the initiative of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
last communicated to the Council on 8 November
(see S/PV.8091), to actively explore the possibility of
investigating crimes related to human trafficking and
smuggling networks. As a preventative action, as well
as to promote changes in behaviour, we remain open
to exploring the possibility of using sanctions to target
smuggling and trafficking in persons.
Secondly, improvements in the humanitarian
situation are acutely necessary. We call on the Libyan
authorities to ensure full and unimpeded humanitarian
access to migrant detention centres across Libya, and
we repeat our calls for these detention centres to be
turned into open transit centres that meet international
standards. In addition, it is crucial to find sustainable
alternatives to detention, not least for women, children
and vulnerable groups. We support the efforts of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) to ensure the protection needs
of refugees, including the emergency evacuation
and temporary settlement mechanism. We are one of
the largest donors to the important operations of the
International Organization for Migration and UNHCR;

17-400169/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

we have provided emergency resettlement slots to that
mechanism and we encourage other countries to do
the same.
While urgent action is required to respond to the
most immediate needs of refugees and migrants, the
only long-term solution to the unfolding human tragedy
is to address the root causes of forced migration. That
will require concerted and coordinated action to
tackle poverty, inequality, human rights violations and
abuses, as well as instability in countries of origin and
transit, including Libya itself. The full implementation
of the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development is a
powerful tool to that end.
Finally, we must continue to support United
Nations-facilitated efforts to achieve a lasting political
solution to the conflict in Libya, which will improve
the lives of all people in Libya, including migrants
and refugees.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Director General of the International Organization for
Migration (IOM) for their respective briefings.
Last Sunday marked the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the release of Casablanca, a classic of the silver
screen that I am sure the majority of the Council will
have seen. In one of its most famous scenes, Captain
Renault tries to shut down Rick’s Café, claiming to be
shocked that gambling was happening on the premises.
The words have barely passed his lips when one of the
croupier’s hands over a bag to the Captain containing
his winnings, who thanks him and gives the order to
shut the place down.
Setting aside the obvious differences, there is a
parallel here with the situation that we are seeing in
Libya, which is not the only country suffering the
phenomenon under discussion today. There have been
reports about the existence of a slave market in Libya
for months. The difference lies in the fact that what we
have seen in recent days is no movie but harsh reality.
What is most shameful is that there are despicable
people who profit from the misery and despair of
migrants.
In April in this very Chamber (see S/PV.7934),
Uruguay referred explicitly to an IOM report on the
existence of that slave market and unequivocally
condemned that horrific state of affairs. Nonetheless,
10/21

28/11/2017

until a video providing irrefutable proof of the IOM
report was made public, declarations of outrage and
repudiation of this absolutely abominable fact from the
major international authorities were conspicuous by
their absence.
We must admit that collectively we have lagged
in condemning this situation much earlier and taking
concrete steps in that regard. Today we still have
time to correct the mistake by cooperating on the
prompt investigation of those crimes by establishing
mechanisms that make possible accountability for
the perpetrators.
The inhumane treatment of migrants who use Libya
as a country of transit to reach Europe has been known
for years. Hundreds of thousands of sub-Saharan
migrants are subjected to degrading practices, such as
violence, torture, hunger, sexual abuse and even murder,
in acts that constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. To the extent possible, the Libyan authorities
have the obligation to detect and to dismantle those
trafficking networks. The United Nations, through
the appropriate coordination of its agencies and the
cooperation of regional organizations, must help the
Libyan authorities to fight against that scourge and
to protect migrants, in particular the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children.
The recent adoption of resolution 2388 (2017)
reaffirms the importance of the fight against trafficking
in persons in conflict situations. Uruguay emphatically
condemns human trafficking in its broadest sense and
related crimes that seek to exploit an individual and to
take advantage of their person or their vulnerable state,
which entails disregarding the nature of an individual
as such and a substantial violation of their human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
In recent years, the proliferation of armed conflict
and the persecution of ethnic and religious minorities
have triggered a series of consequences, including the
unprecedented phenomenon of mass migration and
situations of refugees, internally displaced persons and
asylum seekers, which are precisely the contexts from
which the traffickers of human beings benefit, vilely
profiting from vulnerability and misfortune.
The trafficking in persons in situations of conflict
is a global problem, since it concerns not only the
countries of origin but also the countries of transit
and of destination of the victims, the countries in
which the criminal networks operate and the countries
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

through which the money from which those networks
profit goes. Combating trafficking in persons is
therefore the responsibility of the entire international
community. The work of States must focus not only
on the fight against trafficking in persons in situations
of conflict but also on ensuring the fundamental
rights of the victims by strengthening prevention and
protection mechanisms and measures. Those who
flee from conflict not only are displaced within the
political borders of their countries but also may seek
a better reality in other States. It is very serious that,
in addition to the psychological burden of migration
under extreme conditions and displacement towards
the unknown, migrants may remain at the mercy of
those criminal gangs.
As we prepare to begin the negotiations on a
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration,
Uruguay would like again to emphasize the principle of
the non-criminalization of irregular migration. Giving
migrants the necessary tools to develop in the countries
of transit and of destination makes them less vulnerable
to trafficking in persons. States must therefore promote
and protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all migrants, regardless of their status.
To conclude, Uruguay echoes the appeal of the
Secretary-General to deal with migratory flows in a
comprehensive and humane way through international
cooperation that addresses the root causes of that
phenomenon, increases the opportunities for legal
migration and strengthens the fight against the
smugglers and traffickers of people, while protecting
the human rights of the victims.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the briefers
for their very comprehensive and insightful briefings.
The media reports on migrants sold into slavery
in Libya were shocking. Refugees and migrants are
especially vulnerable to trafficking, as well as various
forms of exploitation, including forced labour, slavery
or practices similar to slavery, which pose a serious
threat to human dignity and integrity. The international
community must make the utmost efforts to eliminate
such heinous crimes.
We take note of the Libyan Government’s
commitment to investigate the inhumane practices
and call on the Government to ensure justice and
accountability through its investigation and prosecution
of those who are responsible. We hope that a thorough
investigation and prosecution will deter similar crimes.

S/PV. 8114

The Security Council has been working to support
the political process in Libya, cooperating with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General as well
as United Nations organs and Member States. The need
to reinforce the Government of Libya and to enhance
its institutions, including its security sector and border
security, is ever more pressing. At the same time, we
need to address the root causes that are forcing people
to leave their homes. That issue requires better regional
coordination and cooperation. The Council needs to
address the trafficking in migrants by working not only
with Libya but also with other Member States in the
region, as well as regional organizations.
We are encouraged by the African Union
communiqué of 20 November, whereby it was
announced that the Chairperson of the Commission
intends to send an envoy for consultations with the
Libyan Government and other stakeholders to agree on
practical measures to improve the plight of migrants in
Libya. The Council needs to closely follow the situation
and to take appropriate action.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and Mr. William Lacy Swing, Director
General of the International Organization for Migration
(IOM), for their timely updates.
Over the past week, a video of African migrants
sold as slaves in Libya has rightly sparked moral
outrage around the world. It is an abomination to see
human beings bought and sold. Those reports should
be profoundly disturbing to all of us and should inspire
us to act. As Ambassador Haley said last week (see
S/PV.8111), there is no place in our world for slavery.
We must hold the perpetrators of such acts accountable
for their crimes.
We welcome the condemnation of slavery and
human trafficking by the Libyan Government of
National Accord and its announcement that it is
conducting an investigation into the latest reports. The
United States reiterates its call for a full investigation
and for those involved to be brought to justice as soon
as possible. That video was the latest of many deeply
disturbing reports about the treatment of migrants and
asylum seekers in Libya.
The fact is that ruthless smugglers are preying
on desperate migrants and refugees with no regard
whatsoever for human dignity. Human traffickers
detain such people in appalling conditions, where

17-4001611/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

beatings, torture and rape have become commonplace.
Migrants and refugees who cannot afford exorbitant
ransom payments are abused and exploited. They are
forced to work on farms or construction sites or as part
of armed militias in gangs or, as we saw, are sold off to
the highest bidder.
Under those circumstances, the United States
welcomes international efforts to provide assistance
and protection to displaced people and migrants in
Libya, including the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and IOM that we just heard about. The international
community must support greater documentation of
abuses in Libya, as well as programmes to ensure the
humane treatment of migrants and refugees. Since
2011, the United States has contributed generously to
the regional humanitarian assistance programmes of
UNHCR, IOM and other partners and has provided
more than $150 million specifically to help refugees and
vulnerable migrants in Libya, as well as those displaced
internally by violence. Upholding international
protection obligations is vital.
We urge the European Union and all Member
States to ensure that there is consistent vetting of
Libyan partners and an international presence at
disembarkation points and in detention facilities, as
well as a process to guarantee access to protection. Of
course, the only long-term solution to the challenge
of migration through Libya is to stabilize Libya.
The smugglers responsible for abusing migrants and
refugees are part of sophisticated transnational criminal
networks that thrive in ungoverned or unstable spaces.
Those migrant smuggling and human trafficking
networks also smuggle arms, narcotics and illicit
fuel across borders. Their earnings support terrorist
organizations, like the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida affiliates. Their presence
contributes to Libya’s instability, as well as to security
challenges that affect the entire Mediterranean and the
Sahel. Instability breeds criminal behaviour and human
rights abuses, which in turn lead to further instability
and additional abuses, and the cycle continues.
We should continue looking for any opportunity
to disrupt criminal networks in Libya using the tools
of the Security Council, including our Libya sanctions
regime. However, while we face an immediate
imperative to disrupt and dismantle smuggling
networks, the members of the Council must also
12/21

28/11/2017

recommit to supporting the United Nations efforts to
advance a more stable, unified and secure Libya. The
only viable way to achieve that goal is for all of us to
lend our full support to the political process organized
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salamé on the basis of the Libyan Political
Agreement, which remains the only valid framework
throughout the transitional period. We must all use our
influence to make sure that all actors in Libya engage
with the United Nations in good faith and stress that
political dialogue is the only way forward.
Any attempt to assert false deadlines, cut short the
United Nations-facilitated political process or impose
a military solution will only further destabilize Libya,
which would only help the smugglers responsible for
abusing migrants and refugees. The United States
reiterates its commitment today to ending all forms
of slavery, cracking down on the perpetrators and
promoting stability in Libya. It is vital that we work
together to achieve those goals. We must rally support
to end impunity for those abuses and ensure human
rights for all in Libya.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to most sincerely thank the French delegation
for having requested the convening of this urgent
meeting in the wake of incidents of slavery in Libya.
I would also like to thank the Italian presidency for
having convened the meeting. Allow me also to thank
today’s briefers, Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and Mr. William
Lacy Swing, Director General of the International
Organization for Migration, for their very detailed and
elucidating briefings.
Let us recall that, a few months ago, the respective
organizations did indeed sound the alarm following the
adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), in which the Security
Council condemned in the strongest terms all acts of
human trafficking in areas plagued by armed conflict
and defined measures to be taken to address them. Just
last week, we held an open debate on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations (see S/PV.8111) and the
threat it poses to international peace and security. At
that time, the Council reaffirmed its commitment to the
fight against this scourge by adopting resolution 2388
(2017). During the debate, many voices were raised not
only to condemn the disastrous and inhumane situation
of migrants in Libya, victims of trafficking and all
other kinds of abuse and violations, but also to call for
action to put an end to it.
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8114

With that and the current crisis in mind, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, while
waiting to provide more structural responses, decided,
inter alia, on the following actions: to refer the matter
to the African Commission on Human and Peoples’
Rights so as to accelerate investigations and relevant
legal processes, to strengthen efforts with African
Union partners in that regard and to recommend the
repatriation of those who wish to work with African
Union member States. In addition, it should be noted
that the issue will figure on the agenda of the African
Union Summit to be held in January 2018 and of the
European Union-African Union Summit to be held this
week in Abidjan.

substitute. Hence frank, comprehensive and robust
international and regional cooperation must be part
of a framework of a concerted and comprehensive
approach, especially with regard to identification,
protection, assistance and the exchange of information.

In our West African subregion, the Economic
Community of West African States also condemned
those acts and invited the Libyan Government and the
international community to take urgent steps to find and
prosecute those guilty of that crime against humanity.

That dimension of the crisis gives deeper meaning
to the Secretary-General’s appeal to States here in the
Council for regular and safer migration routes in order
to protect those who flee persecution, which leads me
to insist on our obligation to address the root causes
of conflicts and crises, among which are instability
and poverty. In that spirit, my delegation also supports
the idea of a draft presidential statement to enable the
Council to speak in a singular, strong and clear voice
about the plight of migrants in Libya.

For its part, the Government of the Republic
of Senegal cares deeply about the plight of Libyan
migrants. It has mobilized itself and, since the
beginning of 2017, has repatriated 2,499 of its nationals
present in Libya. In a recently published statement, the
Government indicated that it
“[v]igorously denounces in the strongest terms
trafficking in persons, which constitutes a grave
offense to the conscience of humankind”.
I would like to take this opportunity for my
delegation to welcome the decision of the Libyan
Government of National Accord to open an investigation
into those findings, and invite all Member States to
provide support to that end.
My delegation considers it imperative, both in
Libya and where armed conflict rages, to resolutely
fight against all forms of human trafficking. For, in
addition to constituting a grave violation of human
rights and international humanitarian law, they
exacerbate instability and contribute to the existence
of terrorist groups, armed groups and transnational
organized crime.
In particular, focus must be placed on accountability,
the need to investigate the acts committed and identify
and persecute the perpetrators. When national judicial
systems are unable to do so because of instability
resulting from conflict, we believe that international
justice should be able to independently stand in as a

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
again that only when Libya consolidates a strong and
stable statehood with unified institutions can it ensure
effective control over all of its territory. The issue
must therefore be addressed by a political solution to
the Libyan crisis and, more generally, by adopting a
comprehensive and concerted approach to promote
development and regular migration, based on respect
for human rights.

Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and Mr. Swing,
Director General of the International Organization for
Migration, for their briefings.
China has paid much attention to the evolving
situation in Libya. In the past two years all the
parties in Libya have made great efforts to move the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement
forward, and some progress has been made. However,
Libya is still facing a number of challenges, including
a fragile security situation, continuing armed clashes
and rampant terrorist activity. On the other hand, there
are massive flows of migrants and refugees in the
Mediterranean, a worsening problem of trafficking in
persons and an increasingly complex global situation
for refugees and migrants. The combination of unrest
in Libya and the issues of refugees and migrant poses
many challenges to security and stability in Libya and
the region.
The causes of the refugee and migrant issues
are complex and multifaceted, and Libya has a long
way to go in terms of improving its overall security
situation. The international community should

17-4001613/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

encourage international cooperation in tackling the
symptoms and the underlying causes of the situation
by taking comprehensive measures and coordinating
the efforts of the many stakeholders involved, both in
promoting a political settlement and dealing with the
refugee-migrant issue, with a view to restoring stability
in both the country and the region as soon as possible.
First, the focus should be on a political settlement
and the creation of a safe and stable environment.
Ending the internal conflicts and achieving stability
in Libya as quickly as possible will establish a major
foundation for resolving the refugee-migrant issue
appropriately. China supports all efforts that can help to
stabilize the situation, promote the political settlement
process and bring all the parties in Libya together in
the fight against terrorism. We also hope that all the
parties in Libya will engage in an inclusive political
dialogue and promote the political process actively and
effectively. The international community should work
to increase its consensus on the issue, giving support
to Libya’s neighbours and regional organizations, such
as the African Union and the League of Arab States
in their efforts to promote peace and the political
settlement action plan.
Secondly, we should strengthen international
and regional coordination on combating terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The international
community should be united in fighting terrorism,
while working in an integrated manner by using
various means to cut off the channels that terrrorism
uses to supply itself with financing and arms and
the ways in which it spreads its ideologies. With a
view to preventing a recrudescence of these terrorist
groups, which will only exacerbate the region’s
instability, the international community should help
the countries concerned to build up their security
capacities, strengthen border controls between Libya
and its neighbours, foster information-sharing and
cooperation between law-enforcement agencies,
destroy the criminal networks that traffic in persons,
and improve the humanitarian situation. We hope that
all members will fully and accurately implement all the
Security Council resolutions on Libya and trafficking
in persons and work to effectively address the issues
related to refugees and migrants in the Mediterranean.
Thirdly, it is also important to emphasize the
significance of treating both the symptoms and root
causes of the issues and promoting inclusive and
balanced development that benefits everyone. We
14/21

28/11/2017

must increase support for countries hosting refugees,
work to end xenophobia and discrimination and, most
important, make efforts to tackle the underlying causes
of social instability and development imbalances
if we are to put an end to turmoil and poverty. The
international community should deal with the issue
of development head-on, implement appropriate
remedies, provide aid to developing countries,
support their efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, enhance their capacity
to alleviate poverty and related problems, foster
homegrown development and promote the achievement
of shared development and lasting peace in countries
of origin. China is ready to work with the international
community in continuing to contribute actively to
ensuring an early end to the conflict in Libya and
achieving stability and restoring prosperity there.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank the briefers for their comprehensive depiction of
the dire situation of migrants and refugees in Libya.
We also appreciate our French colleagues’ efforts to
initiate today’s briefing.
This month alone we have had as many as three
Council meetings on Libya, including with regard to
the situation of migrants. The frequency and intensity
of these deliberations are a clear indication of the
need to ensure that more attention is paid to this grave
humanitarian problem, which is aggravated by gross
violations of human rights. Hundreds of thousands of
migrants and refugees are enduring abuse and detention
in inhumane conditions. It is particularly alarming that
migrants trying to reach Europe via North Africa are
being sold at modern-day slave auctions by smugglers
in Libya. As the Secretary-General indicated in his
statement last week (see S/PV.8111), slavery has no
place in our world. Such actions are among the most
egregious abuses of human rights today and may
amount to crimes against humanity.
Kazakhstan joins the call to see that the situation is
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice as
soon as possible. My delegation welcomes the Libyan
authorities’ confirmation that they will be conducting
investigations aimed at officially prosecuting and
punishing all those involved in such heinous crimes.
This crisis will also require strict monitoring and
implementing of appropriate measures by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the International Organization for Migration, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Member States if we are to bring the operations of these
smugglers and criminal gangs to a halt.
We will therefore need even more determined
international cooperation than we have now in order
to clamp down on traffickers and smugglers and
establish a concerted policy on migration. Along with
that, we must increase all the possible opportunities
for legal immigration and the full implementation of
international conventions and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. At the same time, we must work to
reach a settlement of the situation in Libya as quickly
as possible through political reconciliation. Investment
in development will help to reduce the migration flows
across the country.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan joins the United
Nations and others in vehemently condemning these
reprehensible activities and working to end such
human indignities.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to thank the briefers for
their information.
The serious problems raised during today’s
meeting are very worrying. We share the concerns
about information indicating the growth of trafficking
in persons in the region. The Security Council already
discussed the problem in last week’s debate (see
S/PV.8111) on the subject of trafficking in people in
conflict situations, at which we also adopted resolution
2388 (2017). The issue is regularly brought up in
discussions about the situation in Libya, as it has been
this month.
As we have noted before, the transnational
character of crimes related to trafficking in human
beings in situations of armed conflict demands major
international cooperation in combating it. In order to be
as effective as possible in dealing both with this problem
and with other migrant-related issues it is essential to
take an integrated approach that includes tackling its
underlying causes, prosecuting the perpetrators and
assisting their victims. The primary focus should be on
what has created the problem of migrants.
With regard to the root causes of the situation in
Libya, the scale of the activities there of the criminal
groups associated with trafficking in persons is one of
the many consequences of the severe and protracted
crisis created by the violent military intervention
in Libya’s internal affairs in 2011. The inhuman

S/PV. 8114

treatment of migrants has been made possible against
a background of continued political and institutional
disunity in Libya. And Libya does not exist in a vacuum.
The criminal business related to illegal migration
clearly has a reach throughout the region that extends
to Europe as well.
We have noted Libya’s intention to prosecute these
criminal activities, and we should support its efforts to
fight them and assist the victims. However, a long-term
solution to the problem lies solely in the reunification of
Libya through a political settlement in the framework of
a broad-based dialogue under United Nations auspices.
Only the achievement of lasting peace and a consistent
struggle against the terrorist threats in Libya will help
lead to sustainably alleviating the problems of refugees
and illegal migrants.
Under the pretext of the difficult situation of
migrant rights in Libya, we are hearing suggestions
about the need for urgent intervention. We know that
there are some who prefer to address similar problems
independently by bypassing international law and
in violation of the sovereignty of States. That will
only exacerbate the difficult situation that emerged
following the destruction of Libya. At the same
time, key international organizations and structures
would be well advised to pay close attention migrantrelated issues in that country. In that regard, it would
be highly useful to strengthen cooperation with the
African Union.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I want to thank the French
delegation for initiating, and the Italian presidency for
convening, today’s briefing on the situation of migrants
in Libya. We are equally grateful to the briefers.
The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, must respond to news reports
about African migrants being sold as slaves. That is
why we fully support the idea of a concrete outcome to
today’s meeting.
The situation in Libya has already featured
prominently on the Council’s agenda during this month.
It has a direct impact on the stability of neighbouring
States, the Sahel and the Mediterranean. Largely
owing to the current crisis in Libya, the latter is facing
numerous challenges ranging from terrorist threats to
irregular migration flows.
As we stated in the Chamber just one week ago,
Ukraine strongly condemns continuing violations

17-4001615/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

of human rights in detention centres in Libya, where
African migrants are being systematically abused and
harassed (see S/PV.8104). Reports about slave auctions
are shocking and horrifying. It is appalling that these
heinous crimes are taking place in the twenty-first
century. In that regard, my delegation joins other
Council members in appealing to all the competent
authorities in Libya to investigate this barbarism and
ensure that those responsible are held accountable.
We would also like to encourage the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to thoroughly look into
those atrocities as well.
The current situation of migrants constitutes just
one of many elements of the ongoing instability in
Libya. The lack of progress on the political track and
the security vacuum have been exploited by criminal
networks, which have flourished to an unprecedented
degree. Arbitrary detentions, torture, kidnappings,
unlawful killings, trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of drugs and arms have all become a reality
in the country. That is why only a comprehensive
approach to the root causes of the current conflict may
alleviate the suffering of the Libyan people.
In that regard, we believe it is vital now to invest
more efforts in the political process. My delegation
reiterates its support to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé as he works with
the parties to advance the implementation of the United
Nations action plan for the resumption of an inclusive,
Libyan-owned political process. We call on everyone
involved to continue consultations until a compromise
on amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement is
reached. In our view, the Agreement remains the only
viable framework to end the current crisis in Libya. Any
attempts to undermine the process are unacceptable
and should be rejected. The longer the limbo in Libya
continues, the more the slave trade and other unlawful
activities will become entrenched in the country.
Ukraine believes that without economic
opportunities, particularly for the youth in Africa,
there is a risk that the North Africa and sub-Saharan
regions will remain unstable zones, with terrorists
and criminals exploiting the void left by the State
for illegal trafficking in persons and arms. In that
context, achieving sustainable peace and stability in
Libya and the region requires more investments in
socioeconomic development. Without functioning
Government structures, the provision of most essential
social services, operational law enforcement and
16/21

28/11/2017

judicial organs, vulnerable communities in Libya
and other conflict-affected countries will remain an
easy target for criminals. Therefore, initiatives on
fighting terrorism, fostering economic development,
addressing migration flows and ensuring respect for
human rights must go hand in hand and complement
each other. Ukraine remains committed to contributing
to that endeavour.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to
thank the Italian presidency and your delegation,
Mr. President, as well as the delegation of France for
taking the initiative to convene this morning’s briefing.
We also appreciate the briefings by Mr. Filippo Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and
of Mr. William Lacy Swing, Director General of the
International Organization for Migration.
Bolivia endorses and aligns itself with the statement
by Chairperson of the African Union, Mr. Alpha
Condé, who condemned the inhumane treatment and
enslavement of migrants in Libya, describing them
as a despicable trade and a relic from a bygone era.
We agree with his assertion that modern practices of
slavery must come to an end and that all available tools
must be used to that end. We also support the appeal of
the African Union to carry out an urgent investigation
into those repellent acts and inhuman practices in order
to identify those responsible and bring them to justice.
Bolivia expresses its greatest concern for the
inadmissible and harrowing plight of migrants in
Libya who have been victims of serious human rights
violations. This is the fourth time this month that
the Security Council has dealt with this issue: we
addressed it during the debate on trafficking of persons
(see S/PV.8111), we also raised it at the briefings on
challenges in the Mediterranean and on the situation in
Libya. This demonstrates the gravity of the situation,
which demands the immediate attention of the
international community.
According to statistics from the International
Labour Organization, in collaboration with the
International Organization for Migration, in 2016 more
than 40 million people were subjected to some form
of modern slavery. That means that in the world today
there are five victims of slavery for every 1,000 people,
and one out of every four of them is a child. Those are
horrifying figures that the Organization must not, and
cannot, ignore.
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Security Council should do everything it can
to ensure that the investigation mechanisms and the
initiatives proposed by the African Union are carried
out. We highlight the fact that investigations are being
carried out by the Government of National Accord
in Libya through a high-level committee in order to
identify those responsible for such inhuman acts. In
addition, the Government of National Accord must
cooperate with the investigations being undertaken
by the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, as such events may constitute crimes
against humanity. Should that be the case, these crimes
must be brought to trial before the Court.
We urge all States to address the situation
of migrants in Libya in a humane way, through
international, regional or bilateral cooperation and
dialogue. Work must be done to strengthen effective
measures to combat and eliminate human trafficking
and smuggling, support victims and survivors and help
them reintegrate, as well as to bring perpetrators to
justice and increase opportunities for migration.
In the same way, we reiterate the importance of
implementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and we call on States
that have not yet done so to ratify the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. I recall the words of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime: human trafficking is a parasitic crime that feeds
on vulnerability, thrives in times of uncertainty and
profits from inaction”.
In conclusion, it is important to recall that the
crisis in Libya and its fallout in the broader region
of the Sahel are the direct and practical result of the
recourse to regime-change policies, to interventionism
and to meddling in the internal affairs of other
States — elements that have done nothing but leave
behind millions of victims, displaced persons, refugees
and dead.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
I would like to thank the briefers very much for
their statements, as well as for the work carried out by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization

S/PV. 8114

for Migration (IOM) on the ground to assist all those in
need of international protection.
We are committed to helping improve the appalling
conditions of refugee and migrant centres, including
through the launch of new calls for non-governmental
organization projects and finding avenues for legal
migration and repatriation. I would like to underscore
that Italy has long supported and emphasized the
crucial role of the United Nations on the ground, and
from the start we have advocated and worked for a
stronger presence of UNHCR and the IOM in Libya.
That is why we welcome the important progress
achieved both by UNHCR and IOM on that crucial
matter. Italy is pleased that Italian efforts, including
through the engagement of the Italian Embassy in
Tripoli, were able to facilitate UNHCR activities in
Libya on behalf of migrants and vulnerable categories
in need of international protection, as well as to
define the terms of its presence and engagement in
the country. To that end, we facilitated meetings at
the Italian Embassy in Tripoli with local authorities
and UNHCR. The procedures for the resettlement of
migrants and vulnerable categories of persons can
therefore now be accelerated in cooperation with the
office dedicated for that purpose in Tripoli being run by
the local authorities, which aims to provide the highest
standards of humanitarian assistance and respect for
human rights.
Human mobility, exploitation and abuses
against migrants, and the situation in Libya and the
Mediterranean are at the centre of Italy’s action at the
United Nations and of our presidency of the Security
Council. One week ago, we organized an open debate
(see S.PV.8111) on trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. Our Foreign Minister, Angelino Alfano,
presided over the briefing on security challenges in
the Mediterranean (see S/PV.8106) on 17 November.
A meeting (see S/PV.8104) dedicated to the political
situation in Libya was held the day before. As a member
of the Security Council, measures taken by Italy on
those issues has been consistent, culminating under
our presidency in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2388 (2017), which was supported by many delegations
around the table and co-sponsored by 56 countries at
the open debate I mentioned.
The resolution underscores, inter alia, that the
challenges posed by trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants in the Sahel region and in Libya

17-4001617/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

are further exacerbating instability and conflict. It
calls for a renewed collective and coordinated effort,
and provides a legal basis for a strengthened victimcentre dand a gender- and child-sensitive approach
in addressing the needs of the victim, especially
highlighting that human trafficking entails — as
shown by the situation in Libya — widespread and
grave abuses of human rights, including heinous forms
of exploitation and slavery.
The recent reports indicating that migrants in
Libya are being sold as slaves are sickening. Slavery
must have no place in today’s world. Such actions are
among the most outrageous abuses of human rights and
may amount to crimes against humanity. We condemn
them in the strongest terms. Italy therefore welcomes
the statement by the Government of National Accord
of Libya condemning those inhumane practices and
announcing the launching an investigation into that
abhorrent episode to bring the perpetrators to justice.
We also welcome the remarks made before of the
Council last week (see S/PV.8111) by the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Smaїl
Chergui, on the initiative taken by the African Union
to address the plight of African migrants in Libya. We
also recall the words of Prosecutor Bensouda of the
International Criminal Court at the Council (see S/PV.
8091) under the Italian presidency just three weeks ago.
We must not forget that the issue of large numbers of
people being trafficked through Libya dates back long
before a spotlight was recently shined on that matter
by the international media. Over the past years, Italy
rescued and welcomed over half a million migrants
and refugees who tried to reach Europe across the
Mediterranean. At the same time, we spare no effort in
raising awareness on the issue, initially at the European
Union and subsequently at the global level.
As mentioned in this Chamber by Foreign Minister
Angelino Alfano in the meeting on Libya, the recent
decrease in migration flows across the Mediterranean is
encouraging because it results in reducing the number
of people undertaking a dangerous journey — one that
has cost so many innocent lives over recent years. But
better management of migration flows must not take
place at the expense of human rights. Migrants should
be treated with humanity and dignity, and their rights
should be fully respected. That is the approach that
Italy has taken since the beginning of this crisis by
combining solidarity and security.
18/21

28/11/2017

Italy is mindful that a sustainable solution to these
issues lies in strengthening Libyan State institutions
and local municipalities, and we are implementing
several concrete initiatives to that end. We recall the
importance of assisting Libya, as indicated by several
Security Council resolutions, under the coordination
of the presidency of the Council, in building needed
capacity, including to secure its borders, and to prevent,
investigate and prosecute acts of smuggling of migrants
and human trafficking. That challenge is transnational
in nature, and therefore Libya cannot be left alone in
dealing with it.
We believe that the protection of vulnerable groups,
including migrants, must be at the centre of the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We
also express support to countries in the region affected
by the smuggling of migrants, and emphasize Italy’s
initiative to strengthen an effective multidimensional
response with States of origin, transit and destination
Instability in the Sahel — as other have reminded
the Council — is also being exploited by human
traffickers. We need to address those common
challenges in a spirit of international solidarity and
shared responsibility in order to tackle their root causes
and to prevent vulnerable people from being exploited
by migrant smugglers and human traffickers.
Ultimately, the solution to the problem is a political
one, as we have been reminded in the case of the Libyan
crisis. Such a solution would accompany the country on
its path towards stabilization and national reconciliation
through an inclusive dialogue. Italy reaffirms its full
support to United Nations mediation in that respect, as
reiterated by Prime Minister Gentiloni Silveri in his
meeting with Special Representative Salamé two days
ago in Tunis.
In conclusion, Italy would like to support the
proposal of the United Kingdom for a formal product,
which would lend important added value to advance
the engagtement of the Security Council on the issue.
The proposal would also be a further follow-up to the
initiative launched by the Italian presidency during
this month. I would like to conclude by also thanking
France for organizing this meeting in cooperation with
the Italian presidency.
I now resume my functions are President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement to the Security Council on behalf of
His Excellency Mr. Faiez Serraj, President of the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord of Libya.
“At the outset I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank you for
convening this meeting on the maintenance of
international peace and security, with special
focus on trafficking in persons in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank Mr. Filippo Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and Mr. William Lacy Swing, the Director General
of the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) for their briefings. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity
to take the floor before the Security Council.
“I have followed with extreme concern various
media reports that — if proven authentic — show
that some illegal migrants of African descent are
being traded for financial gain. Regardless of the
veracity of the reports, we condemn those actions
strongly, and we reject them regardless of the
nationality of the perpetrators, be they Libyans or
non-Libyans, and regardless of where the events
took place, be that inside or outside our country,
because they are not aligned with our values,
religions or national laws. Nor are those actions in
line with international law, humanitarian law and
the relevant conventions on human rights. They
cannot be dismissed. I have issued directives to the
competent security bodies in order to authenticate
the recording. If the recording is indeed
authenticated, then the authorities concerned will
pursue the criminals and will bring them before
justice as soon as possible.
“We would also like to confirm that any
violations against or any mistreatment of illegal
immigrants are isolated, individual actions that
are in no way systematic. The Government of
National Accord would also like to emphasize that
the perpetrators of those crimes will not enjoy
impunity. We ask all parties, be they inside or
outside Libya, to submit any information regarding
such crimes to the office of the prosecutor, which
has initiated an investigation.

S/PV. 8114

“We would like to point out that Libyan
laws on illegal migration criminalize trafficking
in persons and stress the need to treat illegal
immigrants humanely. Moreover, Libyan laws ban
and criminalize slavery and enslavement. That has
been the case since Libya’s independence by royal
decree and in accordance with the provisions of
the penal code, to which Libya abides. Moreover,
such actions are not in line with the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. Libya has ratified the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and the law will definitely
punish Libyans and non-Libyans alike who have
broken this law on Libyan territory.
“Moreover, the crime of human trafficking is
considered a form of organized crime that is being
perpetrated by transnational criminal networks,
especially in areas that are undergoing conflict
and instability. The international community must
arrive at a holistic and effective way to confront
this in the countries of destination and origin,
and not simply in the countries of transit. If those
criminal networks were not present in the countries
of origin and destination, then transit countries
such as Libya, which is going through a difficult
time of instability that has affected its citizens,
would not have fallen victim to these large flows of
human migration, especially in the absence of the
capabilities that would allow them to confront and
prevent this phenomenon and protect its borders.
“Therefore, we ask the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to undertake its responsibilities
and to help uncover the networks responsible for
the smuggling of and trafficking in persons in
all countries — countries of origin, destination
and transit — according to the provisions of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons.
“The problem of migration is a multifaceted,
international one, and it is not simply limited to one
country or region. Transit countries, like Libya,
cannot bear the main burden for them. In order to
deal with this problem, we must focus on the root
causes, and not merely the symptoms. We must
establish genuine development in the countries of

17-4001619/21

S/PV.8114

Maintenance of international peace and security

origin with the help of the countries of destination.
We must also help the countries of origin to deal
with the real reasons for migration and to confront
the organizations and gangs in the countries of
origin and destination that are involved in the
smuggling of migrants. We must arrive at effective
solutions to the problem in its current state in a
preventive and sustainable way. I would like to
emphasize the following with regard to the role of
countries of origin and countries of destination.
“First, with regard to countries of destination,
any arrangements or plans to prevent the arrival of
migrants to countries of destination and to force
them to return forcibly to Libya is simply a shirking
of responsibility according to international law
and international humanitarian law. That would
jeopardize those migrants, especially in States
experiencing instability. Moreover, it would place
new burdens on Libyan authorities, which need
logistical assistance in order to deal with the
burdens of this phenomenon at present. It also
needs technical assistance in order to protect its
borders in a sustainable manner. We would also
like to reaffirm our rejection of any attempt to
resettle illegal migrants in transit countries like
Libya, because that would have repercussions on
the demographic composition, as well as on the
social and cultural fabric, of society. It would
also undermine national sovereignty, laws and
international law. We ask the European Union to
review its relevant policies in that regard.

28/11/2017

from the south, are dark-skinned. In the past Libya
has absorbed more than 2 million foreign labourers
from African and Arab countries for projects in the
private and public sectors, and they were treated
well. Moreover, as soon as Libya stabilizes and
establishes sustainable peace and security, it will
absorb a similar number of our African and Arab
brothers in order to work on stalled reconstruction
and development projects by way of legal contracts
and agreements that would guarantee the rights
and responsibilities of both parties, that is, foreign
labourers and Libyan authorities.
“In conclusion, if the international community
were indeed serious about confronting illegal
migration, or at least lessening its impact, it would
stand united in confronting illegal migration and
adopt an effective approach that would deal with the
root causes, instead of resorting to further media
escalation and defamation of Libya. Moreover,
we support any measure that would impose
international sanctions on smugglers and human
traffickers, provided that they covered all of those
involved, both inside and outside Libya, including
the countries of origin, transit and destination.
Moreover, we call for effective support to Libya’s
stability, be it political, security or economic. We
also ask that the Government of National Accord
receive assistance in order to exercise its control
over all Libyan territory and to protect and monitor
its borders.

“Secondly, with regard to countries of origin,
we ask those countries and neighbours of Libya to
work on controlling and monitoring their borders
and to prevent the flow of hundreds of thousands of
their citizens through their borders to Libya, which
puts them in danger. We ask that they do so instead
of shirking their responsibilities and attempting to
throw the burden on Libya, as an unstable transit
country. That is one of the burdens caused by
the huge flows of illegal migrants. We ask those
countries to work on repatriating those who have
sneaked into Libya to their original countries in
order to spare them these very dangerous illegal
migration trips through desert and sea.

“We call on the African Union, for its part, to
work with the African countries of origin to stop
the huge illegal migration flows to Libya, which
now count hundreds of thousands of people, and to
repatriate detained migrants to their countries of
origin. Moreover, we are waiting for the European
Union to assume its responsibilities under
international law and international humanitarian
law and not to hold Libya responsible. Libya is
experiencing a period of instability, and it should
not be held responsible for the effects of an
international phenomenon that it did not cause, but
of which it has been the primary victim.”

“Libya is currently the victim of a large-scale,
false media campaign of defamation that tries to
portray it as a racist country. We would like to
recall that a large portion of our citizens, especially

That concludes the official statement of the
President of the Presidency Council. I would like to
make the following observations in my capacity as
Chargé d’affaires.

20/21

17-40016

28/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Having just read out the official statement of the
President of the Presidency Council of the Government
of National Accord, I would like to express my country’s
appreciation for the noble humanitarian role that is
being played by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in helping illegal migrants.
However, I would like to point out that today we are
discussing illegal migrants, who are risking their lives
for economic reasons in search for a better life, and not

S/PV. 8114

refugees. There is a difference between illegal migrants
and refugees according to United Nations terminology
and international conventions that address these issues.
I would also like to reiterate the importance of the
cooperation that exists between the Government of
National Accord and the International Organization for
Migration in order to help illegal migrants and arrive at
appropriate solutions to their status.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

17-4001621/21
