United

Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Monday,

Official Records
FOURTH EMERGENCY SPECIAL SESSION
CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 6:
Question considered by the Security Council at its 906th
meeting on 16 September 1960 (concluded)
81
Agenda item 3 :
Appointment of a Credentials Committee (concluded)
Report of the Credentials Committee
103
Statement by the President
105
Closing of the session
106
President: Mr. Victor A. BELAUNDE (Peru).
AGENDA ITEM 6
Question considered by t h e Security Council at its
9 0 6 t h meeting on 16 September 1960 (concluded)
1. Mr. GRYAZNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian) : Owing to the
attitude which the United States and its partners have
adopted over the Congo, the Security Council resolutions of 14 July [S/4387] and 22 July [S/4405] and
of 9 August 1960 [S/4426], designed to deal with the
difficulties in the Congo and to provide assistance for
the young African Republic, are not being implemented. Action fundamentally conflicting with these
decisions is even being taken in the Congo, under cover
of the United Nations flag.
2. As a result of this action, the situation in that
Republic has so deteriorated that it has begun to constitute a mortal threat to the cotvntry's territorial
integrity and political independence, a threat to peace
and international security.
3. Through the fault of the United States and its
N A T O allies, the Security Council, at its last meeting
[906th meeting], was unable to take any concrete decisions calculated to promote a return to normality in
the Congo. The United States, whose representatives
talk so much about assistance to the Congolese people
and about the struggle for independence, at first did
not want the Security Council to meet at all, obviously
counting on the emergence in the Congo of a state of
affairs that would be to United States advantage. After
many countries had insistently demanded immediate
action by the Council, the United States and its partners did their best to prevent the representatives of the
Congolese Government from participating in the
Council's work.
4. Now, we may well ask, can we discuss the situation in the Congo without the lawful Government of
the country, which in a very brief space of time was
repeatedly confirmed in power by Parliament and the
Senate, being a party to the discussion? How can we
proceed in this way, seeing that all the Council s deci81

(CLOSING MEETING)
I960,
19 September
at 8.15 p.m.

New York

sions on the Congo have been taken in connexion with
a request from that very Government?
5. Having prevented the Council from taking constructive decisions which might contribute to a return
to normality in the Congo, the United States put forward the demagogic proposal that the General
Assembly should meet in emergency special session.
We may well ask why they need this emergency special
session and why they are in such a hurry. We think
that everyone understands the United States' hidden
aims. The United States does not want a comprehensive and detailed discussion of this question at the
fifteenth session of the General Assembly, in which the
Heads of State and Heads of Government of a number
of countries, including many African ones, will take
part.
6. May I turn next to the way in which the Security
Council resolutions of 14 and 22 July and 9 August
1960 have been carried out? In these resolutions the
tasks and duties of the United Nations and its forces
in the Congo are set out with perfect clarity and
accuracy. But it must regretfully be pointed out that
the actions of the Secretary-General and of the United
Nations Command in the Congo have often been in
conflict with the Council's decisions.
7. Recently the United Nations Command and the
responsible officials of the Secretariat have, in essence,
become accomplices in the colonialist conspiracy against
the Congolese people and its lawful Government,
elected in accordance with the country's constitution
and enjoying the population's full confidence.
8. Let us see how the Security Council resolutions
on the withdrawal of the Belgian troops from the
Congo have been carried out.
9. In its resolution of 14 July [S/4387], the Security
Council called upon the Government of Belgium to
withdraw its troops from the territory of the Republic
of the Congo. It would seem that the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Command in the
Congo should have taken all the necessary steps to
ensure that that decision was carried out as soon as
possible. In actual fact, the armed intervention against
the Congo continued even after the Security Council
had adopted that decision.
10. What were the United Nations forces in the
Congo doing in the meantime? What were they
engaged in? They were deploying and taking up positions—to put it that way—and, in the process, were
often being sent to areas and towns where no Belgian
troops existed and where there was no need for the
forces' presence.
11. The Belgian Government, relying on the support
of the United States and the other Western countries
interested in the maintenance of the colonial régime
in the Congo, continued daily to send additional army
units into the country. Everyone knows this, and the
Belgian representative who has denied the fact will be
unable to mislead the Assembly. It is moreover charA/PV.863

82

General Assembly — Fourth Emergei

acteristic that these reinforcements were coming in
simultaneously with the arrival of United Nations
units in the Congo.

12. After the Security Council had adopted its resolution on the withdrawal of Belgian troops from the
Congo, Belgium seized a number of Congolese towns
and important strategic points. The cities of Leopoldville, Coquilhatville, Kindu and others were occupied.
The Belgian military bases at Kamina and Kitona
became the focal points for the subversive activity
directed against the Republic of the Congo. Simultaneously the Belgians, acting in accordance with the
colonialist principle of "divide and rule", embarked
upon an active policy of undermining the territorial
integrity of the Republic of the Congo.
13. It was perfectly clear that in these circumstances
the Security Council had to occupy itself once more
with the situation in the Congo. In its resolution of
22 July [S/4405], it called upon the Government of
Belgium to implement speedily the resolution of 14 July
1960 on the withdrawal of the Belgian troops, and it
authorized the Secretary-General "to take all necessary
action to this effect", These words "all necessary
action" need emphasizing.
14. It was therefore useless for Mr. Hammarskjold
to try, as he has done here, to show that he did not
have sufficient powers to fulfil this task. He did, in
point of fact, have such powers.
15. In the same resolution, the Security Council
requested all States "to refrain from any action which
might undermine the territorial integrity and the
political independence of the Republic of the Congo".
16. But those decisions of the Council were not
carried either.
17. To camouflage its aggressive actions in the
Congo, Belgium withdrew some of its troops from the
country, while at the same time reinforcing the garrisons at its military bases and in Katanga.
18. The traitors to the Congolese people—the separatists of the Tshombé type and others—threw all
restraint aside, having received massive support from
the foreign States whose economic interests in Katanga
are at the bottom of the attempts to split the country.
19. As for the United Nations Command, on the
pretext of non-interference in the Congo's internal
affairs, and in violation of the Security Council resolutions of 14 and 22 July, it not only failed to give the
necessary assistance to the lawful Government of the
Congo in its efforts to safeguard the territorial
integrity and political independence of the country,
but indeed took every measure to impede it in this
task.
20. It is common knowledge that the SecretaryGeneral's representative, without consulting the Government, proceeded to Katanga for talks with Tshombé.
The Secretary-General and other United Nations
officials in the Congo began dealing with Tshombé, the
Belgian puppet, as with an equal. Tshombé was making
one demand after another and, strangely enough, the
representatives of the United Nations met these brazen
demands with compliance. For example, the SecretaryGeneral refused to allow the lawful representatives of
the Republic of the Congo to proceed to Katanga, and
on a subsequent occasion he postponed—following objections by Tshombé—the implementation of an earlier
order for the dispatch of United Nations forces into
Katanga.

Special Session — Plenary Meetings
21. All these facts show that the actions of the
Secretary-General and of the United Nations Command
in the Congo have been in conflict with the Security
Council resolution of 14 July, which stipulates that the
Secretary-General must "take the necessary steps, in
consultation with the Government of the Republic of
the Congo, to provide the Government with such
military assistance as may be necessary".
22. In his statement of yesterday, 18 September
[859th meeting], the Secretary-General tried to prove
that both he and his representatives in the Congo had
been in constant consultation and co-operation with the
Central Government. However, he omitted to name the
persons in the Congolese Government whom he consulted and with whom he maintained contact. The only
clear fact that has emerged from his statement is that
he did not deem it necessary to consult with the Prime
Minister and Head of that Government, Mr. Lumumba,
and that he obviously ignored him.
23. Spokesmen for the Central Government of the
Congo have repeatedly made official statements to that
effect, both at press conferences and in letters to the
United Nations. In this context I could quote, in
particular, the letter [S/4448] dated 20 August 1960
from the Prime Minister of the Congo to the SecretaryGeneral.
24. On 9 August the Security Council adopted a
decision calling for the immediate withdrawal of the
Belgian troops from Katanga so that United Nations
forces could enter the province. The United Nations
forces did enter Katanga but, in spite of that, the
withdrawal of the Belgian troops continued to be
delayed. One deadline after another was set, but to
this day there are still Belgian troops in the Congo;
they remain at the Kamina and Kitona bases. In
Katanga the henchmen of the Belgian aggressors were
given a free hand to carry out subversive actions
against the Republic of the Congo. Even after the
arrival of the United Nations forces in Katanga, the
Belgians continued, and are continuing, to bring
weapons into the province; and this, of course is not
a technical error as the Belgian representative has
asserted, but premeditated action by the colonialists.
25. The United Nations Command followed a totally
different line in its dealings with the lawful Government of the Congo. The United Nations forces deprived
Mr. Lumumba's government of access to the radio
station; they seized all the airfields and made it impossible for the Prime Minister and other officials of
the Government to move freely about the country.
They went so far as to threaten to use their weapons
against the Head of the Government of the Republic if
he tried to board an aircraft or broadcast an appeal to
the people. All this was done under the cloak of noninterference in the Congo's internal affairs.
26. The Secretary-General has told the Assembly
[859th meeting] that the United Nations forces could
not and should not interfere with the Congolese National Army which, according to him, was free to side
with the Government or against it. But in this context
it is_legitimate to ask why the Secretary-General tried
to disarm the Congolese Army when it was defending
the interests of the lawful Government and the people
of the Congo, and why the United Nations Command
is taking no action against Congolese Army units which
have refused to obey orders, are not allowing Parliament to meet and are impeding the activity of the lawful Government of the country. Bearing in mind that
the United Nations forces have, in essence, been

863rd meeting —19 September 1960
83
assisting traitors like Tshombé and his kind in their
ore is magnificent and so is the organization; the only
acts of subversion, it becomes obvious that the actions
doubt is political.
of the United Nations Command in the Congo can be
34. This explains why the United States shows such
regarded only as tantamount to the establishment of
an interest in the Congo and why it is opposed to
an occupation régime in the country.
Mr. Lumumba's government, which has set itself the
goal of consolidating the independence of the country
27. A conspiracy was organized to overthrow the
and of liberating it from the yoke of all the colonialists,
legitimate Government of the Congo. It is beyond doubt
including the Americans, and not only the Belgians.
that the organizers of this odious affair were Belgium
and the Western countries behind it. It should be
35. The colonialists have pursued the course of dispointed out that the United States representative had
organizing the Congo's economy. Under the protection
clearly admitted, in the course of near-polemics in the
of the United Nations forces, the Belgians have reSecurity Council, that the colonialists were plotting
moved from the Congo gold, valuables, money and
something against the lawful Government of the
specialists in an attempt to bring the Republic of the
Congo.
Congo to economic collapse, cause famine and even
more wide-spread unemployment, and provoke unrest
28. At the 899th meeting of the Security Council, the
throughout the country. They needed this in order to
United States representative made unambiguous use
create the impression that the Central Government of
of expressions such as: "it is neither necessary nor
the
Congo is incapable of getting the country's
appropriate in the present circumstances—by that I
economic life going.
mean today, at this moment—" [S/PV.899, para. 10]
36. In these circumstances the Government was
in reference to the question of inviting the representaforced to turn for economic assistance to other peacetives of the Congo to attend the Council meeting.
loving States, and this request met with timely
Referring to the delegation appointed by the Prime
response.
Minister of the Congo to take part in the Council
meetings, he remarked : "if he (i.e., the Prime Min37. The objections raised here to assistance for the
ister) still be the Prime Minister . . . " [ibid., para. 12].
Republic of the Congo being provided outside the
United
Nations merely prove that the objectors wish
29. Is it not clear from these remarks that the
to
deprive
the Congo of the rights enjoyed by every
colonialists had then already set in motion plans for
independent State. These objections are not dictated
overthrowing the lawful Government of the Republic
by any desire to give real assistance to the Congolese
of the Congo? As for the United Nations forces, they
people; their purpose is the use of assistance through
continued to ignore the lawful Government and to
the United Nations in order to consolidate the positions
assist all kinds of subversive and separatist elements
of the United States and of the other colonialists.
outside and inside the country.
38. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR takes the
30. This attitude on the part of the Secretary-General
view that the General Assembly at its present emerand other United Nations officials in the Congo has
gency special session must condemn Belgium's armed
led to a most grave situation in the country, which has
aggression against the Republic of the Congo and must
been plunged into total disorder and lawlessness.
demand from the Belgian Government the immediate
Responsibility for this state of affairs in the Congo
and complete withdrawal of all its troops and military
falls squarely on Belgium and its NATO allies, and on
personnel from the territory of the Congo, whatever
leading officials of the United Nations, whose actions
the pretext for their presence there.
have furthered and sometimes directly promoted the
39. The General Assembly must ensure absolute
designs of the colonialists and their henchmen.
compliance with the Security Council's resolutions of
3 1 . As a result of the prolonged rule of the Belgian
14 and 22 July and 9 August 1960 regarding the withcolonialists, the Republic of the Congo has remained
drawal of the Belgian forces from Congolese territory
economically backward. Side by side with the Belgians,
and the maintenance of the territorial integrity and
the monopolists of the United States, the United
political independence of this Republic, without perKingdom and other capitalist countries are taking part
mitting any interference in the country's internal
in the exploitation of the Congolese people and its
affairs.
wealth. The following, for example, will show who
40. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR fully
owns the wealth of the Congo.
supports the draft resolution submitted by the delegation of the Soviet Union [A/L.293], because it is inline
32. The economy of the Congo is dominated by a
with the interests of peace and the maintenance of the
powerful company, the Union Minière du HautCongo's territorial integrity and political independence.
Katanga, a cartel belonging to the monopolists of Belgium, the United States and the United Kingdom.
41. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR conThis company accounts for 60 per cent of the cobalt
siders that, taking into account the situation—the new
produced in the world (excluding the socialist counsituation—now obtaining in the Republic of the Congo,
tries), 10 per cent of the uranium and 8 per cent of
it is absolutely necessary to discuss this question
the copper produced. Last year the shareholders
thoroughly at the fifteenth session of the General
received a dividend of 34 per cent, i.e., more than three
Assembly, at which the Heads of many Governments
times the usual profits of the capitalists.
will be present.
42. Mr. RITCPIIE (Canada) : Throughout the re33. According to press reports the Rockefellers, the
cent months of the crisis in the Congo the Canadian
American millionaire family, in 1950 acquired 600,000
Government has been guided by a desire to see that
shares in the major Belgian company working the
country emerge as a stable, prosperous and independent
mineral wealth of the Congo. The London Observer
State fully able to take its place among the other
stated on 10 July 1960 that Rockefeller's operations
States of Africa and in the United Nations family.
i n Katanga brought him considerable profit. "For the
Canadians have the greatest sympathy for the CongoRockefellers"—the newspaper pointed out—"participalese people in these hours of trial. W e have watched
tion in the. Belgian enterprises in Katanga provides a
with close and warm interest the emergence of inbrilliant opportunity for profitable speculation" ; the

General Assembly — Fourth Emergency Special Session — Plenary Meetings
which they have shown, if I may say so, throughout
dependent nations, first in Asia and more recently in
this troubled period.
Africa. We have been glad to offer whatever assistance
we could to facilitate this very important and promising
48. Non-African Members too have responded quickly
development.
and generously to the requests of the Secretary-General
for assistance in carrying out the heavy task. The ex43. The Canadian Government has been fully alive
tent and significance of the United Nations operation
to the dangers and difficulties which have prevailed in
in the Congo really qualify it as the most important
the Congo. Essentially we believe that in the long run
challenge, I think, ever met by this Organization. The
the situation there can only be remedied by the people
combined effort on the part of so many Members has
of the Congo themselves. In their own way they must
been a really impressive demonstration of international
meet the challenge thrust upon them by this sudden
co-operation under the United Nations. It must not be
emergence into statehood. They must solve the problem
allowed, in the Canadian view, to fail of its purpose.
of separatism, which may be largely the result of traditional forces, but which has political causes of more
49. The most pressing requirement of this emergency
recent origin. This separatism, however, must be overspecial session is to ensure that sufficient support is
come if the Congo is to survive as a nation and if the
forthcoming to sustain the United Nations effort in the
dangers of the present situation are to be avoided.
Congo.
44. No independent nation would be prepared, in our
50. In this debate and in the earlier proceedings in
opinion, to submit to outside dictation or to interthe Security Council, we have heard sharp and very
ference as to the kind of constitutional arrangements
unjust criticism of the Secretary-General. This kind of
which should be made. The evolution of a national
activity has been counter to the real interests of the
constitution, with the governmental form and processes
United Nations in the Congo, and indeed counter to
which it should embrace, is of the very essence of inthe interests of the Congolese people themselves, whose
dependent statehood. Any attempt to impose a solution
main hope for future independence must lie in close
from outside would not only be improper but would
co-operation within the United Nations. We believe
be likely to fail because it fell short of the national
that this emergency special session should act to ensure
aspiration. In the Congo, however, there has been a
that all Member States refrain from political interrecognition that help is needed from the outside to
ference and military assistance outside the framework
assist in setting the new State on a stable course.
of the United Nations mandate in the Congo.
Shortly after independence, as we know, the country
51. I have already referred to the heartening response
was plunged into serious disorders which have disfrom
Member States to meet the needs of this emerrupted political and economic life. Assistance was
gency situation. There is surely no doubt that our
urgently needed, first to restore order, but over a
efforts must be sustained in the months to come if the
somewhat longer period to organize the administrative
United Nations assistance to the Congo is to be truly
services needed to give political and economic reality
effective. A serious and sizable problem will be the
to the new national independence.
financing of the United Nations operations there. It
45. Very wisely, the Congolese Government turned
must be fully recognized, however, that the dangers in
to the United Nations for that help and the Security
the Congo situation are sufficiently great and the politiCouncil responded with its resolutions of 14 July
cal consequence for Africa sufficiently important to
[S/4387] and 22 July [S/4405], and later of 9 August
make it imperative that the political decisions of the
[S/4426]. As a result, the resources of the United
United Nations be backed with material means. I t is
Nations and its specialized agencies have been moessential, moreover, that the broadest possible measure
bilized on a growing scale.
of support be provided in furtherance of the United
Nations efforts in the Congo to bring about stability
46. At the focal point of this complex effort by the
and peace.
United Nations, and indeed its mainspring, has been
the Secretary-General. I am honoured to pay the
52. Turning to the draft resolution
[A/L.292/Rev.l]
highest tribute to the unstinting and unhesitating way
before us, submitted in the names of Ceylon, Ghana
in which he has served us all and the cause of peace
and fifteen other nations, I should like to say that it is
in carrying out this most difficult mandate which has
the assumption of our delegation that this draft resobeen given to him. Drawing on his limitless patience
lution is designed to serve the very aims I have already
and diplomatic skill, the Secretary-General has
mentioned. Among other things, it requests the Secreeffectively led the United Nations team in the Congo,
tary-General to continue to take vigorous action to
whose loyalty and devotion we also acknowledge.
carry out the mandate given to him by the Security
Without this guidance and devotion to duty, these
Council; it appeals to the Congolese people to seek
United Nations operations would have foundered long
a speedy solution by peaceful means of all their internal
ago and the people of the Congo, and the members of
conflicts. It requests all States to refrain from action
this Assembly and the world at large would have faced
which might impede the restoration of law and order,
a disaster of major proportions in this important part
and especially through the provision of arms, military
of Africa.
personnel and other assistance for military purposes
outside the framework of the United Nations mandate.
47. At the same time, I should like to pay warm
Therefore, for the reasons which I have stated, the
tribute to the independent African States, whose conCanadian delegation will support this draft resolution.
tribution to and support of the United Nations in this
formidable effort have been really decisive. Without
53. In view of the Canadian attitude on the seven teenthe highly efficient contingents from the African States,
Power draft resolution, I need hardly comment on the
without the wise counsel of African representatives in
draft resolution [A/L.293] submitted by the Soviet
the Security Council and in consultations with the
Union. I would only place on record, however, that in
Secretary-General, the United Nations role in the
conformity with its own past record of support for the
Congo would not have been possible. The leaders of
United Nations, the Government of Canada responded
independent African States deserve our praise for the
to the urgent request of the Secretary-General for
responsible statesmanship and the political wisdom
assistance by providing a contingent of army specialists
84

863rd meeting —19 September 1960
tit
ai
tni
it
»e
is
il
>e
y

s
e
ii

Y
t
e

who were selected specifically for their technical competence and their linguistic qualifications. It is utterly
absurd to suggest that this response to an emergency
requirement can in any way be regarded as a sign of
aggressive intent, just as it is absurd to argue that
membership in the N A T O alliance is in any way incompatible with rendering support and assistance to
the United Nations. The Canadian Government firmly
rejects both these suggestions.
54. Mr. A V E R O F F T O S S I Z Z A (Greece) (translated from French) : A grave hour has again struck
for the United Nations. In this hall, and in neighbouring rooms, during the last few years, we have
lived through many a difficult hour. W e have dealt with
problems of the utmost gravity, which threatened us
and the entire world with the direst fate. We have
managed to survive these various crises, and the credit
must go to the United Nations, to its wise decisions
and the faithful execution of those decisions by our
eminent Secretary-General, who earned the appreciation of all at the time.
55. The crises which we have avoided, and which
might have brought disaster, were very grave and
frequently raised complex problems. The problem we
are dealing with today is likewise grave, both for the
peoples directly concerned and because of its more
general long-term consequences, which it would be
naive to ignore. However, the problem is even more
complicated in this instance because it has two aspects
which are entirely fundamental to it. One of these concerns the attitude of third parties, particularly third
parties who, rightly or wrongly, wish to be more
directly concerned in it. This aspect is difficult and
complex enough, but it can at any rate be discussed and
disposed of, and with a little goodwill, agreement might
even be reached. But, the other fundamental aspect we
cannot discuss; it is entirely beyond us. Would it be
an excess of scepticism to inquire what precisely the
situation in the Congo was last night? And whether
it is the same today and will be the same tomorrow?
Who represents the new Republic in a manner which
reflects the true situation?
56. I know there are arguments in support of answers
all pointing in the same direction, but I am equally
sure that there are arguments in favour of answers
all pointing in the opposite direction. Thus one of the
most basic factors of the problem is unknown. Indeed,
it is highly likely that one of the basic factors of the
problem is as yet non-existent. On a question which
is so serious because it is so ill-defined, it is extremely
easy to indulge in polemics. It is also useless, and
perhaps even harmful.
57. My country is concerned about the fate of the
Congo, not only on principle and for reasons of a
general nature, but also for very special reasons.
Thousands of my fellow-countrymen live in the Congo,
have settled there and wish to continue, with the permission of the Congolese people, to live and to work
in the country, in a fraternal spirit and with a constructive purpose. Consequently, my Government is
particularly eager to see peace restored in that vast
country which was offered its independence with
dignity and without delay.
58. We are convinced that there is only one means
of achieving the peace which the Congo must have before it can enjoy independence, dignity or well-being;
that means is the United Nations. If one State intervenes in any manner, and if its intervention appears
to be inoffensive or actually is so, there is absolutely
no doubt that another State will intervene tomorrow

85
and a third the next day. That is in the nature
of things; it cannot be avoided.
59. However, to abandon the Congo to its fate today
would be to deliver it over to famine, disease and perhaps civil war. Consequently the United Nations must
clearly take a hand and make decisions in accordance
with the Charter.
60. May I be allowed, in conclusion, to express the
view that the best proof of concern for the fate of the
peoples of the Congo that can at this time be given is
complete abstention from any direct intervention—I
repeat, any such intervention—or offer of direct assistance otherwise than through the United Nations. I
believe that this would truly demonstrate concern for
the welfare of the new Republic.
61. The United Nations has proved its worth in cases
where world peace was threatened and when the situation was more serious than it is today. It now has a
further opportunity to prove its worth in the case of
the Congo, in the interests of the continent, of the
world as a whole, and indeed of the United Nations
itself. This point in regard to the future of the United
Nations must be emphasized. The conflict of views is
such, the United Nations has become involved to such
an extent and the situation has developed in such a
manner, that failure by the United Nations in this
instance would undoubtedly do harm and might even
prove fatal to this Organization, though it grew out
of the bloodshed, the sorrows and the hopes of humanity. It would be all the more deplorable since, I
repeat, the United Nations has proved its worth in
even graver hours and, on this occasion too, it can
rapidly and effectively bring true independence and
true dignity to the people of the Congo.

62. The United Nations is ready to act. It has appropriate organs—organs to take decisions and organs
to implement those decisions. They too have proved
their worth, and I should like to take this opportunity
to state, on behalf of the Greek Government, that we
have complete faith in the principal executive organ,
the Secretary-General and his staff, whom we have
seen at work in times of stress in the plains of the Nile
Valley, and of the valley of the Euphrates, on the
shores of Lebanon and elsewhere. Why are they alleged
to have failed only in the present instance? In our
view, the abilities and the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral have been among the most important factors
contributing to the prestige and effectiveness of the
United Nations. Those of us who have been here
longest know that the Secretary-General has had plenty
of experience. Considering the difficulties of the situation in the Congo, we are convinced that he has once
again acted with great wisdom, courage and objectivity.
My country, involved without intent or desire in one
of the delicate aspects of this major upheaval in the
Congo, has also had direct and concrete proof of the
Secretary-General's objectivity.
63. As a result of its geographical position and the
large-scale emigration of its nationals, Greece is particularly interested in the fate of this vast continent
where so many young and vigorous peoples are now
emerging. It hopes whole-heartedly that the dignity and
welfare of the African peoples will be preserved and
it is prepared to make its own modest contribution to
that task. For that reason, at the conclusion of this
debate my delegation will vote in accordance with the
general position which I have had the honour to
outline.
64. Mrs. ROSSEL (Sweden) : The Swedish Government and the Swedish people have followed with

General Assembly — Fourth Emergency Special Session — Plenary Meetings
86
measures of this kind be decided upon and carried out.
great interest and sympathy the process by which an
If there is justification for expecting solidarity toward
increasing number of countries in Africa and Asia have
the United Nations on the part of all Member States,
attained full national independence. It is fitting that the
this applies especially to the authorities of the country
United Nations should shoulder an important part of
in whose interest and at whose request the action was
the responsibility for carrying forward this process in
initiated. All groups in that country must make loyal
peace and in a way which contributes to stability in the
and whole-hearted attempts to settle their internal congeographical regions concerned.
flicts for the good of the whole country and to refrain
65. We consider it to be of special importance that
from all measures that would favour, or be to the
the new sovereign States should be allowed freely to
detriment of, the special interests of another country.
choose their own line in foreign policy without undue
We have a right to assume that no group in the Congo
influence or pressure from any quarter. Furthermore,
takes it upon itself to act against these principles.
the United Nations should try to meet the requests of
70. It is the earnest hope of the Swedish Government
these countries for such material aid as can create an
that all parties concerned, and in particular the great
economic foundation for their political independence.
Powers, will be able to agree to carry on the United
66. Against this background, we found it natural and
Nations action in the Congo. The draft resolution
proper that the United Nations should take action,
presented by a number of African and Asian States
after the tragic events in the Congo, to render assist[A/L.292/Rev.l]
seems to us to offer the necessary
ance for the maintenance of law and order, as well as
basis for such an understanding, and the Swedish
to furnish material aid. In accordance with this attidelegation is therefore prepared to support this draft
tude, the Swedish Government has willingly made
resolution.
certain contributions to the realization of this pro71.
Mr. HAKIM (Lebanon): The delegation of
gramme, at the request of the Secretary-General. We
Lebanon
has joined sixteen other Asian and African
have noted with particular satisfaction that all the great
delegations in sponsoring a draft resolution [A/L.292/
Powers, while dealing with the Congo question in the
Rev.l], I should like briefly to state the position of
Security Council, gave active support to the same basic
the Lebanese Government on the question of the
concept of the role of the United Nations which I just
Congo and the reasons which prompted my delegation
mentioned.
to propose this joint draft resolution.
67. We have heard serious criticism from certain
72. First of all, I should like to express in the
quarters against the manner in which the resolutions
strongest possible terms my Government's support for
of the Security Council have been implemented in the
the United Nations effort in the Congo. The United
Congo. The criticism, of course, has not been directed
Nations is in the Congo at the request of the Congolese
against the United Nations action as such. It has been
Central Government, for the purpose of assisting that
motivated by allegations that the measures taken in
Government in the restoration of law and order and in
accordance with the mandate given to the Secretarythe normalization of economic and social life in such a
General by a unanimous Security Council decision
way as to help in preserving the unity, the territorial
were in fact to the advantage of certain great Power
integrity and the political independence of the soverinterests and aimed at replacing one form of colonialism
eign Republic of the Congo.
by another. Furthermore, the attitude has been taken
73. Lebanon is firmly determined to co-operate with
in the same quarter that single Member States should
other Member States in ensuring the success of United
have the right to furnish direct aid to the Congo outNations action in the Congo. We wish to urge all
side the framework of the United Nations action.
Member States not to let this United Nations opera68. In the opinion of the Swedish Government, the
tion fail. Such a failure would result in serious conresolutions of the Security Council on the Congo have
sequences harmful to the prestige and authority of our
been carried out by the Secretary-General and the
Organization. My Government firmly upholds the
United Nations Command in the Congo correctly,
authority of the United Nations and would be prepared
effectively and impartially. It is evident that the crito do its part to strengthen it as an agency for peace.
ticism lacks foundation. However, some remarks of
The United Nations constitutes a bulwark for the
a more general character may be advanced in this
independence and the peaceful development of small
context.
countries, and in particular the independence of the
newly-emerging countries of Africa. Without it, the
69. When the United Nations, as in the case of the
cold war is bound to produce conditions in Africa that
Congo, gives a mandate to the Secretary-General to
will be detrimental to the interests of the emergent
carry out such measures as he may deem necessary in
nations of that continent and dangerous to the peace
his own judgement, it may well happen that opinions
of the world. The United Nations effort in the Congo
differ on the manner in which he discharges his task.
should not be allowed to fail. We should all coThis is in no way surprising. However, it is imperative
operate in preserving the United Nations from all
that once the Secretary-General has received a certain
prejudice, and, on the contrary, strengthening it as an
mandate from the Security Council or the General Asinstrument for peace and economic and social developsembly, he should be able to count on the confidence
ment in the world.
necessary for the fulfilment of his task. His motives
should under no circumstances be questioned by any74. Second, the Lebanese Government upholds the
body. Furthermore, the situation may easily arise in
Secretary-General in carrying out the difficult task
which a given United Nations action, however faithfully
entrusted to him by the Security Council. His task is
it is carried out according to the mandate and the stipua difficult one and needs our sympathetic support and
lations of the Charter, is looked upon by some country
encouragement for its successful accomplishment. No
as improperly furthering the interests of some other
one is infallible and no one can be absolutely impartial
country. Nevertheless, the country concerned should be
in the present complex situation in the Congo. But we
required to show solidarity in relation to the United
have full confidence in the good faith and the
Nations action. Only if such loyalty and the will to
good judgement of Mr. Plammarskjold and his
co-operate is shown by all Member States can collective
assistants.

863rd meeting — 19 September 1960
87
75. Third, we consider that the United Nations action
some of the essential elements in the problem before us,
in the Congo is one of assistance to a sovereign State
which may have become obscured in our debate.
and not one of intervention in its internal affairs. The
81. First, in our effort to understand what has proRepublic of the Congo is one of the African nations
duced the crisis in the Congo, we cannot accept the
which have recently acceded to independence and
notion that it is the fruit of sinister plots and conspirawhose sovereignty has been internationally recognized.
cies. Moreover, we regret the slurs which have been
I t s admission to the United Nations has already been
cast on the integrity of the Secretary-General and his
recommended to the General Assembly by the Security
staff.
It is quite legitimate for anyone to feel critical
Council. Faced with aggression and outside intervenof
this
or that measure taken under the pressure of
tion, the newly-independent Republic of the Congo
events,
but
there is no reason to doubt the vigour, the
requested the assistance of the United Nations. We
dedication
and
the honesty of purpose brought to bear
emphatically reject the view that United Nations action
by the Secretary-General and his aides on a gigantic
constitutes, or can develop into, an act of intervention
task which is without parallel in the history of our
in the domestic affairs of the Congo. It should not and
Organization.
does not in any way impair the sovereignty of the
82. The basic cause of the difficulties lies, in our
Congo. Voluntarily-requested assistance is not intervention. W e regard this principle of non-intervention
opinion, in the abrupt transition to independent status
as fundamental, and we are opposed to any intervenwithout an adequate opportunity to prepare for the
tion, whether it is practised by the United Nations
burdens and responsibilities of governing so huge and
collectively or by any Power or group of Powers. But
complicated a country. All of us who are newlyw e are convinced that the United Nations, when reemergent States have discovered in turn that the proquested, is the proper agency for assisting emergent
clamation of independence is not an end but only a
nations and for preventing intervention in their affairs
beginning. On the morrow of the independence celeby foreign Powers.
brations, the leaders of each of us have had to face
difficult internal problems and looming external dangers,
76. In the fourth place, my delegation regards as one
and each of us has made mistakes and suffered failures.
of the main purposes of United Nations action assisUnhappily, these normal pressures have been sharply
tance to the Republic of the Congo in safeguarding its
accentuated in the Congo because of the circumstances
unity and territorial integrity. We have all recognized
to which I have referred. However, we have before us
t h e Congo as one State, and would regard any attempt
the reassuring example of other new African countries
towards its Balkanization as dangerous and inconsistent
which have been making steady progress and whose
with the very nature and purpose of United Nations
leaders have been displaying a high level of statesmanaction. Partition of the Congo, motivated by the desire
ship and internal responsibility with regard to the
of certain colonialist circles to maintain their interest
current crisis in the heart of their region.
a n d control so as to permit the exploitation of the rich
83. Fundamentally, we must reject any concept of
natural resources of certain Congolese territories, is a
superior or inferior races and any belief that one counperilous enterprise which runs counter to the movement
try,
nation or people has the right to rule another. This
of liberation from colonialism which is sweeping the
applies fully to the Congo. Moreover, it should not
continent of Africa with irresistible force. The leaders
emerge from colonial tutelage in order to incur interof free Africa will oppose any such attempt towards
national tutelage instead.
t h e division of the Congo, whatever form it may take.
84. The task of the United Nations is that of fur77. Operative paragraph 2 of our draft resolution connishing temporary assistance to the Congolese Governtains a specific request to the Secretary-General to
ment until it has gained internal stability and a funcassist the Central Government of the Congo in safetioning administration, which we hope will be soon.
guarding the unity and territorial integrity of the
Above all, the Congolese people must be masters in
Republic of the Congo.
their own house. It is our sincere hope that the present
unfortunate differences amongst the Congolese leaders
7 8 . Finally, the problem of the Congo can best be
will soon be overcome, so that there will be a Governsolved by the Congolese leaders themselves, who, in a
ment in Leopoldville with sufficient authority and cohespirit of national harmony, eventually will agree to
sion to implement the sovereignty of its country. In the
resolve their differences so as to build a united, stable
meantime, it would be only just and fair for all of us,
a n d progressive nation. If they desire help in this matter
and, first and foremost, for the Congolese themselves,
from the leaders of their sister African and Asian
to recognize that however confused the picture may
nations, such help should be offered to them for the
still be, the United Nations forestalled a worse situation
purpose of conciliation and in a spirit of solidarity
which would have brought far more chaos, bloodshed
among the nations of Africa and Asia. It is for this
and suffering to that country,
reason that my delegation has agreed with the other
sponsoring delegations to include in the proposed draft
85. I should like particularly to stress the quiet work
resolution paragraph 3, the proper implementation of
which has gone on behind the political conflict in order
which would help to bring about a peaceful settlement
to keep essential services going. This has been possible
of the internal conflicts that have arisen in the Congo.
because of the wholly disinterested and willing aid of
many countries. For instance, with the collapse of health
79. It is the fervent hope of my delegation that our
and sanitary services, the population was threatened
draft resolution will be approved by the General Assemwith widespread disease and epidemics. It is a matter
bly and that its provisions will be faithfully applied with
of some satisfaction to us that in this humanitarian
a view to arriving at a peaceful solution of the problem
field Israel was able to make its own modest contribuof the Congo in the interests of the Congolese people
tion by rushing a medical team to the Congo.
themselves, of the peaceful development of the continent
of Africa and of the maintenance of world peace.
86. Second, the seventeen-Power draft resolution [A/
L.292/Rev.l]
before us rightly stresses the unity and
80. Mr. COMAY (Israel) : My delegation feels that
the territorial integrity of the Congo, and my Governeven at this late stage it should comment briefly on

General Assembly—Fourth Emergency Special Session — Plenary Meetings
of their attacks on the United Nations action in the
ment fully endorses these principles. It is easy to point
Congo serves only to aggravate the situation and to
out that the boundaries of the African countries were
undermine the authority of the Secretary-General and
artificial to start with, drawn a long time ago by outside
of the United Nations itself.
Powers without due regard to ethnic distribution,
geography or economics. But once countries have
93. We cannot subscribe to such views, which call in
emerged to independent nationhood within certain
question the highest authority of the Organization. For
boundaries, we deem it essential that the territorial
this reason, my delegation wishes formally, here in the
integrity of those countries within those boundaries
Assembly, to follow the example of previous speakers
should be respected. This is in our considered view a
and express to the Secretary-General the gratitude,
principle which must be accepted and safeguarded by
esteem and confidence of my country. This is a very
all, otherwise there can be no prospect of stability and
sincere, simple tribute from a small country and from
peace in Africa or in any other region in which new
a people which, at a time when the Kingdom of Laos
countries have been born.
is experiencing foreign encroachment and assault upon
its independence and authority, is not unmindful of the
87. It is also easy to show that within the Congo, as
efforts of the United Nations and, in particular, those
in other African States, there are a variety of tribal
of the Secretary-General, to seek a solution in keeping
groups and allegiances, allegiances which have not as
with their ideals and the principles of the Charter.
yet merged into a full sense of national solidarity and
Those efforts, calculated to assist my country in imallegiance, but there is nothing unusual about that. In
proving its economic and social position, are still being
fact, most of the countries represented in this hall took
pursued.
their present form after a process, sometimes a long and
painful process, of unification. So, too, let us have faith
94. I have mentioned these aspects of my country's
in the process of building a united Congolese nation out
peculiar problem because we have faith in the United
of many diverse components. The fact that this must be
Nations and because the problems facing the young
a process and not ab initio an established fact is hardly
nations which have achieved independence are the same,
surprising, and it should not in the long run make us
whether they occur in Africa or in Asia.
doubt the viability of the Congo as a single State.
95. With regard to the problem now under con88. . To what extent the internal structure and powers
sideration, my Government hopes that the United
within that State should be centralized or decentralized
Nations action in the Congo will be pursued until, in
is entirely a matter for the people of that country to
the interest of the Congolese people themselves, calm
decide for themselves.
and order are restored in the country. T h e situation in
the Congo is changing with such disconcerting rapidity
89. Third, my Government accepts without reservathat yesterday's opinion is no longer valid today. The
tion the guiding principle that at this stage States should
internal struggles, the secessionist tendencies, the greed
channel all forms of military assistance through the
shown by foreign chancelleries, the destructive stateUnited Nations. We have no personal interest in this
ments made by various personalities, the constitutional
matter since no form of military assistance from Israel
difficulties, the chaotic extremes of an economic situation
to the Congo has at any time been offered or requested.
which was already alarming—all these things combine
We adhere to the principle because we believe that it is
to create a picture of utter confusion, I do not wish
in the best interests of the Congolese people themselves
to describe the situation in more gloomy terms because
and offers them the best prospects of non-involvement
no one knows what tomorrow may bring there. In the
in global conflicts. We fully agree with what was said
Congo, as elsewhere, men are overwhelmed and left
by the representative of Ghana and by others, that it
behind by events which are crowding in at full speed.
would be a major tragedy for the new African States
to be dragged into such conflicts instead of being given
96. In this fluid and ever-changing situation, at the
a full and free opportunity to organize their statehood
request of the Central Government of the Congo the
and to promote the welfare of their own people.
United Nations dispatched its troops with a view to
90. Israel has many friends in Africa. This friendship
producing order and defending the independence and
is based on the deep conviction that we who are young
integrity of the Republic of the Congo. Such is the
countries should seek each other out, should share each
state of political confusion in which the Secretaryother's experiences in nation building, should in fruitful
General has had to seek the best ways and means of
co-operation with each other attack our common
carrying out the mission entrusted to him by the
enemies, which are poverty, ignorance and disease, the
Security Council.
under-developed state of our countries and the under97. The spontaneous impulse of solidarity which has
privileged state of our people. It is a friendship offered
arisen in every quarter throughout the world, in Africa,
and accepted in a spirit of complete equality, mutual
Asia, Europe and America, and in a number of counrespect, brotherhood and human dignity. And it is in
tries which in response to the Secretary-General's
this spirit that we are anxious to do whatever we can
appeal dispatched troops under the United Nations flag,
as a small country to help the Congo overcome its
is surely tangible evidence of international friendship
present troubles and move towards a better future.
and co-operation which testifies to the success achieved
91. Mr. C H A M P A S S A K (Laos) (translated from
by the United Nations in its work for peace and to the
French) : At this stage of the debate on the question
confidence which the peoples place in the Secretaryof the Congo, I should like to express the appreciation,
General.
confidence and sympathy felt by the Government and
98. After all, this Organization cannot be required
people of Laos regarding the Secretary-General perto
be, at one and the same time, insurance agent, firesonally and his wise action in the Congo crisis.
man and banker. The reason why the situation in the
92. My delegation has listened with indignation to
Congo has deteriorated to a point where it has become
the personal attacks made on the Secretary-General.
dangerous is that foreign intervention frequently has
The strong utterances of the representatives of certain
an ulterior motive. For that reason, my Government
Powers are evidence of this offensive and the repetition
would like to see any assistance to the Congo in the
88

863rd meeting — 19 September 1960
89
form of equipment or military or other personnel
purpose with the earlier ones, all the African repreprovided exclusively through the United Nations, so
sentatives, with the sincere advice of their Asian colas to prevent Africa in general and the Congo in
leagues^ continued their efforts to find a solution
particular from becoming a battlefield in the war of
embodying the same fundamental principles while at the
ideologies.
same time making progress in the right direction.
99. Experience provides abundant proof that in the
108. Accordingly, in draft resolution A/L.292/Rev.l,
world of suspicion and distrust in which we live, aid
of which my delegation had the honour to be one of the
from abroad is bound to give rise to serious intersponsors, the same central ideas are found in more
national difficulties and create sources of trouble. We
detail and in more concrete form. Thus we find,
must place our trust in the United Nations which is
in the last paragraph of the preamble, the draft resoluendeavouring, in Africa and elsewhere, to remove such
tion accepting as valid the first proposition to which
sources of trouble. Its desire to assist and defend States
I just referred.
which are weak and powerless is most strikingly con109. In operative paragraph 1 the General Assembly
firmed in the Congo episode. My delegation considers
gives its moral support to all three resolutions adopted
that all Member States should act jointly through the
by the Security Council regarding the situation in the
United Nations, the very principles of which constitute
Congo.
a guarantee of impartiality and justice.
110. Operative paragraph 2 supports the continuation
100. We therefore feel that the United Nations action
of vigorous action in the Congo in order to maintain
in the Congo should not be hampered in any way by
the unity of the peoples throughout the Congo and also
separate intervention concealing aims which imperil
in order to maintain the Republic of the Congo as an
international peace and security.
entity—one and indivisible.
101. A draft resolution [A/L.292/Rev.l]
has been
111. Operative paragraph 3 is directed to the Consubmitted by seventeen Powers. It is fully in keeping
golese people. It appeals to all the leaders in that country
with the ideas and principles I have just stated and my
to forget their differences and by peaceful means to face
delegation will be glad to support it.
the task of reconstruction and the enormous develop102. Mr. GEBRE-EGZY (Ethiopia): The crisis
ment of the Congo in a united manner. That is to say,
which engulfed the Republic of the Congo a month
it appeals to their sense of duty towards their people
and a half ago was the direct result of a colonial
to attain a stable and strong government by the fraternal
administration which ignored the dynamism of the
approach of conciliation. The paragraph appropriately,
peoples of the continent of Africa. I am certain that
and in case they need it, makes it possible for them
anyone who has examined the premises of the colonial
to avail themselves of the assistance of some Africanadministration of the Congo cannot escape the concluAsian representatives to be appointed by the Advisory
sion that had there been a liberal administration of
Committee on the Congo. The formulation is such that
t h e territory as late as the I950's, the result at the
it does not derogate in any sense from the sovereignty
present time would have been quite different. Therefore,
of the Republic of the Congo. It simply appeals to them
when we take the floor on the item before the Assembly
to make use of the process of conciliation by a group
w e do it with mixed feelings—a feeling of emotion and
of African-Asian representatives. This is a bold step
a sense of duty. Emotion because we realize the
and a constructive one, which to our mind goes to the
enormous difficulties that the leaders of the Republic of
centre of the problem, for as I have made it clear in
t h e Congo had to surmount to attain their independmy brief intervention in the Security Council [906th
ence, and a sense of duty because, the Congo being in
meeting], without a strong government in the Congo
t h e heart of Africa, we wish to see it become a stable
the chances of success of the United Nations effort may
State with a strong and stable Central Government
not be certain. For this reason and having regard to
which can effectively safeguard the unity, the integrity
the serious situation in the Congo my delegation supa n d the sovereign independence of the Congo.
ports this paragraph in particular and very much hopes
that all delegations will vote for it.
103. Thus it was at the beginning of the Congo crisis
112. Finally, operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 specify
t h a t the African States tacitly agreed on a number of
in a more detailed manner the point that I made earlier
fundamental principles which are to be found in all
in this intervention, namely, the paragraphs attempt
t h e resolutions of the Security Council. These fundato ensure the United Nations venture in the Congo by
mentals were and are:
establishing a United Nations Fund for the Congo,
104. First, the Congolese people are one and the
to be set up by voluntary contributions, and also, they
territory of the Congo must be maintained as a unit,
ensure the maintenance of law and order in the Congo
105. Second, collective action should be taken through
by continued action. Therefore, the draft resolution is
t h e United Nations in order to avoid complications that
built on what the Security Council has done until 16
could only be to the detriment of the Republic of the
September—it takes into careful consideration the
Congo and indeed of the continent at large.
various points of view advanced in the meetings at the
106. In consequence, the African States responded to
Security Council and in the General Assembly itself.
t h e call of the United Nations and sent military con113. On the basis of these considerations, it is the
tingents and other assistance in order to help maintain
hope
of my delegation that the draft resolution will
law and order in the Congo and thereby attain the
receive the unanimous support of all delegations to
goals to which I have just referred, that is, the unity
the end that as we began the United Nations venture
a n d the integrity and complete independence of the
unanimously, we may also see it move in complete
Congo.
unanimity.
107. In subsequent Security Council resolutions the
114. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Repubsame fundamental purposes are developed and specified.
lics) (translated from Russian) : The Soviet delegation
A t the present time, when the Security Council has not
appreciates the effort of the African-Asian countries to
been able, despite the persistent efforts of the African
draft a resolution which might help to solve the Congo
g r o u p , to produce a resolution identical in spirit and

90

General Assembly — Fourth Emergency Special Session — Plenary Meetings

problem. We have given this draft resolution [A/L.292/
Rev.l ] careful study and in our earlier statement today
have made certain comments on the defects to be found
in it. It was with the idea of correcting these defects
and helping to draft a resolution which might rally the
support of the greatest possible number of delegations
that we introduced our own draft resolution [A/L.293]
touching upon a number of questions which to some
extent go beyond those dealt with in the draft resolution
of the African-Asian countries.
115. But since the draft resolution of the AfricanAsian countries was submitted somewhat earlier, and
wishing, as we do, to act in a spirit of co-operation with
those countries in the solution of a question which is
of vital concern to them and, of course, of concern to
the entire General Assembly, we should like to make
our contribution to the drafting of a resolution which
would be acceptable to the largest possible number of
delegations. We should, therefore, like to propose certain amendments [A/L.294] to this draft resolution,
amendments which, in our view, are entirely in keeping
with the position adopted by the African-Asian countries on these most important questions but which did
not find a place in the draft for various reasons and
perhaps because of the difficulty of reaching agreement
among the sponsors on certain questions.
116. We should like to introduce amendments which
would, we believe, improve the text and answer the
questions which inevitably arise when we consider the
problem of the Congo—questions which the General
Assembly cannot, we think, ignore.
117. Allow me to comment on these amendments and
to submit them formally for discussion. The draft resolution frequently speaks of assistance to the Central
Government of the Congo. We fully understand the
intention of the sponsors. They mean, of course, the
Central Government of the Congo which was that country's legitimate Government and which the United
Nations has been called upon to help under the Security
Council decision. But the situation in the Congo is
somewhat fluid at present, and we cannot be quite
certain that there will be the same Government today,
tomorrow and the day after. We therefore suggest that
it would be proper, wherever there is a reference to the
Central Government of the Congo, to add the word
"legitimate" before "Central Government", for we can
by no means exclude the possibility that some unlawful
group may for a short period seize power and call itself
the Central Government of the Congo, especially if the
United Nations Command and all persons representing
the United Nations do not take measures to assist the
legitimate Central Government of the Congo.
118. It is for this reason that we suggest that it would
be more correct to refer, throughout the draft, to the
legitimate Central Government. This applies, in the first
instance, to the last paragraph of the preamble, which
states that the United Nations should continue to assist
the Central Government of the Congo.
119. In other words, we should like to preclude the
possibility of the resolution which the General Assembly
is going to adopt being interpreted as promising assistance to any Government which may temporarily set
itself up in the Congo.
120. We should not wish to help a Government that
was not legitimate, nor, we thinlc, would the General
Assembly or the authors of the draft resolution. There
cannot, therefore, it seems to me, be any objection to the
addition I have suggested.

121. Further, the operative part of the joint draft
resolution fails to give any assessment of the events
which took place in the Congo and were, in effect, the
basis of the discussion in the Security Council and subsequently in the General Assembly.
122. We do not quite understand why the authors of
this draft resolution make no reference whatever to
Belgium's armed aggression against the Republic of
the Congo, when it is clear to all that it, and it alone,
was the prime cause of all the incidents which have
taken place in the Congo. It was not without reason that
in its first resolutions the Security Council said straight
out that the activities of the Belgian forces must be
stopped and the forces themselves removed from the
territory of the Congo.
123. It seems to me again, therefore, that the authors
of the joint draft resolution should not object to the
addition, in the operative part, of a special paragraph
on this matter. We propose that it should be inserted
as operative paragraph 1, and that it should read as
follows :
" 1 . Condemns the armed aggression of Belgium
against the Republic of the Congo and urgently
demands that the Belgian Government immediately
withdraw all its troops and military personnel from
the entire territory of the Congo, whatever the cover
or pretext under which they are there."
124. Further, operative paragraph 2 refers to the
instructions which the General Assembly has given the
Secretary-General. The paragraph states that the
General Assembly "requests the Secretary-General to
continue to take vigorous action in accordance with
the terms of the aforesaid resolutions". But everyone
here must well remember that a great many representatives of various countries, including African countries,
emphasized in their speeches the errors and shortcomings in the implementation of the Security Council's
resolutions by the Secretary-General and his staff. We
believe that attention should be drawn to this fact,
although we do not propose that this should be stated
in the draft resolution in such a way as to imply a direct
accusation of the Secretary-General.
125. We propose the insertion in operative paragraph 2
after the words "Requests the Secretary-General", of
the words "not to permit violations of the aforesaid
resolutions of the Security Council", and the deletion of
the words "to continue".
126. We do not want the Secretary-General to continue to implement the resolutions in the way he has done
hitherto. We should like him to correct the manner of
their implementation, and to permit no further errors.
127. I believe that it would be quite correct, in this
guarded form, to draw the attention both of the Secretary-General and of his staff to the need properly to
fulfil the resolutions which have been adopted and to
make a serious effort to ensure that no further errors
occur.
128. In the same paragraph we should insert the word
"legitimate" between the words "to assist the" and
"Central Government". This follows from my earlier
remarks.
129. We should like the end of operative paragraph 2,
after the words "the Republic of the Congo", to be
made somewhat clearer from a purely textual point of
view. Here there» is obviously some confusion in the
drafting, for neither the English text nor, more particularly, the Russian text of this phrase, it seems to me,

863rd meeting —19 September 1960
91
accurately reflects the thought the authors wished to
the Central Government of the Congo against these
express. The wording I am going to read out should
consultations imposed from above.
not, I think, cause any objections on the part of the
134. It is for this reason that we suggest that the end
authors, for in substance there is no difference, but it is,
of paragraph 3 should be redrafted. The text, after the
we _ believe, more exact. After the words "to assist the words "with the assistance", should be replaced by the
legitimate Central Government of the Congo in the
following : "if it is requested by the legitimate Central
restoration and maintenance of law and order throughGovernment, of Asian and African representatives, for
out the territory of the Republic of the Congo", the
the purpose of conciliation". It seems to us that this is
sentence should, we suggest, read, "and in safeguarding
the sense of this paragraph as we understood it from
its unity, territorial integrity and political independence,
the authors of the draft. In this way we shall not be
in the interests of international peace and security".
creating any difficulties for the Central Government
and we shall at the same time be giving the Asian and
130. The Russian translation before me is so phrased
African countries a real opportunity of making an effort
that it suggests that the Secretary-General has been
and giving all the assistance they can in the solution of
entrusted directly with the task of safeguarding the
those difficult questions which are now confronting the
unity and territorial integrity of the Republic of the
Central Government of the Congo. It seems to us that
Congo. But, notwithstanding the many gifts of the
this in no way conflicts with the central idea of this
Secretary-General, I do not think that we can ask him
paragraph, but rather expresses it.
to safeguard the unity and territorial integrity, nor yet
the political independence of the Republic of the Congo.
135. Lastly, operative paragraph 4 reads: "Appeals
This is too formidable a task for any one man, however
to all Member Governments for urgent voluntary congifted. It seems to me, therefore, that the text I have
tributions to a United Nations Fund for the Congo to
just read out is more in accordance with the thought
be used under United Nations control • and in conthe authors wished to express in this paragraph.
sultation with the Central Government for the purpose
of rendering the fullest possible assistance to achieve
131. The English original itself, I think, is inadequate.
the objective mentioned in the preamble.-"
132. Then operative paragraph 3 reads: "Appeals to
136. What is wrong with this formulation is that it
all Congolese within the Republic of the Congo to seek
in effect gives the Central Government a very small
a speedy solution by peaceful means of all their internal
part to play in this entire matter. Everything is in the
conflicts for the unity and integrity of the Congo"—this
hands of the United Nations, while the Central Governpart causes us no difficulty. We have serious doubts,
ment is merely to be "consulted". But assistance can
however, about the second part which says, "with the
only be of value if the Central Government itself knows
assistance, as appropriate, of Asian and African repreto whom and where and to what extent it is to be
sentatives appointed by the Advisory Committee on the
given. Who ought to know the situation if not the
Congo, in consultation with the Secretary-General, for
Central Government itself?
the purpose of conciliation".
137. If we leave everything in the hands of the Secre133. In the first place, no advisory committee on the
tariat, it will mean in effect a United Nations trusteeCongo officially exists. There is no resolution of the
ship of the Congo. That is not, I think, what the authors
Security Council or any other United Nations body
of the draft resolution intended and paragraph 4 ought,
providing for the establishment of an advisory comtherefore, to be amended.
mittee on the Congo. That was done entirely on the
138. While not objecting to the substance of the parainitiative of the Secretary-General himself. He has a
graph, we should like to suggest that the last part,
perfect right to take such an initiative and he did so
after the words "to be used", should be replaced by the
in order to facilitate his task of consulting the various
following text: "by the legitimate Central Government
Asian and African countries. But no official advisory
of the Congo, in consultation with the United Nations
body of this kind exists. This wording in effect proposes
for the purpose of achieving the objectives set out in
the establishment of such a body; it sanctions the existhe preamble". The general sense of the paragraph is
tence of an organ to deal with questions of the Congo.
not changed, but our wording, we believe, gives a better
I n the first place, however, the draft resolution says
indication of the machinery for rendering the assistance.
nothing at all about the composition of this body—
which countries are to be represented on it. In _ the 139. These are the amendments we wish to propose
with a view to improving the text of the joint draft
second place, if the body is to be advisory, why is it
resolution so that it may serve as the basis for broader
necessary for us to confirm this in a General Assembly
participation
by all countries in the solution of this
resohition? Third, why has this advisory body no link
question.
The
Soviet delegation^ attitude to the draft
with the Central Government of the Congo ? If we were
resolution
as
a
whole will depend on the result of the
to permit the establishment of such a body without the
vote
on
these
amendments.
consent of the Central Government of the Congo, this
140. Mr. KAMIL (Federation of Malaya) : On the
would be nothing short of interference in the internal
very eve of the opening of the fifteenth regular session
affairs of the Congo from above, on the initiative of the
of the General Assembly we are meeting here in an
Secretary-General and with the collaboration of the
emergency special session to deal with a grave issue,
Asian and African countries. I do not think that the
which, in the view of my delegation, need not have
authors of this draft resolution intended, as it were, to
come before the General Assembly in this manner. In
impose upon the Central Government their own form of
view of its grave urgency, and had there been an earnest
consultation with Asian and African countries. From
desire for sincere co-operation on the part of all memthe conversations we have had with them we underbers of the Security Council in striving for the restorastood that they did not intend to initiate such contion of law and order in the Republic of the Congo, in
sultations against the wishes of the Central Government.
the interest not of the Congo alone, but of Africa at
If that is so, we should say so clearly, so that there
large, and also of world peace and security, this issue
will be no misunderstandings and so that we do not find
could, I maintain, have been clarified and settled in the
ourselves in a short while listening to the protests of

General Assembly — Fourth Emergency Special Session — Plenary Meetings
92
in the task of maintaining law and order in the country
Security Council itself, upon which is laid the responand of defending its territorial integrity in accordance
sibility of upholding the higher interests of the United
with the terms of the Security Council resolutions of
Nations. My delegation cannot but regret such a lack
14 July [S/4387] and 22 July [S/4405] and 9 August
of unanimity in the Council as that which unfortunately
[S/4426], for it is only in a condition of stability and
prevented the adoption of a resolution. The adoption of
order, which the Force can help bring about, unhindered
the draft resolution submitted by Ceylon and Tunisia
by outside interference, that the internal conflict in the
[S/4523] would undoubtedly have helped to clarify
Congo can be resolved by peaceful means and by the
matters and would have added fresh life and vigour
Congolese people themselves. In this regard a suggesto the mandate of the United Nations in carrying out
tion has been made for assistance towards conciliation
the gigantic mission of restoring law and order in the
of differences through the mediation of some African
Congo which, in so short a span of existence as a
and Asian members of the Secretary-General's advisory
sovereign and independent nation, has suffered so much.
committee. My delegation welcomes this suggestion.
141: The facts relating to the situation in the Congo
The fact that the African and Asian Members of this
are well known and I need not therefore recount them
Organization most intimately concerned with the proball over again. The background has been described in
lem of the Congo choose to render this assistance
detail in the many meetings of the Security Council ever
through the existing framework of the United Nations
since the Congo crisis came before it on 13 July 1960.
operation speaks volumes for the respect they have for
At this emergency special session of the General Assemthe United Nations endeavour and for the Secretarybly, I can therefore confine myself, as other delegations
General.
have done, to making some observations and statements
of my Government's point of view on the whole matter.
147. To turn briefly to the subject of economic and
financial assistance to the Congo, my delegation is
142. That there exists today an internal political and
particularly impressed by the highly commendable
economic crisis in the Congo, and that this crisis has
initiative of the Secretary-General in pointing out, in
increasingly assumed an international dimension is
his fourth report on the implementation of the Security
clearly evident both from the reports of the SecretaryCouncil resolutions, the acute financial needs of the
General and from the proceedings of the Security CounCongo and appealing for international financial aid as
cil. I could do no better in this regard than to remind
a matter of urgency. The appeal for voluntary contrirepresentatives in this General Assembly of the grave
butions is indeed a timely one, and will no doubt find
warning given by the Secretary-General when
ready response from many Member States of this
addressing the Security Council [884th meeting].
Organization which are in a position to provide the
Referring to the situation in the Congo then, the Secrenecessary assistance. Needless to say, my delegation
tary-General declared that in a perspective which might
believes that this financial aid should form a part of
well be short rather than long the problem facing the
the many-sided United Nations assistance programme
Congo was one of peace or war, and not only in the
which is already acclaimed as the biggest single task
Congo.
ever undertaken by the'United Nations.
143. I submit that this warning is as valid today as
when it was first given, perhaps even more so.
148. In this respect my delegation would like to pay
144. The fourth report of the Secretary-General
the highest tribute to the man whose devotion to the
[S/4482 and Add.1-3] on the implementation of the
cause of humanity, whose untiring efforts in the face
Security Council resolutions on the Congo situation
of taxing difficulties, and whose skill, patience and forclearly and unmistakably uncovers a potentially danbearance have made this task a working reality. I refer,
gerous situation arising from outside interference in the
of course, to none other than the Secretary-General.
Congo's internal conflict, a situation which not only
The ceaseless and determined efforts of Mr. Hammarrenders the mission of restoring and maintaining law
skjold and his able staff, both here at Headquarters as
and order more difficult and complex, but also contains
well as in the Congo, have contributed in no small
the seeds of international tension threatening world
measure to the containment of the present difficulties in
peace and security. To the Republic of the Congo itself,
the Congo and, indeed, to the remarkable progress so
needless to say, this situation represents a serious threat
far achieved in the restoration of law and order in the
to the unity and integrity of the country. My delegation
Republic. The task is gigantic as well as delicate. In
firmly believes that a necessary pre-condition for a
the face of many difficulties the United Nations Comsolution of the Congo crisis must be non-interference by
mand, which works under the direction of the Secreoutside Powers.
tary-General, has to walk the tightrope of impartiality
and neutrality.
145. It is only through non-interference that the
Congo can be shielded from the threat of becoming a
149. Many unjustified and erroneous accusations have
battleground of the cold war, with all the implications
been levelled against the United Nations Command,
that that entails. Because of this consideration, and for
whose integrity and sincerity have been unfairly questhe purpose of preserving the territorial integrity and
tioned by these accusations. The Secretary-General has
political independence of the Republic of the Congo, my
been accused of introducing neo-colonialism in the Congo.
delegation would like to see a fresh call made to all
He has been labelled a conscious tool of the imperialist
States to refrain from such action as might tend to
Powers. He has been branded an accomplice of evil
impede the restoration of law and order and the exercise
intrigue aimed at undermining the territorial integrity
by the Government of the Congo of its authority. More
and political independence of the Republic of the Congo.
important, in the context of the present situation in the
Under normal circumstances these charges, because of
Congo, all States should refrain from providing any
their fallacious character, could easily be dismissed, but
form of war materials except through the United
when they seem to have the intention of publicly disNations and as part of the United Nations action.
crediting the Secretary-General, and thereby endan146. As regards the United Nations Force, to which
gering the authority of the United Nations, in which
my country is a contributor, my delegation fully supwe small nations place our hope and faith in this
ports the continuing action of the Force in the Congo
troubled age, my delegation feels it incumbent upon it

863rd meeting — 19 September 1960
93
to speak up and take strong exception to these unwe support unreservedly the political independence,
warranted and unjustified accusations.
territorial integrity and unity of the sovereign Republic
of the Congo, which the Security Council recommended
150. In conclusion, may I stress the great significance
for admission to the United Nations.
of the United Nations operation in the Congo? This
operation represents a response of this international
157. Second, we accepted with sympathetic underbody to the appeal of a young State for assistance to
standing the appeal of the Government of the Republic
maintain its political independence and territorial
of the Congo for assistance, the request which was
I integrity. The success or failure of this operation may
addressed to the United Nations on 13 July 1960
well determine the future of the United Nations itself.
[see S/4382]. Here it is important to emphasize that
O n this note I conclude my intervention by expressing
that indicates that the presence of the United Nations
in the Congo is by invitation, on request; that the
the fervent hope of my delegation that this great
United Nations did not force itself on the country, but
endeavour of the United Nations will succeed.
had been invited and requested to come there to render
151. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): The very fact
assistance,
that we are assembled here at this emergency special
session, summoned on the very eve of the fifteenth
158. Third, we fully endorsed also the ready response
regular session of the General Assembly of the Organof the United Nations to this appeal, and we appreciate
ization, is an indication of the urgency as well as of
the generosity and speed with which several countries
,
the importance of the complex and delicate problem
answered the Secretary-General's call, enabling him to
that faces the United Nations in the Congo. The time
assemble in the territory of the Congo a military force
is late, and I do not intend in any way to add to the
of almost 11,000 troops in a few days' time. That figure
delays that have already attended our efforts in this
has since risen to 18,000. In passing, let me observe
matter over the last few days. Undoubtedly our disthat sometimes we are, in the march of events, inclined
cussions serve a very important purpose, but we should
to forget the constructive work some people do, and
I not forget that we have been discussing this matter for
here is an illustration of the dynamic energy and speed
nearly ten days, while the situation in the Republic of
with which the Secretary-General carried out the
i
the Congo is not getting any better.
Security Council resolution of 14 July 1960 [S/4387]
j
152. My delegation, as a member of the Security
in bringing into the Congo a very large force able to
|
Council, the organ of the United Nations primarily
undertake the task with which it was entrusted, namely,
(
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
the restoration of law and order in the territory of
|
and security, has, since 13 July 1960, in association with
the Congo, and making it possible for the Government
;
the delegation of Tunisia and all the other delegations
of the Congo to ask for the withdrawal of the Belgian
j in the Security Council, given its most patient, serious
troops. That is a point which in our criticisms we
1 and dedicated attention to devising ways and means of
should not fail to remember.
[
helping the Congolese people in the most unfortunate
159. Fourth, we are convinced that if international
events that have taken place in their country in the
peace and security are to be maintained, it is absolutely
short time since they gained their national independence.
essential that the Republic of the Congo be insulated
from the direct or indirect effects of the cold war, for,
153. I wish to state here firmly and very categorically
if by our indifference we permit that conflict to enter
before this august body that the only objective of the
into the situation in the Congo, we fear it will be
efforts of the Security Council has been the eventual
difficult to prevent the rest of the African continent
welfare and the harmonious development of the Confrom becoming also involved.
golese people to a full realization of their political, social
and economic aspirations. I do not need to repeat here,
160. It is our belief that the only instrument at present
at this late hour, the policy of my own Government in
available to us for such insulation is our own Organrelation to the several problems that have arisen as a
ization, and we whole-heartedly welcome the Secretaryresult of the unhappy events in the Republic of the
General's decision to exclude from the whole field of
Congo. It has been several times stated in the Security
the United Nations military forces those of any of
Council, and the records of that body are open for all
the permanent members of the Security Council, thus
t o see.
ensuring the protection of the Congo from any direct
or indirect influence by any of the great Powers.
154. My delegation has also supported several resolutions which have indicated the principles and the pur161. Now, this was one of the principles of the operaposes of the Security Council's action in response to the
tion which was put before the Security Council by the
request of the Government of the Congo for assistance
Secretary-General in one of his reports [S/4389], and
in their difficulty. Those resolutions have been referred
the Security Council accepted this principle, which
t o in the course of this debate with appreciation and
means that the permanent members of the Security
approval. The representative of the Soviet Union and
Council accepted the principle of the exclusion of
other representatives have accepted not only the usefulmilitary forces coming from the permanent member
ness of the action undertaken under those resolutions,
countries. We similarly uphold the view that we
but have acclaimed those resolutions as the best action
recognize and can deal only with the Central Governthat could have been taken for meeting the situation
ment of the Republic of the Congo. We cannot and
that had arisen in the Congo. So there is no dispute
will not encourage, recognize or tolerate any attempts,
whatsoever with regard to either the objectives of the
overt or covert, at dismemberment of the fledgling
Security Council or the actual resolutions that were
State, from whatever source or quarter such attempts
adopted by that Council.
may come.
155. This is a significant and important point because
162. We are firmly of the opinion that, given the time
of the criticism which has followed activities of the
and given the opportunity for untrammelled and disUnited Nations in the Congo.
interested discussion between several Congolese leaders,
the Congolese people will soon be able by themselves
156. Let me here briefly summarize the general printo overcome their present constitutional and political
ciples we have followed and continue to follow. First,

94

General Assembly — Fourth Emergency Special Session — Plenary Meetings
168. Therefore, if there is any one to be blamed, it
difficulties ; but we are convinced that interference from
must be the Security Council that is to be blamed for
outside, directly or indirectly, except in the capacity of
that particular action. I mention this to illustrate the
helpers and advisers, will merely add to these problems
difficulty of the position and that sometimes one mayand will tend to perpetuate the present disorders.
differ in a matter of judgement, and in such cases it
163. We do not exclude the urgent necessity of advice,
does not even amount to a mistake.
guidance from countries which are able and willing to
169. I would now like to make a few comments on
give it, and advice to the young Republics in order to
the draft resolution [A/L.292/Rev.l ] which was so
enable them to compose among themselves their political
ably introduced last night [860th meeting] by the repredifficulties and conflicts, and try to establish unity and
sentative of Ghana, and which my delegation has the
harmony among themselves.
privilege of sponsoring, in association with sixteen other
164. It is for these reasons that we supported and will
delegations of African and Asian States, and to refer
continue to support the view that the United Nations,
to a very important resolution which was adopted at
and the United Nations alone, should be the fountain
the Conference of Independent African States meeting
of guidance, assistance and advice to the Government of
in special session, at Leopoldville, from 25 to 30 August
the Congo. W e wish to reaffirm that it is for these
1960.
reasons that we not only voted in favour of, but joined
170. This is relevant to what I have tried; to say
with Tunisia in sponsoring, each of the three resolutions
about the actions of the Secretary-General which have
adopted by the Security Council.
been criticized. This meeting was composed of a large
165. Much has been heard about the implementation
number of representatives from very many African
of those resolutions by the Secretary-General and his
States. I do not wish to take up the time of the General
representatives. As we have already stated, at the last
Assembly by reading the whole of what is called resolumeeting of the Security Council [906th meeting], some
tion III, which is entitled "Co-operation between the
errors may have been committed. We must be prepared
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations", but
to recognize the probability of honest mistakes in the
there are certain paragraphs in the resolution which
execution, supervision and control of an operation of
I think I should read. Let me quote one paragraph :
such vast proportions as that being performed now
"Pays a tribute to the United Nations for the
under the flag of the United Nations, an operation
work it is doing for peace in the Congo, both by
involving 18,000 troops from 15 countries on the
effecting the complete withdrawal of the Belgian
military side, and involving an administrative and techtroops of aggression from the entire territory of the
nical crash programme on the civil side covering almost
Republic of the Congo and through the recovery of
every aspect from river dredging to monetary and
the Kamina and Kitona bases by the Government of
banking facilities.
the Republic of the Congo."
166. The Secretary-General, in our opinion, has per171. Perhaps since this proposal was adopted there
formed an extremely difficult task, under the most
have been certain changes, for the information is that
trying conditions, in a way remarkably acceptable to
certain Belgian troops have entered this province since
most of us. I wish, therefore, to pay tribute to his sense
then. I do not want to go into that, but to find out the
of dedication, to his skill, bis patience and his integrity.
spirit in which this resolution was adopted. It says:
H e may have made mistakes. Such mistakes are sometimes inevitable in operations of this kind, and sometimes
"Regrets the occurrence of incidents to disturb the
they are not mistakes but differences of opinion. May
collaboration and co-operation between the GovernI cite one instance. There are those who have urged
ment of the Republic of the Congo and the United
very strongly that the Secretary-General should have
Nations, which must be complete;
forced his way into the province of Katanga, and not
"Expresses the hope that similar incidents will be
be forced to negotiate or converse with the provincial
avoided and that all necessary steps will be taken
President, Mr. Tshombé. But there are others who
to ensure mutual understanding until the United
would have equally strongly criticized the SecretaryNations mission in the Congo comes to an end."
General if he had ignored or forgotten the basic principles of United Nations action in situations of this
172. Here we have these African States looking to
kind. A decision had to be made.
the future, and that is what we have to do at this time.
Even if any mistakes have been made in the past, we
167. But in this case, for which he is blamed so much,
have to look to the future for greater co-operation and
the Secretary-General did not take action on his own
greater mutual confidence between the Government of
judgement. H e immediately referred the matter to the
the Congo on the one side and the United Nations
Security Council. An emergency meeting of the Security
Force, or those who are responsible for the execution
Council was called and this particular question of
of our policy in the Congo, on the other. If we act in
whether in that case the Security Council would susthat spirit, perhaps such mistakes as may have occurred
pend the normal rules of the United Nations to enable
can easily be avoided in the future.
force to be used so as to obtain entry into the province
of Katanga, was considered. The resolution of 9 August
173. I would like to say that my delegation was greatly
1960 [S/4426] is the clearest vindication of the Secregratified to hear from the representative of the Soviet
tary-General in that particular instance, for that resoluUnion that he had decided to introduce certain amendtion clearly and definitely stated, in two succeeding
ments [A/L.294] to the draft resolution [A/L.292(
paragraphs, first, that it is essential for the United
Rev.l] submitted by the seventeen Powers in a spirit
Nations to enter Katanga, and second, that the United
of co-operation. _ We gathered from his statement that
Nations shall not interfere in or be used to influence the
he would put aside his own draft resolution [A/L.293]
internal affairs of the country, clearly demonstrating
if some or all of these amendments could be accepted.
the decision which the Security Council took on that
We would certainly like to welcome the offer of
occasion.
co-operation and the co-operative spirit in discussing

863rd meeting —19 September 1960
95
these matters, and we would certainly like to meet him
178. This does not mean that there is a desire to
on that level, except that we have to remember one
exclude from consideration the amendments which have
thing: that if we embark at this time on a discussion
been put before us by the representative of the Soviet
which involves the attempts to get what was termed a
Union ; but our plea to the representative who sponsored
precise legal formulation of parts of the joint draft
these amendments is to take the draft resolution as it is,
resolution, we may perhaps not reach a decision on it
because of the quarter from which it came, because of
for some time to come. That is a factor which must be
the patient efforts that preceded its formulation, and,
borne in mind.
because of their special knowledge, to place faith not
only in the ability and judgement of the authors of the
174. There is another point which I would like to urge
draft resolution, particularly of the African States, but
in general terms on the amendments which have been
in their desire to promote the best interests of the
formulated. I would like to remind members, and the
Congo.
representative of the Soviet Union, that days and nights
179. I regret having taken so much of the Assembly's
were spent by a substantial group of representatives of
time, but I did wish to comment generally on the
Asian and African countries in formulating their draft
amendments which have been submitted in this case.
resolution, and I presume that we may, on an occasion
There is only one further point before I conclude.
like this and in the context of the situation in the Congo,
I would like to make a comment with regard to operatake it that the representatives of the African States
tive
paragraph 3 of the seventeen-Power draft resoluare particularly well-qualified to understand and convey
tion. I mention this particularly because it is liable, in
the needs of the Congo situation when formulating
some cases, to be misunderstood, and it is so important
resolutions.
in the situation we are facing.
175. I do not wish in any sense to exclude the right
180. I refer to the call to the Congolese people to settle
of all members here present to take part in the formulatheir differences, their internal conflicts, in the interests
tion of such draft resolutions, nor to say that they
of the "unity and integrity of the Congo, with the assiscannot give any suitable assistance. But let us at least
tance, as appropriate, of Asian and African representaon this occasion bear in mind that this draft resolution
tives appointed by the Advisory Committee on the
was formulated mainly through the efforts of a large
Congo, in consultation with the Secretary-General, for
number of representatives of African States, who have
the purpose of conciliation".
the interest of the Congo at heart as much as we all
181. The text might have taken many different forms,
have, but perhaps in a special way; who are near
but this one is the result of an attempt to meet many
neighbours of the Republic of the Congo; who underdiffering points of view, and it is in that sense a comstand the needs, the weaknesses and the strong points
promise text. Some of us would have liked a more preof the people in the Congo more than others. We might
cise and definite text, to set up a good offices committee
at least on this occasion take the draft resolution given
to assist the people of the Congo. But I do want to
to us as a result of the patient labours of these repreemphasize that this is one of the most important ways
sentatives, place our confidence and faith in their good
of assisting the people of the Congo, as important as
judgement and understanding and accept their position
the other ways prescribed in the resolutions of the
as one which would lead to the benefit of the Congo.
Security Council which the Secretary-General has been
attempting
to implement.
176. Undoubtedly the representative of the Soviet
182. This committee is not being appointed to report,
Union, inspired by the same motive of helping the same
or to pass judgement, on the implementation of the
cause, conveyed his own ideas, resulting from his own
Security Council resolutions, or to implement them on
study, his own judgement, which we respect and which
behalf of the Secretary-General. This is something
we do not discard. He tried to improve these things.
totally different. The function of this group is to meet
But if, for practical reasons, we embark on a discussion
the people of the Congo, to discuss their political and
of a detailed kind, in an attempt to improve the draft
constitutional
difficulties and the reasons for the disresolution in such a way as to secure a precise text and
unity which may prevail in that country and find a
one that has all the legal niceties, to obtain a balance
way of settling the differences that exist between them.
between one Government and another Government by
We want that done because it is only in the last three
the test of which is the legal Government—whether it
months that the people of that country have become
should be the Central Government which is in power
independent. They might benefit by the mature judgetoday, or the Central Government which might be in
ment of people from other African and Asian States
power tomorrow, is the Government to be recognized—
who are interested in their welfare, who might be prethese are legal niceties, very elegant and very important,
pared to go to their country, advise them and guide
and we would certainly like to have them adopted if
them in the settlement of these difficulties which they
there was time to go into them all. But while we are
are facing. That is why I refer to this as an important
discussing the legal niceties of the question there is
clause.
a very serious situation developing, which we are trying
to prevent, or fires starting which we ought to be trying
183. I would therefore urge that the draft resolution
to put out.
of the seventeen Powers be accepted in the form in
which it has been submitted, and I would appeal to the
177. These are the difficulties to which I would like
representative of the Soviet Union to consider whether
to refer in a general way. I understand also that some
he might not be prepared to accept this draft resolution,
of these amendments have been considered by many of
for we are very conscious of his desire to co-operate
the sponsors of this draft resolution and, again, the
with us and of his intention to improve the text for
feeling as conveyed to me seems to be that they feel
the benefit of the people of the Congo.
the text now before the members of this Assembly
184. Mr. WIRJOPRANOTO (Indonesia): This
satisfies the sponsors of the resolution and they would
emergency
special session of the General Assembly has
not wish at this stage to enter into a more detailed
been convened because of the deadlock in the Security
examination of it.

96
General Assembly — Fourth Emerge
Council on further recommendations designed to
advance a solution of the Congo problem. The Indonesian delegation was honoured to participate in the
discussions of the Council. On the occasion of our intervention in the Council [905th meeting], Indonesia
called attention, among other things, to what it considered a key aspect of the Congo problem. This key
aspect is that the Congo must have a strong central
government.
185. This is the starting point, the positive starting
point, to resolving the turmoil in the Congo. It is a
positive approach in contrast to the negative approach
of stressing merely the absence of a strong central
government. Let us indeed abandon this negative attitude. Its advocates are obviously hoping that the Congo
will be saddled with a weak and docile leadership, open
to influences and pressures from outside. But we who
advocate a positive approach to the Congo problem want
to see the Republic of the Congo move ahead under a
strong and effective leadership, dedicated solely to
promoting and realizing the will and the aspirations of
the Congolese people.
186. These two differing—in fact, these two opposing—approaches to the Congolese problem epitomize
what is really at stake. We are confronted in the Congo
with a life and death struggle between nationalism and
colonialism. And, as I have already stated in the
Security Council, there is but one choice. The United
Nations must choose the force of nationalism.
187. It is said—I have been told—that colonialism is
dead. But it is not dead. It is still alive. It is still alive
in the Congo, and especially in the provinces of Katanga
and Kasai where the Belgian forces—in or out of
uniform—still carry on their pernicious activities. We
know that their days are numbered. What we are witnessing now are the final throes of colonialism in the
Congo. They can do harm to the cause of peace. They
are doing harm.
188. However, we are convinced that these activities
can be speedily stopped if there is a strong central
government in the Congo. A strong central government,
together with the United Nations Force, can end the
civil strife without recourse to further bloodshed. Confronted by the combined will and determination of the
Central Government of the Congo and the United
Nations Command, the defiance of the dissidents and
their colonial supporters will soon collapse. After all,
the present opposition to the Central Government of
the Congo is a political disease that calls for a political
cure, rather than an appeal to military force.
189. Another reason why my delegation advocates a
strong central government is to protect the newlyindependent Republic of the Congo from becoming a
battleground of the cold war. A weak and docile government in the Congo would inevitably find itself torn to
and fro by one side or the other in the cold war, and
thereby deprived of any possibility of exercising effective and stable leadership in the national interest. Therefore, conscious of the national interests of the Congolese
people and of the need to keep the Congo outside the
conflux of cold-war tensions, the United Nations should
not hesitate for even one minute in promoting the
establishment of a strong central government of the
Republic of the Congo.
190. It was and it is our belief that a non-aligned
Congo, free from all cold-war entanglements, will be
a positive contribution to peace. We are of the firm
opinion that a policy of non-alignment is the most

Special Session — Plenary Meetings
suitable one for newly-independent countries in order
to ensure a healthy and stable national growth.
191. Finally, our advocacy of a strong central government for the Congo is based on the conviction that this
will serve the best interests of the United Nations itself.
It is not only through the existence of a strong central
government that the United Nations can help to bring
about an end to civil strife and thus attain its objective
of a peaceful settlement, but such a government is also
the prerequisite for obtaining conditions under which
United Nations financial and technical assistance can be
utilized for exclusively productive ends, rather than for
military operations.
192. It is, moreover, important that we begin as soon
as possible to secure conditions under which the people
of the Congo, as a whole, can be mobilized to advance
the task of national reconstruction and rehabilitation.
For this we need a strong central government. It is
only in co-operation with a strong central government
which can mobilize the energy, spirit and wholehearted
support of the entire Congolese people, that the United
Nations can be assured that its financial and technical
assistance will return the greatest profit in concrete
achievements at the lowest rate of investment.
193. It is with these aims and purposes in mind that
the Indonesian delegation is sponsoring a draft resoluSince it has been clearly and
tion [A/L.292/Rev.l].
sincerely presented to this Assembly by the representative of Ghana, and noted by other sponsors, I feel
that I need not elaborate on its various provisions.
194. But I should like to emphasize that this joint
draft resolution looks towards and is promotive of a
stable and effective central Congolese Government. W e
have heard statements by some representatives concerning the lack of such a stable and effective central
government in the Congo. I am convinced that these
statements reflect a sincere anxiety over the present
situation, and consequently I expect that they will
eagerly join in our efforts to pave the way for the
formation of a strong central government in the Congo.
They can do this now by supporting the joint AfricanAsian draft resolution before this Assembly.
195. This joint draft resolution, of which we have the
honour to be a sponsor, is conciliatory in tone, practical
and flexible in its implementation and in conformity
with the declared goals of the United Nations in the
Congo. We commend it to this emergency special session
of the General Assembly for unanimous approval.
196. As I stated at the beginning of my remarks, this
emergency special session of the General Assembly was
convened to rescue the Security Council, which found
itself unable to adopt further decisions on the Congo
problem. And if this session of the General Assembly
also cannot produce the required recommendations, then
it will signify the bankruptcy of the United Nations as
an instrument for maintaining international peace in
the interest of mankind.
197. There are tremendous problems facing the United
Nations. Surely it would amount to an admission of
bankruptcy if we could not solve the Congo problem
and restore peace to this disturbed little corner of the
world. This is a decisive moment for the United
Nations.
198. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translated from
Spanish) : Although the specific points which the
Security Council has referred to the General Assembly
restrict the scope of this debate to a certain extent, we
cannot begin to discuss this subject without pointing

863rd meeting — 19 September 1960
97
out the importance and the nature of the United Nations
conditions and by influences, likewise adverse, exerted
operation in the Congo.
from abroad.
199. On 13 July 1960, when the Secretary-General,
207. At this stage in the Assembly's proceedings I
in timely, sound and forthright fashion, transmitted to
shall refer specifically to three fundamental points
the Security Council the Congolese Government's appeal
which were raised in the Security Council at its last
and unequivocally recommended that the Council should
meeting [906th meeting] and which could not be
accord it favourable treatment, the international situaresolved: first, the impartiality of the United Nations
tion surrounding the Congo problem was in some
in relation to the domestic problems of the Congo:
respects unprecedented in the life of nations.
second, foreign intervention outside the United Nations ;
and third, the economic problem.
200. A few days previously the Republic of the Congo
had begun its independent life in extremely unfavour208. As regards the problem of the impartiality of the
able circumstances. The Power administering the Congo
United Nations Force, the Assembly will recall that that
had neglected its duty of preparing the Territory for
point was raised in the Security Council in connexion
independence, and as a result the new State lacked
with the struggle between the Central Government and
stable elements capable of exercising the responsibilities
the authorities of Katanga province, a struggle having
which the maintenance of law and order and the
its roots in constitutional factors which must not be
preservation of its security entailed. A vacuum was
underestimated. The point was raised again in conthen created which led to the presence of Belgian troops
nexion with the struggle between opposing forces
and to an agonizing situation in the Congolese Governseeking to control the Central Government. In both
ment, which caused it to seek unilateral support from
instances the authorities concerned appeared somewhat
various Powers in such a manner that an armed conflict
confused regarding the scope of the Security Council
of serious proportions appeared imminent.
resolutions, especially that of 14 July. They seemed to
be under the impression that the United Nations Force
201. It would be a mistake for this Assembly to forget
had been sent to the Congo to serve as an instrument
how serious the situation was in mid-July, and to
of the Government—clearly a mistaken idea. The Force,
examine the present state of affairs without reference
in our judgement—and the Security Council has sancto the situation which prevailed then.
tioned this interpretation—has among its other func202. Faced with that situation—the situation in midtions that of preserving law and order in the Congo;
July—the Security Council acted rapidly and authorized
but it is not an instrument of the Government.
the Secretary-General to provide the Republic of the
209. In authorizing the Secretary-General to provide
Congo with such military assistance as might be necesthe Congolese Government with such military assistance
sary until, through the efforts of the Congolese Governas might be necessary until the national forces might be
ment with the technical assistance of the United
able to meet fully their tasks, the Security Council
Nations, the Congolese national forces might be able
sought to fill a vacuum in the country's internal organt o meet fully their tasks.
ization. That vacuum, however, had led to the presence
203. The Security Council thus set an unforgettable
of Belgian troops; and it and the presence of those
precedent in the protection of a State's independence
troops were creating in the Congolese Government an
and sovereignty. The Secretary-General, for his part,
understandable state of anxiety which—as I have
complied with the Security Council's instructions with
already said—led it to call for assistance from various
exemplary dispatch, with efficiency, and with a display
Powers whose presence in the Congo, outside the
of political sense and diplomatic ability which were
United Nations framework, would have given rise to
generally applauded and which considerably raised the
a serious international armed conflict. Thus the forces
prestige of the United Nations in the eyes of the world.
of the United Nations are not in the Congo merely as
substitutes for Congolese forces but on a mission of
204. A few days after the Council adopted a resolubroader scope: that of preserving international peace
tion [S/4387], United Nations military forces, most of
and security, which might have been imperilled if the
them the forces of African States, disembarked in the
state of domestic insecurity prevailing in the Congo on
Congo and took the situation in hand and Belgian troops
and about 13 July had persisted or if it had recurred.
began leaving the territory. It is an act of strict justice
to pay a tribute from this rostrum to the Secretary210. In this respect, the Security Council endorsed the
General and his staff for this vigorous action, which
Secretary-General's interpretation that the Force should
radically changed the course of events in the Congo.
neither be a party to, nor be used to influence the outThe Security Council's resolutions and records and the
come of, any internal conflict.
records of this Assembly testify to the approval accorded
211.
This decision by the Council appears in the
the Secretary-General by a vast majority of Member
résolution
of 9 August 1960 [S/4426]. Serious internal
States.
complications have arisen in connexion with this prin205. T h e problems of the Congo could not, of course,
ciple. Faced with difficult circumstances, the Secretarybe solved overnight; and even though, through the
General and the United Nations Command found it
United Nations operation, significant progress has been
necessary to take emergency measures to maintain law
made towards the virtually complete evacuation of
and order and, at the same time, preserve the imparBelgian troops, the maintenance of law and order and
tiality of the United Nations. The validity of these
the prevention of an armed conflict of serious propormeasures from the standpoint of the Council resolutions
tions, pressing problems still remain unsolved. The
has been questioned by certain Powers. We have careproblem of the country's unity is very serious; the
fully studied these measures and the circumstances in
constitutional problem is not an easy one to solve ; and
which they were taken, and have reached the concluthe problem of the political vacuum is at times a source
sion, as we told the Security Council, that the Secreof real anguish.
tary-General's action was faithful to the Council resolutions
and to the principles of the United Nations
206. Unfortunately the solution of these problems is
Charter; that it was sound action to take under
seriously hampered by adverse economic and social

98

General Assembly — Fourth Emerge

extremely difficult conditions; and that it was strictly
impartial. The Secretary-General deserves the confidence and the applause of this Assembly.

212. The constitutional and political problems of the
Congo are exclusively within the jurisdiction of the
Congolese people and, however difficult they may be,
can be solved only through the expression of public
opinion in all regions of the country.
213. The problem of foreign assistance outside the
United Nations has seriously complicated the situation
in the Congo. The Republic of the Congo needs international co-operation in order to make a good start as
an independent State ; but conditions in the Congo are
such that, if this aid from abroad is to strengthen, and
not to weaken or destroy, the Congo's independence,
it must be channelled through the United Nations.
214. The purpose of foreign assistance outside the
United Nations would appear to have been to influence
the outcome of the constitutional and political struggle
within the country, and that assistance has thus constituted unlawful intervention in the domestic affairs of
the Congo. Both the assistance given by one of the
great Powers to a certain group struggling to gain
control of the Central Government and that given by
the former Administering Power to the Katanga
authorities constitute, in our judgement, reprehensible
intervention in the Congo's domestic affairs,
215. Since the Security Council has been unable to
declare it essential that military assistance to the
Government of the Congo should be sent exclusively
through the United Nations and as part of the United
Nations operation, we consider it essential for the
Assembly to make such a declaration for, if unilateral
assistance continues or is resumed, problems of all
kinds will steadily grow more serious.
216. Closely connected with the problem of the
Congo's independence is that of economic assistance.
In order that foreign economic assistance may
strengthen, instead of weakening or destroying, the
Congo's independence, the Secretary-General has proposed the establishment of a United Nations Fund for
the Congo, financed by voluntary contributions from
Member States. The need for this measure appears
urgent and, since the Security Council was unable to
take action on it we are sure the Assembly will launch
an appeal to Member States, and that this appeal will
be responded to with generosity and vision. The maintenance of peace entails making sacrifices, and we can
be sure that those States which are able to make
voluntary contributions will react to the General Assembly's appeal as promptly as did the States from
which the Secretary-General requested military contingents and other assistance.
217. Let me take this opportunity to pay a tribute,
and to express our gratitude as a Member of the United
Nations, to the States that are contributing to the
United Nations operation in the Congo.
218. The delegations of Ceylon, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Morocco, Nepal, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan,
Tunisia, the United Arab Republic and Yemen have
submitted to the Assembly a draft resolution [A/L.292/
Rev.l] which in our judgement presents the problems
awaiting solution in a form approximating, as it were,
to the common denominator of the majority position in
the Assembly. I wish to congratulate those delegations
on their initiative, which is all the more deserving of
respect in coming from delegations whose geographical

' Special Session — Plenary Meetings
closeness to, and regional feeling for, African problems
give them special authority. The Ecuadorian delegation
intends to vote for this draft resolution.
219. As the sponsors of the draft resolution know,
we feel that some paragraphs of the text could be
improved in order to eliminate ambiguities or redundancies. In consultation with the sponsors, my delegation and others ventured to make some suggestions to
this end. The sponsors considered them carefully, but
ultimately asked us to leave the text as it stood, since
it was a compromise wording arrived at among them
by no easy process of negotiation. They have told us
that they do not intend to accept amendments to this
proposal, but to have it put to the vote as it stands.
In view of this request from the sponsors, the delegations which suggested certain changes have refrained
from pressing them. Since the sponsors' task presented
difficulties in the negotiations outside the Assembly,
we do not wish to make it more difficult within the
Assembly. It is our hope, therefore, that the draft
resolution of the African-Asian delegations will be
adopted, if possible unanimously, in its present form,
220. Permit me to close this statement as I closed my
last statement on this subject in the Security Council
[903rd meeting]. Permit me to emphasize the importance of success in the United Nations operation in the
Congo to the higher interests of peace, and to the future
of the United Nations.
221. We must not lose sight of the fact that the
African countries first and foremost, and those of other
continents as well, will continue to need the United
Nations, time and again, as a shield for their integrity,
as a weapon in the struggle against aggression, as diplomatic machinery for the settlement of disputes, as a
force to advance the great principles of the Charter, and
as a centre for the co-ordination of international
co-operation in raising levels of living.
222. At this juncture, the United Nations faces a
difficult situation in its Congo operation. If we, today,
were to allow the authority and prestige of the United
Nations to be weakened ; to allow its Secretary-General
to be the victim of an unjust campaign, unchecked by
support from the rest of us ; to allow the motives and
intentions of Member States which are contributing
generously and selflessly to the Congo operation to be
misinterpreted ; then in the future, when the efforts of
the United Nations are needed elsewhere in Africa or
in another continent, we may find, to our distress, that
the Organization had lost its vigour and effectiveness.
223. We cannot allow that to happen; but the only
way to avoid it at the present stage of events is by
joint action which, fortunately, is taking shape in this
Assembly and which, by ensuring the success of the
United Nations in the Congo today, will preserve its
authority, prestige and effectiveness in the future.
224. Mr. AUGUSTE (Haiti) (translated from
French) : For many weeks now, international news
reports have devoted their most sensational and frequently their most vehement commentaries to the Congo
crisis. The delegation of Haiti does not wish to try the
patience of the Assembly, and will therefore refrain
from analysing the situation in detail. It is an extremely
unfortunate situation, one fraught with danger for the
peace we all .seek. My delegation believes that the
primary task is to assist the young Republic in
recovering as rapidly as possible from the fever with
which it is stricken.

863rd meeting — 19 September 1960

225. The United Nations is the only agency with all
t h e means of acting with the necessary speed and in
a genuinely disinterested manner. Ever since its inception, it has provided proof of its objectivity and efficacity
n o t only in the Congo but elsewhere, in equally difficult
circumstances. However, in referring to its action,
which might be described as a kind of apostolate, it is
impossible to avoid mentioning one name and paying a
public tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Hammarskjold, who is, in a manner of speaking, the very
epitome of our Organization and who once again, in the
Congo crisis, has shown his impartiality in the supreme
cause of peace.
226. For all these reasons, my delegation will vote in
favour of the seventeen-Power draft resolution [A/
L.292/Rev.l].
227. Mr. J H A (India) : This emergency special
session of the General Assembly has been called by the
Security Council to deal with the situation regarding
which the Council itself was unable to reach a decision.
I n some ways therefore this session may be taken to
h a v e a somewhat particular purpose. The United Nat i o n s action with regard to the question of the Congo,
a n d its current operations sanctioned by the Security
Council, are among the most important and far-reaching
activities of the United Nations.
2 2 8 . The United Nations and the General Assembly
a r e seized of the Congo problem. The situation in the
Congo itself is not altogether clear. It is a developing
a n d rather confusing situation of the greatest complexity. My delegation would therefore like to deal with
t h e profound issues and problems raised by the quest i o n of the Congo, not only in its current but also in
its future aspects, at the fifteenth session of the General
Assembly which is due to convene in less than twentyf o u r hours and at which there will be no doubt occasion
for my delegation to state its views. I therefore confine
myself to the somewhat limited though nevertheless
extremely important purpose of this emergency special
session.
2 2 9 . The United Nations action in the Congo was
undertaken at the request of the Central Government
of the Republic of the Congo in the situation arising
f r o m the incursion of Belgian troops into the Congo.
T h i s had brought about chaotic conditions with all the
internal conflicts, disruptions and dangerous secessionist
tendencies which threaten the very existence of the
y o u n g Republic. My Government believes that the
Security Council took the right course by responding
t o the request of the Central Government of the Congo
t h r o u g h its Prime Minister, Mr. Lumumba. There is
n o doubt that if the United Nations had not acted at
t h a t time, not only would the Congo have suffered
internal disruption and disintegration, but it would have
become a scene of international conflict and even endang e r e d the peace of the world.
2 3 0 . W e believe that despite possible shortcomings
t h e United Nations action in the Congo has been beneficial. In our view the United Nations mission must
continue in the Congo. The alternative of direct assist a n c e by interested Powers to various groups would
m e a n the total disintegration of the Congo. Obviously,
t h e United Nations mission in the Congo must function
i n accordance with the directions given by the Security
Council or by the General Assembly. If there has been
a n y misunderstanding in the past, this could be
corrected. But the United Nations mission itself must
continue so that conditions in the Congo do not worsen.

99

231. It is well to remember that the entire basis for
United Nations responsibilities in the Congo is the
request by the Central Government. This Government
must, therefore, at all times be upheld. It is essential
for the success of the United Nations mission in the
Congo that there should be the fullest co-operation and
understanding with the Government of the Congo. The
latter, on its part, should give full co-operation to the
United Nations in its operations.
232. It has grieved my delegation, as indeed it has
grieved others, that ever since its accession to independence on 30 June 1960, at which the Government
and the people of India rejoiced, the Congo has been
the_ scene of bitter conflict, internal strife and disunity
which have made it difficult for the Central Government
to function effectively in all parts of the Congo. The
Congo is a large country, with a large and varied
population of freedom-loving Africans and with immense natural resources.
233. In order that the people of the Congo should
enjoy in the fullest measure the blessings of freedom
which has come to them after long delay and nearly
a century of colonial exploitation, nothing is more
essential than the forging of unity among the peoples
of the Congo. The future of the Congo indeed lies in
the hands of the people themselves. So long as they
are divided, so long will they be weak and unable to
fulfil their destiny.
234. We believe that the Congo should be helped to
achieve unity. The United Nations can greatly assist
the peoples of the Congo in the achievement of this
unity. It has a positive role to perform. It is desirable
that the United Nations should set in motion the
processes of conciliation. Above all, we think that the
Congo should be insulated from outside military
assistance. The rendering of assistance by the United
Nations for the maintenance of peaceful conditions
ensures that extraneous factors will not disturb or
retard the restoration of peaceful conditions, and will
help to preserve the unity, integrity and the political
independence of the Congo.
235. The draft resolution [A/L.292/Rev.l] sponsored
by seventeen African and Asian countries, in our
opinion, fully meets the present situation. It embodies
the general principles which I have indicated. It seeks
to insulate the Congo from arms and other military
assistance. It appeals to the Congolese peoples to settle
their differences and internal conflicts peacefully. It
underlines the importance of maintaining the unity,
territorial integrity and political independence of the
Republic of the Congo. It requests the States to refrain
from any action which might tend to impede the
attainment of peaceful conditions. It appeals to all
Member States to contribute voluntarily and generously
to a United Nations Fund for the Congo to provide
the wherewithal for the stability of essential and
administrative services and for the economic development of the Congo.
236. This is a constructive approach which we welcome and support. Therefore, the draft resolution
meets, as I have said, the needs of the present situation,
and my delegation will support it. In doing so, we
should like to make it clear, as paragraph 6 of the
draft resolution seeks to do, that the sovereign rights
of the Republic of the Congo should not be prejudiced
in any way. Normally we would not support an
injunction of this nature, but we believe that, in the
exceptional and dangerous situation in the Congo, this
is necessary and beneficial.

General Assembly — Fourth Emergency Special Session — Plenary Meetings
100
Security Council resolutions. It called on all States to
237. The P R E S I D E N T (translated from Spanish) :
refrain from sending any supplies or men for military
Discussion being closed, the Assembly will now vote
purposes to the Congo. The draft resolution was thereon the draft resolutions before it and the amendments
fore vetoed by the USSR, and it was necessary for
thereto.
this Assembly to be convened.
238. Rule 93 of the rules of procedure provides that,
246.
We now have before us a draft resolution
if two or more proposals relate to the same question,
[A/L.292/Rev.1] presented by seventeen States includthe Assembly shall vote on the proposals in the order
ing all the African States. I must say frankly that there
in which they have been submitted. I shall therefore
are some deficiencies in this draft which under ordinary
put to the vote first the resolution submitted by sevencircumstances we should feel it desirable to correct.
teen Member States [A/L.292/Rev.l],
and the amendIn fact, I have quite frankly voiced this opinion in
ments presented by the Soviet Union, which appear
discussion with various delegations since the introducin document [A/L.294]. The Chair will then put to
tion of the draft resolution. Plowever, we are not
the vote the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet
acting in normal circumstances; we are acting in
Union
[A/L.293].
emergency special session and we should reach decisions
239. It is the ruling of the Chair that explanations
quickly. The best, therefore, must not become the
of vote will be heard after the voting has been
enemy of the good.
completed.
247.
On the two key issues on which this Assembly
240. The delegations of the United States of America
was required to express itself, this draft is unequivocal.
and the Republic of Ghana have just requested permis248. First, the draft resolution fully supports the
sion to speak on the USSR amendments.
resolutions of the Security Council. It then asks the
241. Mr. W A D S W O R T H (United States of AmeriSecretary-General to continue to take vigorous action
ca) : In my opening speech to this emergency special
in accordance with them and to continue to assist the
session [858th meeting] I said that the historic United
Government of the Congo to maintain order and safeNations action in the Congo was at the cross-roads.
guard the unity of the Congo. This language clearly
It was at the cross-roads in two ways.
expresses the opinion of the Assembly that the Secre242. First, the actions and impartial direction of the
tary^General has properly in the past acted, and should
Secretary-General have been put under bitter and
continue
in the future to act, in accordance with those
unfounded attack from the USSR. The whole Assembly,
resolutions and in accordance with the principles set
the whole world, has heard this attack. This attack
forth in the Secretary-General's reports which the
was even participated in by the Head of Government
resolutions endorsed. The confidence of the Assembly
of the Soviet Union, Mr. Khrushchev, who said on
in the Secretary-General and in the execution of United
12 September:
Nations resolutions in the Congo is thus clearly stated.
"The colonialists and imperialists are carrying out
When contrasted with the demands of the Soviet draft
their policy through the hands of the United Nations
resolution [A/L.293] for a censure of the SecretarySecretary-General, Mr. Hammarskjold. It is not as
General, the intent of the sponsors of this draft is even
if Mr. Hammarskjold does not understand this. No,
more pointedly apparent.
he is fully aware of it and he is doing it consciously."
249. Second, the draft resolution has faced directly
This attack on the Secretary-General and the others
and squarely the realities of Soviet policy towards the
preceding and following it have now been formalized
Congo.
Operative paragraph 6 is crystal clear in stating
further in the draft resolution [A/L.293] that the
that, even though the United Nations recognizes the
USSR has introduced today, as well as in the amendsovereign rights of the Congo, it is nevertheless calling
ments [A/L.294] that it has produced to the Asianupon all States—and that must include the Congo as
African draft resolution
[A/L.292/Rev.l].
well as the USSR and its friends—to refrain from
243. Second, the Soviet Union was and is doing
allowing any assistance of a military nature in the
everything in its power to frustrate the success of the
Congo except upon the request of the United Nations
United Nations effort, by sending men, supplies and
through the Secretary-General.
equipment to the Congo in defiance of Security Council
250. I note with pleasure the straightforward interdecisions. The Soviet representative reflected this
pretation which the representative of Ghana made on
brazen Soviet desire to make a satellite of the Congo
this point in introducing the draft resolution last night :
when in the Security Council he vetoed the draft
resolution introduced by Ceylon and Tunisia [S/4523],
"We go on to say that there should be no provision
He then said—and he accused these two States :
of arms, whether directly or indirectly, or of other
materials of war and military personnel, or other
"They also said that such [military] assistance
assistance for military purposes, during the temporary
should be provided exclusively through the United
period of military assistance through the United
Nations... We consider that it is not possible to
Nations... I think that the phrase 'except upon the
take such a course." [S/PV.906.]
request of the United Nations through the Secretary244. This policy, and nothing else, is what has dictated
General' must be underlined. W e feel very strongly
the Soviet Union's cold fury against the Secretarythat no help whatsoever should be sent to the Congo
General and the United Nations Command in the
without the express request of the United Nations
Congo. This was an issue which had to be faced and
and that this help should go only through the United
faced squarely. The only alternative to United Nations
Nations medium." [860th meeting, para. 164.]
preventive action was unilateral action, with all the
grave consequences that that would entail.
251. The injunction is categorical. It is made even
more categorical by endorsing the Security Council's
245. These issues were the same as those which faced
call on all States not to take any steps which would
the Security Council. The draft resolution submitted
make the maintenance of law and order more difficult.
by Ceylon and Tunisia in the Security Council dealt
with them forthrightly. It backed up the Secretary252. For our part, I can assure the Assembly that the
General for his vigorous efforts to carry out the
United States has not sent any men, supplies or

863rd meeting —19 September 1960
101
materials to the Congo for military purposes except in
I think that it is worthwhile doing so at the present
support of the United Nations Force and at direct
juncture.
United Nations request. The United States fully intends
260. Without prejudicing the rights of my friend the
to continue that policy. It is now the responsibility of
representative of the Soviet Union, I would appeal to
the Soviet Union and any others to do likewise.
him to withdraw his amendments [A/L.294] to our
253. The draft resolution, of course, is not confined
draft resolution [A/L.292/Rev.l].
I do so because
to these overwhelming issues. It also proposes other
I am convinced that there are various points which he
constructive steps. Among other things, paragraph 3
has made and which other delegations have made,
appeals to all Congolese to seek a solution of their own
which we could have considered, but, as I said yesterconflicts by peaceful means and authorizes, as approday [860th meeting], our draft resolution is a result
priate and in consultation with the Secretary-General,
of deep thinking, considered consultation and discussion
among ourselves, and it is a result of harmony among
the appointment by the Advisory Committee of repredifferent views. If we were to listen to every representatives for the purpose of assisting in conciliation.
sentative here, I am sure that we should not have a
We concur with this appeal for a solution by peaceful
draft resolution to present. It is in this spirit that I
means and can foresee circumstances where United
make my appeal.
Nations assistance in conciliation might be useful. We
are pleased, moreover, that the language of the last
261. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Repubpart of the paragraph is permissive and that consultlics) (translated from Russian) : The representative of
ation with the Secretary-General is also envisaged.
the African-Asian group has just appealed to the
254. We must guard carefully against introducing,
Soviet delegation to withdraw its amendments
ourselves, any complicating element into the Congo.
[A/L.294] and thus ensure greater unity in the solution of this question. I must say that the amendments
The timing and nature of- any action, as well as the
submitted by the Soviet delegation have a significant
willingness of those concerned to accept it, should be
bearing on the understanding and hence the implecarefully considered before they are initiated.
mentation of the draft resolution [A/L.292/Rev.l] in
255. Finally, the draft resolution makes an appeal
question and we continue to uphold our interpretation
for voluntary contributions to a United Nations Fund
of the paragraphs of that resolution as expressed in
for the Congo to be used under United Nations control.
our amendments. Nevertheless, heeding the appeal
W e feel that the language which sets out the purposes
just made by the representative of Ghana, we shall not
of this Fund is slightly ambiguous. We take it to mean,
press for a vote on those amendments. Without the
however, that the Fund is to be used for purposes
introduction of those amendments, however, we shall
specified in the Secretary-General's fourth report
not be able to support the resolution as a whole.
[S/4482 and Add.1-3]. With this understanding, the
262.
We consider that without those amendments, the
United States will give prompt consideration to the
draft resolution before us may be used by those who,
appeal.
as Mr. Wadsworth clearly indicated today, have taken
256. The United States, in the context of these
a very definite stand on this matter. It may be used
comments, will vote for the draft resolution if it is not
by them to distort in practice the position taken by
adversely amended.
the Security Council on the solution of the Congo
257. There is also another draft resolution before us,
problem.
the draft resolution of the USSR [A/L.293]. I do not
263. In view of these considerations, and because, in
believe that too much comment on it is necessary.
our opinion, the United States representative's interT o our mind, it is full of misstatements of fact and of
pretation of this draft resolution as expressed by him
slanderous allegations against the Secretary-General,
today does not coincide with the interpretation of the
the United Nations Command and States Members
sponsors, we find ourselves unable to support the draft
of the United Nations. It demands a policy totally at
resolution in its present form. We do not wish to comvariance with the one in the other draft. The United
plicate the voting on this question and for that reason
States will vote against it and hopes that the General
we shall not press for a vote on our amendments; we
Assembly will reject it decisively.
shall, however, abstain in the vote on the resolution.
264. At the same time I should like to state that,
258. The same considerations apply to the amendments
mindful of the appeal made by the representative of
[A/L.294] which the Soviet Union has moved to the
Ghana, we shall not press for a vote on our draft resoAfrican-Asian draft resolution under the guise of
lution [A/L.293], the statements of the representatives
seeking general agreement. The Soviet Union, in our
of the African and Asian countries having made it clear
opinion, is trying in these amendments to impose its
that they want their text to be the basis for action in
own views concerning the Government of the Congo.
settling the Congo problem. We believe that a settleI t is trying to shift the attention of the General
ment of that problem will in the last analysis depend
Assembly from the Soviet Union, which has been
on the Congolese people themselves.
sending military equipment and personnel into the
Congo, to Belgium, which has been taking its troops
265. The resolution which is about to be adopted here
out. It is trying to change the draft resolution from one
can, of course, either simplify or complicate the solusupporting the Secretary-General to one critical of him.
tion of the problem, depending on how it is carried out.
It is trying to take out of United Nations control a
We are firmly convinced that if this resolution is
fund which is supposed to be a United Nations fund.
carried out in the same way as the resolutions of the
T h e United States will, therefore, vote against these
Security Council, the situation in the Congo will
amendments and hopes that the General Assembly will
inevitably deteriorate and we shall again be obliged to
reject them decisively.
revert to this problem.
266. That is why we think that it will not be possible
259. Mr. QUAISON-SACKEY (Ghana): At this
to arrive forthwith at a complete solution of all the
late hour it should have been impossible for me to be
problems which have been raised by events in the
here, but I have come to make an appeal. It seems as
Congo and that this question should be discussed at the
If I am specializing in making appeals nowadays, but

102
General Assembly — Fourth Emerge y Special Session — Plenary Meetings
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Ausregular session, which opens tomorrow, 20 September,
tralia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Burma, Cambodia,
to which we have submitted an additional agenda item
Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
entitled "Threat to the political independence and terriCuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
torial integrity of the Congo" [A/4495]. The partiSalvador, Ethiopia, Federation of Malaya, Finland,
cipation of the Heads of Government of many African
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras,
States in the work of that session will enable us to give
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
very thorough and serious consideration to this quesItaly, Japan, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
tion and we expect that in the discussion of it the
Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands,
actual results of the operation in the Congo and the
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
implementation of the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and by this Assembly will be taken
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Saudi Arabia,
into account.
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia.
Against: None.
267. Accordingly, the Soviet delegation, as I have already said, will not press for a vote either on its
Abstaining: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
amendments or on its draft resolution. We shall abstain
Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist Rein the vote on the draft resolution submitted by the
publics, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet SoAfrican-Asian group.
cialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary,
Poland, Romania.
268. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish) :
In view of the statement we have just heard from the
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by
representative of the Soviet Union, we have before us
70 votes to none, with 11 abstentions.
only the draft resolution [A/L.292/Rev.l],
submitted
272. The P R E S I D E N T (translated from Spanish) :
by Ceylon, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq,
I call upon the Secretary-General.
Jordan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Morocco, Nepal,
273.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: May I be
Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Repermitted
to say one word with regard to the resolution
public and Yemen.
just adopted.
269. A separate roll-call vote has been requested on
274. In a report to the Security Council on 9 Sepparagraph 6. We shall therefore vote first on the pretember 1960 [896th meeting] I proposed that the
amble and paragraphs 1 to 5.
Council appeal for financial support for the Republic
The preamble and paragraphs 1 to 5 were adopted
of the Congo. Owing to well known circumstances the
by 71 votes to none, with 9 abstentions.
Security Council did not reach a positive decision on
270. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish) :
this matter. Knowing the desperate needs of the ReWe shall now vote on paragraph 6.
public of the Congo, I am deeply gratified indeed by
the decision which has now been taken by the General
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Assembly on this subject. Members will undoubtedly
Morocco, having been drawn by lot by the President,
bring this appeal to the notice of their Governments.
•was called upon to vote first:
They will, certainly, permit me to do the same,
In favour: Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New
stressing the urgency of the appeal. I am sure that
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, ParaGovernments will respond with their usual generosity.
guay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
It must give the Congo and its people special satisSaudi Arabia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, Tunifaction that, whatever differences of opinion have been
sia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
reflected in the debates, there has been full agreement
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Reon the substance of this specific proposal.
public, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vene275. Having taken the floor, I may, perhaps, add that
zuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania,
I have carefully noted the explanations given by the
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulsponsors of the text of their draft resolution. These
garia, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
explanations will provide helpful guidance for its
implementation.
Cambodia, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Domi276. I have been happy indeed to note the cornican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fedrespondence between the attitude reflected in the resoeration of Malaya, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece,
lution and that of the Secretariat as presented most
Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
recently in the fourth report [S/4482 and Add.1-3]. I
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
believe that I am right in finding in this fact evidence
Japan, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxemof a fundamental and encouraging agreement with and
bourg, Mexico.
within the African world regarding the aims and
Against: None.
the very philosophy of this major United Nations
operation.
Abstaining: Union of South Africa.
Paragraph 6 was adopted by 80 votes to none, with
277. The P R E S I D E N T (translated from Spanish) :
1 abstention.
I give the floor to the representative of Brazil for an
explanation of vote.
271. The P R E S I D E N T (translated from Spanish) :
We shall now vote on the draft resolution as a whole.
278. Mr. GIBSON BARBOZA (Brazil) : In view of its
statement at the beginning of this debate [859th meeting]
A roll-call vote has been requested.
the Brazilian delegation considers it unnecessary to
A vote %vas taken by roll-call.
explain its affirmative vote on the resolution just apTurkey, having been drawn by lot by the President,
proved as a whole since that resolution conforms in
was called upon to vote first.
its general lines with the opinions we have voiced here.
In favour: Turkey, United Arab Republic, United
Of course, the resolution, being the result of an effort
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
towards the conciliation of several viewpoints, has
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
certain aspects that some of us would have preferred

863rd meeting — I September 1960
103
to have written otherwise or not written at all. But the
sitting in this hall, including the United States delegaresolution as a whole is a good one, and we congratution, is_ well aware of the validity of the Hungarian
late the Assembly on its adoption. I should like, howcredentials.
ever, to explain the affirmative vote of Brazil on
286. My second remark refers to the fact that, as it
operative paragraph 6.
follows from all this, the United States proposal has
279. We have listened with great attention to the
been put forward not from legal but clearly and solely
explanations offered by the sponsors of the resolution,
from political motives. These political motives have
from which we infer that the first sentence of parabecome obvious in the light of our recent debate. Cerg r a p h 6, "Without prejudice to the sovereign rights of
tain circles in the United States are unable to become
the Republic of the Congo", does not imply an
reconciled to the fact that four years ago they failed
encouragement to or an approval of the rendering of
to achieve in Hungary the very objectives which they
direct military assistance by any State to the Congo.
had hoped to attain in the Republic of the Congo ; that
W e take note of those assurances not only because
is, to misuse the United Nations in order to violate
they make good sense, but also because if interpreted
the independence and sovereignty of a Member State,
otherwise the sentence in question would run counter
serving their own political interest.
to t h e very sense of paragraph 6 as a whole.
287. It is understandable that these circles are un280. It goes without saying that all of us in this
able to forget that failure easily. But this cannot
Assembly recognize the full sovereignty of the Republic
prevent Hungary from following its own way indeof the Congo, a country which we are ready and
pendent of the wish of the United States Government.
anxious to admit to the Organization. What the BraThe only value of this and similar actions of the
zilian delegation wishes to stress is that no State should
United States Government consists in revealing its
t r y _ t o interfere in the Congo by furnishing any military constant but less effective effort against social progress
assistance otherwise than through the United Nations.
in many parts of the world. My delegation is firmly
convinced that the real character of this manoeuvre is
281. To sum up, in the opinion of the Brazilian deleclear to the General Assembly. My delegation will, of
gation this is the only way to respect the sovereignty
course, vote against the adoption of the report of the
of t h e Congo. Any other kind of action is just paying
Credentials Committee.
lip-service to it.
2S8. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish) :
AGENDA ITEM 3
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution, appearing
in the report of the Credentials Committee
Appointment of a Credentials Committee
[A/4499].
(concluded)
The draft resolution was adopted by 70 votes to 1.
R E P O R T OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (A/4499).
289. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish) :
I now give the floor to representatives who wish to
282. The P R E S I D E N T (translated from Spanish) :
explain their vote.
Before putting to the vote the report of the Credentials
290. Mr. WIRJOPRANOTO (Indonesia): I will
Committee [A/4499], which recommends that the
be very brief. My Government's attitude with regard
Assembly should approve the Committee's report, I
to the credentials of the delegations of the Republic of
call o n the representative of Hungary, who wishes to
China and the Hungarian People's Republic is well
explain his vote in advance.
known and has been stated by my delegation on many
283. Mr. SZITA (Hungary) : In explaining the vote
previous occasions. Tonight, in voting for the draft
of m y delegation, I want to state the following. I
resolution on the report of the Credentials Committee,
believe that it is not very difficult to define the real
my delegation wishes to put on record that it approved
aim and character of the United States proposal subthat report with the following reservations. First,
m i t t e d in the Credentials Committee in connexion with
having friendly diplomatic relations with the Governt h e credentials of the Hungarian delegation. Therement of the Hungarian People's Republic, the Indofore, at this late hour I beg leave to limit my remarks
nesian delegation accepts the credentials of the delegato t w o points.
tion of the Hungarian People's Republic. Second,
while recognizing only the Government of the People's
284. First, those who are confronted with the soRepublic of China as the legal Government of China,
called question of the Hungarian credentials might at
my delegation does not accept the credentials of the
first believe that this matter involves a legal problem.
persons who describe themselves as the representatives
I n reality, however, it has nothing to do with law.
of the Government of the Republic of China.
T h e proposal of the United States is not only against
t h e law and the rules of procedure, but it is a patent
291. Mr. SHAHA (Nepal): I have asked for the
absurdity. According to that proposal, the Credentials
floor merely to say that our acceptance and approval
Committee, which was elected for the sole purpose of
of the report of the Credentials Committee does not
deciding upon the validity of the credentials, should
in any way imply a change in my Government's views
not take a decision on the credentials of my delegation.
on the question of the recognition of the People's
T h i s proposal would also induce the Assembly unapRepublic of China and its representatives.
p r o v e the report of the Credentials Committee
292. Mr. CABA (Guinea) (translated from French) :
[A/4499],
which contains an absurdity. It is comWe shall be very brief in explaining our vote. My
m o n l y known that no doubt can be raised, either from
delegation, though it voted in favour of the report of
t h e legal or any other point of view, about the validity
the Credentials Committee of this emergency special
of m y delegation's credentials. These credentials are
session of the General Assembly, wishes to point out
in conformity with the corresponding provisions of
that it cannot endorse the reservations expressed by
the Charter and the rules of procedure, just as much
certain members of the Committee. We recognize only
as t h e credentials of any other delegation here.
the People's Republic of China, whose absence from
the United Nations astonishes us. The Republic of
2 8 5 . It seems to be totally superfluous to deal with
Guinea considers that the People's Republic of China,
this matter in detail, because every representative

104
General Assembly — Fourth Emerge
a country of 650 million inhabitants, ought to be given
its place in the United Nations. We believe that it is
impossible to ignore the existence of that great people.
We also wish to point out that the Republic of Guinea
in no way questions the credentials or the representative character of the Hungarian delegation. We have
economic, cultural and friendly relations with the
Hungarian People's Republic, based upon reciprocity
of interests, absolute equality and mutual respect for
the sovereignty of our two countries.
293. Mr. VIDIC (Yugoslavia) : I wish to place on
record that our vote in favour of the resolution does
not in any way imply any change in regard to the wellknown position of my Government with regard to the
question of the credentials of the Hungarian delegation
and the question of the representation of China in the
United Nations.
294. U T H A N T (Burma) : In voting for the adoption of the report of the Credentials Committee I wish,
on behalf of my delegation, to place on record that the
Government of the Union of Burma recognizes only
the Central Government of the People's Republic of
China. Therefore, my delegation holds that the credentials of the present representatives of China are not
valid. The Government of the Union of Burma has
recently recognized the Government of Hungary, and
therefore my delegation holds that the credentials of
the representatives of Hungary are valid.
295. With these two reservations, we voted for the
adoption of the report of the Credentials Committee.
296. Mr. A D E E L (Sudan) : My delegation cast an
affirmative vote in favour of the report of the Credentials Committee, but we have two reservations to make
regarding the credentials of two delegations.
297. My Government recognizes and has diplomatic
relations with the People's Republic of China and the
Hungarian People's Republic. We recognize the representatives of the People's Republic of China as the only
representatives legitimately entitled to speak for China
in the Organization, and the same applies to the
representatives of Hungary who sit in this Assembly.
298. Mr. ASHA (United Arab Republic): I also
wish to explain the vote of my delegation ou the report
of the Credentials Committee. My Government recognizes only the People's Republic of China as the legitimate Government of that country, and therefore we
believe that the report is incorrect in that respect.
299. We also recognize the Hungarian People's Republic, and we believe that the credentials presented
by the representative of that State are valid.
300. Mr. J H A (India) : I would like to make it clear,
on behalf of my delegation, that our support of the
report of the Credentials Committee does not affect
the position, first, that we recognize the People's Republic of China as the only lawful and legitimate
Government of China entitled to a place in the United
Nations; and, second, that we recognize the Government of Hungary, with which we have diplomatic and
commercial relations, and we think that it is rightfully
represented here.
301. Mr. L E W A N D O W S K I (Poland) : In accepting
the report of the Credentials Committee, my delegation
wishes to present its position on the two following
questions :
302. First, concerning the problem of the representation of China. The delegation of the Polish People's
Republic has had the opportunity on many occasions
to express its strong conviction that the rightful

Special Session — Plenary Meetings
representative of the Chinese people in the_ United Nations can only be the representative appointed by the
Central People's Government the People's Republic of
China.
303. In preventing the representative of the People's
Republic of China from occupying his place in this
Assembly, the countries responsible for this state of
affairs are acting against the best interests of the
United Nations.
304. The second question concerns the credentials of
the Hungarian delegation. On behalf of the Polish
delegation I would like to voice the strongest protest
against the questioning of these credentials by the
Committee. These credentials were issued by the
Hungarian Government in compliance with established
United Nations procedure. To question them amounts
to interference in the internal affairs of Hungary, and
to disregarding the basic principles of the United
Nations Charter.
305. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : The U S S R delegation wishes to confirm once again that its vote for
the approval of the Credentials Committee's report
does not signify agreement with the decisions concerning credentials in the cases of the People's Republic of China and the Hungarian People's Republic.
306. The Soviet Union has consistently maintained
and continues to maintain that the great People's
Republic of China should be represented only by the
Central People's Government and not by persons whom
the Chinese people have driven from their country and
who are the puppets of another Government.
307. We wish to state emphatically that the time has
come when that problem must be settled and that the
policy of the United States with regard to it is the
only thing which stands in the way of a commonsense solution in the interests of consolidating peace
and strengthening the United Nations. W e hope that
the time is not far distant when the question will be
settled at last in spite of the United States policy with
regard to it.
308. Where Hungary is concerned, we also consider
entirely incorrect the position of the United States
with regard to the Hungarian People's Republic, which
has won the right to participate entirely in all the work
of the United Nations and to be a full-fledged Member
of the Organization, a right of which the Hungarian
people cannot be deprived by anyone.
309. The Soviet delegation once again confirms its
earlier position with regard to these questions and
accordingly has deemed it necessary to make this
statement.
310. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon) : On behalf of
my delegation I wish to state that my acceptance of
the report of the Credentials Committee does not
involve any change in the policy of my Government
toward the People's Republic of China and the Hungarian People's Republic.
311. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq) : Our vote in favour
of the report of the Credentials Committee does not
affect our position regarding the right of the Chinese
People's Republic to represent China in the United
Nations nor does it affect our recognition of the Government of the Hungarian People's Republic.
312. Mr. MEZINCESCU (Romania)
(translated
from French) : My delegation, though it voted in
favour of the report of the Credentials Committee,
wishes to enter an express reservation regarding the

863rd meeting —19 September 1960
105
report's provisions relating to the credentials of the
of the People's Republic of China, the only one which
representatives of the Hungarian People's Republic
represents the Chinese People.
and those of the so-called representatives of the Re321. Mr. T O D O R O V (Bulgaria) : In connexion with
public of China.
the affirmative vote for the resolution contained in the
313. By making the Credentials Committee submit
report of the Credentials Committee, the Bulgarian
this report to the Assembly and then imposing that
delegation would like to declare that only the delegadecision on the Assembly, the United States and its
tion accredited by the Government of the People's
allies _ who are parties to the various well-known ag- Republic of China can be recognized as the legal repregressive treaties have again succeeded in making the
sentative of China in this body.
United Nations accept fiction for fact while attempting
322. In the second place, the Bulgarian delegation
to present what is a fact' as if it were fiction. This
would like to make a strong protest against the report
would be farcical if it did not reflect the dangerous
of the Credentials Committee in connexion with the
policy of fanning international tensions in circumrepresentation of Hungary. The Government of the
stances which are already grave.
Hungarian People's Republic is the only legitimate
government of that country which has sent a Hun314. In the opinion of my delegation, it is high time
garian delegation, and that delegation, further, is the
such manoeuvres were thwarted. We hope that the
legal representative of that Government.
time will soon come when such attempts, on the part
of the United States or any other Government hostile
Statement by the President
to peace, will no longer be possible.
315. _ Mr. L I U (China) : This is not the first time nor
323. The P R E S I D E N T (translated from Spanish) :
will it be the last time that the question of the repreWe have postponed consideration of the first item on
sentational China is raised. At this late hour I do not
our agenda, concerning the admission of new Members.
wish_ to impose on the Assembly by dwelling on the
324.
It is my understanding that this is not the
political^ and juridical considerations which support
time to take a decision on this subject, particularly
the position of my delegation as the rightful represince the day on which the new Assembly takes over
sentatives of China. I think it will not be long before
has already begun.
we have the opportunity to discuss these important con325. Before closing the meeting I wish to express
siderations. For the time being, I think that the findvery briefly my views on the resolution on the Congo
ings of the Credentials Committee, which reflect the
which has been adopted.
views of the majority and which have, been endorsed
by the Assembly, will be sufficient answer to those who
326. I thank divine Providence for having granted
still question the rightful status of my delegation.
me the opportunity to bring my presidency to an end
by directing this memorable Assembly which has
316. Mr. MALILE (Albania) (translated from
adopted, we may say unanimously, a resolution of a
French) : Although we voted in favour of the report of
nature decisive for the destinies of the Congo, for the
the Credentials Committee, my delegation deems it
solidarity of those countries of Africa which we are
necessary to state that it does not recognize as valid
about to welcome with enthusiasm and those which
the credentials submitted by the representative of the
have already joined the United Nations and for the
Chiang Kai-shek clique. We also consider it necessary
prestige of our Organization.
to state that only the Government of the People's
Republic of China is entitled to represent the Chinese
327. We have worked diligently, and I thank all
people in the General Assembly and all its organs.
delegations for their assistance and for the spirit of
317. My delegation likewise protests against the
sacrifice they have shown; they may take satisfaction
doubts cast on the credentials of the Hungarian delein having contributed to one of the most important
gation. T h e Government of the Hungarian People's
measures ever taken by the United Nations. To this
Republic is the only lawful Government of the HunI must add that justice has been done to the resolugarian people, and any attempt to cast doubts on its
tions of the Security Council, to the operation directed
representatives is part of the cold war policy.
with such intelligence, skill, boldness and dispatch by
the Secretary-General, and to all those who are work318. Mr. K U R K A (Czechoslovakia)
(translated
ing for the United Nations in the Congo.
from Russian) : The Czechoslovak delegation voted for
the adoption of the report of the Credentials Com328. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Remittee but that, of course, by no means signifies that
publics) (translated from Russian) : I am somewhat
we do not have serious reservations concerning the
surprised at the casual way in which the President has
Committee's decision on the credentials of the delegadisposed of the first item, on the agenda. In fact, I am
tion of the Plungarian People's Republic and the sonot quite sure what happened to it and what we are
called "representatives of China".
doing. Are we ever going to discuss the first item before the emergency special session of the General
319. I must express a most vigorous protest against
Assembly or are we not? It is my understanding that
the decision of the Credentials Committee on the
this was the day on which we were going to decide
credentials of the representatives of the Plungarian
that question. But, may I ask, is it going to be decided
People's Republic. As has happened repeatedly during
at the emergency special session or at the regular
the past few years, the majority in the Committee,
session of the General Assembly? If it is to be decided
under pressure from the United States, has taken a
at the emergency special session, then we must obposition which casts doubt on the Committee's imparviously convene the emergency special session totiality. This is all the more striking in that the same
morrow. But the President appears already to have
majority in the Committee has shown no hesitation
reached a conclusion for us. That item has not been
in recognizing the credentials of persons who never
discussed at the emergency session. Hence it must be
have had and do not now have the right to represent
asked why it was introduced as the first item on the
the People's Republic of China in the United Nations.
agenda.
Who introduced it? The representative of the
320. My delegation will not recognize any credentials
United States. Why did he introduce it? Only in order
which have not been confirmed by the Government

General Assembly—Fourth Emergency Special Session — Plenary Meetings
106
than the one I have just made, then since we are
to show that his delegation favours having the young
within the period of authority of the new Assembly
African States take part in the discussion of the Congo
I shall put it to the vote.
question. But we have discussed the question of the
Congo, we have taken a decision on that question, and
331. As I have already told Mr. Zorin, any explanathe representatives of the young African States have
tion or observation from representatives should not be
not participated. That being the case, why was the
merely academic or theoretical but practical, and should
item introduced ? Are not the manoeuvres of the United
take the form of a motion.
States in this matter clear to everyone?
332. If the U S S R representative wishes to make a
329. I believe that they are entirely clear. This
proposal, nothing could give me greater^ pleasure than
manoeuvre has failed and we are going to take note of
to open discussion on it and then put it to the vote.
it; but the President does not want it to be recorded
If he prefers merely to make criticisms, we shall also
that the item has been removed from the agenda, prelisten to them, if not with pleasure, at any rate with
ferring to say that we are going to take up the quesinterest; but we have nothing on which to take a
tion tomorrow. But we are going to take it up at the
resolution.
regular session of the General Assembly and not at
the emergency special session to which the United
Closing of the
session
States representative referred. This is the result of the
manoeuvring of the United States.
333. The P R E S I D E N T (translated from Spanish) :
I declare closed the fourth emergency special session
330. The P R E S I D E N T (translated from Spanish) :
of the General Assembly.
I do not think this is the time to embark on the discussion which the USSR representative is introducing.
The President is always open to suggestions from the
The meeting rose on Tuesday, 20 September,
Assembly. If the representative has a better suggestion
at 1.10 a.m.

Printed in Canada

Q—26281—November 1960—2,300
