33

Resolution, adopted on the report, of the Second Committee

and trained personnel currently available to the developing countries ;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to consult
States Members of the United Nations and members
of the specialized agencies and of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, in particular those which have
achieved a high level of scientific and technological development, concerning their views on the nature and
scope of such a programme and on the measures they
envisage undertaking in this regard, and to communicate
these views to the Advisory Committee;
5. Invites the Administrative Committee on Coordination to present .to the Advisory Committee,
through the Secretary-General, the comments of its
Sub-Committee on Science and Technology on the
assistance which the participating organizations, including the regional Pconomic commissions, might render
within the fr::imework of such a programme:
6. Recommends that the Advisory Committee should
envisage, in connexion with such a programme, the
possibilities of:
(a) Mobilizing the efforts of universities and scientific and technological institutions of the developed
countries for active participation in such a programme;
( b) Creating and strengthening, with the aid of the
highly developed countries, national and regional institutes for scientific and technological research and training in the developing areas of the world;
( c) Obtaining the human, technical and financial
resources required for the execution of such a programme;
7. Requests the Advisory Committee to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its summer session
in 1%5.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1945 (XVIIl). Enlargement of the Governing
Council of the Special Fund
The General Assembly,
Considering the provisions of part B, paragraphs 11,
13, 14 and 15, of its resolution 1240 (XIII) of 14
October 1958 on the membership of the Governing
Council of the Special Fund,
Taking into consideration the increase in the membership of the United Nations,
Noting the increase in the activities of the Special
Fund,
Noting further that the number of Governments
making voluntary contributions to the Special Fund
has steadily increased since 1959,
Desirous of ensuring equitable geographical distribution among the developing countries in accordance with
part B, paragraph 14, of its resolution 1240 (XIII),
1. Decides to amend part B, paragraphs 11 and 15,
of its resolution 1240 (XIII), to provide that the Governing Council of the Special Fund shall consist of
representatives of twenty-four States;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its
resumed thirty-sixth session, to elect six additional
members from among States Members of the United
Nations or members of the specialized agencies or of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, on the under-

standing that, at this first election, the countries initially
called upon to serve for one, two or three years,
respectivelv, shall be drawn by lot.
·
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1946 (XVUI). Provision of operational personnel
under the Expanded Programme of Tech•
nical Assistance
The General Assembly,
Havi•ig considered Economic and Social Council resolution 951 (XXXVI) of 5 July 1963 concerning the
provision of operational personnel under the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance,
·
1. Approves the proposals set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 951 (XXXVI) and authorizes
the use of funds from the Special Account of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance for the
provision of operational personnel by all the participating organizations, at the request of Governments,
on an experimental basis for the years 1964-1966;
2. Agrees that implementation of these proposals
shall not prejudge the issues before the Ad Hoe Committee on Co-ordination of Technical Assistance Activities concerning co-ordination between the different
programmes of technical co-operation ;
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to review
in due course the results of the experimental pro-\tisions
approved in paragraph 1 above and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1947 (XVUI). Confirmation of the allocation of
funds for the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance in 1964
The General Assembly,
Noting that the Technical Assistance Committee has
reviewed and approvPd the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance for the biennium 1963-1964,
1. Confirms the allocation of funds authorized by
the Technical Assistance Committee to each of the
organizations participating in the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance from contributions, general
resources and local costs assessments, as follows :
Total allocations
requested for 1964
(equivalent of
US dollars)

Participating organization

United Nations ..... .
International Labour Organisation
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization ..
International Civil Aviation Organization
World Health Organization
Universal Postal Union
International Telecommunication Union
World Meteorological Organization
International Atomic Energy Agency ..
TOTAL

9,464,119
4,749,187
11,535,277
7,589,363
2,034,424
7,988,760
83,841
929,823
1,028,020
944,824
46,347,638

General Aaeembly-Efs~nth Seleion

enlarged and its membership redistributed to reflect
correctly the membership of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction Economic and Social Council
resolution 974 C (XXXVI) of 22 July 1963 on the enlargement of the Economic and Social Council, adopted
by the Council at the initiative of the Economic Commission for Africa,
Noting that many subsidiary bodies of the Economic
and Social Council are already larger than the Council
hself and that it is within the Council's competence, in
accordance with Article 68 of the Charter of the United
Nations, to determine the membership of all its subsidiary bodies,
Desiring, as an interim measure and pending the enlargement of the Economic and Social Council itself, to
improve forthwith the representative character of the
subsidiary bodies of the Council,
Invites the Economic and Social Council at its resumed thirty-sixth session to enlarge the membership
of the Economic Committee, the Social Committee and
the Co-ordination Committee and to carry out forthwith
necessary elections so as to permit these committees to
become, without delay, representative of the membership
of the United Nations.
1285th plenary meeting,
17 December 1963.

2. Concurs in the Committee's authorization to the
Executive Chairman of the Technical Assistance Board
to make changes in these allocations as may be necessary
to provide as far as possible for the full utilization of
contributions to the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance, and to permit modifications to country programmes requested by recipient Governments and
approved by him;
3. Requests the Executive Chairman to report any
such changes to the Committee at the session following
their adoption ;
4. Concurs in the Committee's authorization to the
participating organizations to retain for operations in
1%4 the balance of funds allocated to them in 1963
which have not been obligated or transferred to another
agency, under the provisions of paragraph 2 above, by
the end of the year.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1992 (XVIII). Enlargement of the Economic
Committee, the Social Committee and the
Co-ordination Committee of the Economic
and Social Council
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the overwhelming will of the Member States that the Economic a:1d Social Council be

*

*

*

Note
Organization of the work of the Second Committee at future sessions of
the General AHembly
At its 1285th plenary meeting, on 17 December 1963, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Second Committee.18
18 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, separate fascicle
entitled "Organization of the work of the Second Committee at future sessions of the General
Assembly", document A/5651.
