United Nations

A/RES/68/230

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 February 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 24 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2013
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/68/443/Add.2)]

68/230. South-South cooperation
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 64/222 of 21 December 2009, in which it endorsed
the Nairobi outcome document of the High-level United Nations Conference on
South-South Cooperation,
Reaffirming also its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it
endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, 1
Recalling its resolutions 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 60/212 of 22 December
2005, 62/209 of 19 December 2007, 63/233 of 19 December 2008, 64/1 of
6 October 2009, 66/219 of 22 December 2011, 67/227 of 21 December 2012 and
other resolutions relevant to South-South cooperation,
1.
Takes note of the report of the High-level Committee on South-South
Cooperation on its seventeenth session, 2 the decisions taken at that session 3 and the
decisions taken at the intersessional meeting of 4 June 2013;
2.
Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of
South-South cooperation; 4
3.
Further takes note of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on SouthSouth and triangular cooperation in the United Nations system, 5 including its
recommendations, and the related note by the Secretary-General; 6

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,
Buenos Aires, 30 August–12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and
corrigendum), chap. I.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/67/39).
3
Ibid., chap. I.
4
A/68/212.
5
A/66/717.
6
A/66/717/Add.1.

13-45325

*1345325*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/230

South-South cooperation

4.
Recognizes the importance and different history and particularities of
South-South cooperation, and reaffirms its view of South-South cooperation as a
manifestation of solidarity among peoples and countries of the South that
contributes to their national well-being, national and collective self-reliance and the
attainment of internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals; South-South cooperation and its agenda have to be set by
countries of the South and should continue to be guided by the principles of
respect for national sovereignty, national ownership and independence, equality,
non-conditionality, non-interference in domestic affairs and mutual benefit;
5.
Also recognizes that South-South cooperation is a partnership among
equals based on solidarity and should not be seen as official development assistance,
and, in this regard, acknowledges the need to enhance the development effectiveness
of South-South cooperation by continuing to increase its mutual accountability and
transparency, as well as coordinating its initiatives with other development projects
and programmes on the ground, in accordance with national development plans and
priorities, and further recognizes that the impact of South-South cooperation should
be assessed with a view to improving, as appropriate, its quality in a results-oriented
manner;
6.
Encourages the funds, programmes, specialized agencies and other
entities of the United Nations system to take concrete measures to effectively
mainstream support to South-South and triangular cooperation in their policy and
regular programming work, and in this context requests those organizations and the
United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation to leverage each other’s
institutional and technical capacities;
7.
Recognizes the need to continue to mutually enrich South-South
cooperation based on the diverse experiences of and good practices from SouthSouth cooperation, triangular cooperation and North-South cooperation, and to
further explore complementarities and synergies between them;
8.
Invites developing country Member States to improve the impact of
South-South cooperation initiatives on sustainable development and to exchange
best practices in planning, implementation, data collection and information
management;
9.
Stresses that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a
complement to, North-South cooperation;
10. Recognizes the importance of considering South-South cooperation and
triangular cooperation in the context of the elaboration of the post-2015
development agenda;
11. Reaffirms the mandate and the central role of the United Nations Office
for South-South Cooperation as the focal point for promoting and facilitating
South-South and triangular cooperation for development on a global and United
Nations system-wide basis, recalls decision 17/1 of the High-level Committee on
South-South Cooperation, 3 and in this regard, requests the Secretary-General, noting
the idea of separating the Office for South-South Cooperation as operationally
autonomous from the United Nations Development Programme, to present, as part
of his comprehensive report to the High-level Committee at its eighteenth session
and, in consultation with Member States, the Office for South-South Cooperation
and the United Nations Development Programme, a comprehensive proposal
evaluating the feasibility and financial, human and budgetary implications of
separating this Office, at the same time clarifying contributions of the United
2/4

South-South cooperation

A/RES/68/230

Nations Development Programme under such a change, and presenting all options,
including the continuation of all existing arrangements and financing options for the
Office, including through voluntary contributions as well as core contributions from
the United Nations Development Programme;
12. Calls upon the Office for South-South Cooperation to explore and
undertake intensive, innovative and additional resource mobilization initiatives to
attract more resources, both financial and in-kind, to supplement regular resources
and other funds for activities involving South-South cooperation in order to enable
it to respond effectively and efficiently to the South-South cooperation needs of
Member States and the United Nations system;
13. Acknowledges and encourages the initiatives and arrangements,
including public-private mechanisms, undertaken in the efforts to enhance
cooperation among developing countries, including in the areas of eradication of
poverty and hunger, gender equality, the empowerment of women, access to
information and communications technologies, science and technology,
environment, culture, health, education and human development;
14. Requests the United Nations development system to further assess,
within the report of the Secretary-General, progress made in its support, particularly
with regard to the provision of adequate resources and the mobilization of technical
and financial resources for South-South cooperation, as well as mainstreaming
South-South cooperation in the work of the United Nations funds and programmes
and the specialized agencies in the field;
15. Also requests the United Nations development system to continue
improving coordination among its agencies in order to enhance its support to
South-South and triangular cooperation and monitor progress at the global and
regional levels and to continue evaluating the support of the United Nations
development system for those activities;
16. Further requests the United Nations development system to accord a
high priority to facilitating programmes and projects of South-South and triangular
cooperation and to assist countries of the South, upon their request, in implementing
them to ensure that sustainability is a key component of those projects;
17. Recognizes the need to mobilize adequate resources for enhancing SouthSouth and triangular cooperation, and in this context invites all countries in a
position to do so to contribute in support of such cooperation to the United Nations
Fund for South-South Cooperation and also to the Pérez-Guerrero Trust Fund for
South-South Cooperation, in accordance with its resolution 57/263 of 20 December
2002, and to support other initiatives for all developing countries, including
technology transfers among developing countries;
18. Also recognizes that South-South and triangular cooperation are mutually
supportive in terms of both technical and financial assistance, emphasizes in this
regard the importance of further invigorating South-South cooperation, and invites
all Member States to enhance South-South and triangular cooperation, focusing on
shared development priorities with the involvement of all relevant stakeholders in
governments, civil society and the private sector;
19. Invites the regional commissions, where relevant, to further harness the
knowledge network, partnerships, technical and research capacity in support of an
enhanced subregional, regional and interregional South-South cooperation and to
use the meetings of the regional coordination mechanism, as appropriate, as a tool
for advancing system-wide cooperation and coordination in support of South-South
cooperation at the regional level;
3/4

A/RES/68/230

South-South cooperation

20. Requests all Member States and the United Nations development system
to foster complementarities among North-South and South-South and triangular
cooperation through greater evidence-based policy dialogue on strategic cross-cutting
issues, in particular for the application of science, technology and innovation and
the integration of a gender perspective into the pursuit of sustainable development;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session,
under the item entitled “Operational activities for development”, the sub-item
entitled “South-South cooperation for development”, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a
comprehensive report on the state of South-South cooperation, focusing on how the
United Nations development system can improve its support to South-South
cooperation and the implementation of the present resolution.
71st plenary meeting
20 December 2013

4/4
