S/2018/241

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 March 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2350
(2017), by which the Council decided to close the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) by 15 October 2017; established the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) for an initial period of six
months, from 16 October 2017; and, requested that I report to the Council on the
implementation of the initial mandate of MINUJUSTH, 30 days before its expiration,
setting out a well-developed and clearly benchmarked projected two -year exit
strategy to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence to continue supporting the
efforts of the Government of Haiti in sustaining peace and peacebuilding. It covers
major developments that have occurred since the issuance of my final report on
MINUSTAH (S/2017/840).

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation and related developments
2.
Throughout his first year in office, the President of Haiti, Jovenel Moïse, took
steps towards implementing his reform agenda to foster sustainable development . The
comfortable majority of the ruling political party, Parti haïtien tèt kale, and its allies
in both chambers of Parliament should have been conducive to progress on the
passage of key legislation; however, certain items that were on the 2017 legislati ve
agenda that are directly relevant to the mandate of MINUJUSTH, such as the draft
Criminal Code, the draft Code of Criminal Procedure and the draft law on legal aid,
have yet to be reviewed by both chambers of Parliament.
3.
The deadline of 10 November 2017 for the selection of nominees by the three
branches of power for the long-awaited establishment of a Permanent Electoral
Council was not met. However, during the reporting period, the special commission
on constitutional amendments of the lower chamber continued to hold consultations
with a broad cross section of national sectors, including the diaspora, and intends to
complete the first draft of its report by 29 March.
4.
During the reporting period, the Government of Haiti took further steps towards
the reconstitution of the Armed Forces of Haiti. On 16 and 17 November 2017, two
presidential orders were published establishing the structure of an interim command

18-03983 (E)

230318

*1803983*

S/2018/241

of the force and appointing former army Colonel, Jodel Lesage, interim Commander in-Chief. On 13 March, President Moïse appointed six former army officers as the
interim command, who will work on strengthening the military engineering corps and
establishing and operationalizing both a military aviation and a medical corps.
Addressing concerns over the lack of an agreed legislative framework for the process,
President Moïse announced the inclusion of draft legislation on the re -establishment
of the armed forces in the 2018 legislative agenda.
5.
On 30 November, the Government announced the first disbursement of
$8.78 million in compliance with the law on the formation, functioning and financing
of political parties of 2014. On 22 January, the Government delivered payments to 4
of the 58 political parties deemed eligible. Opposition political parties rejected the
financing, which they qualified as a form of corruption at a time of a backlog of salary
arrears owed to civil servants.
6.
Throughout the period, President Moïse emphasized the importance of
strengthening the fight against corruption in his administration. Amid allegations of
the embezzlement of approximately $320,000 in the Ministry of the Interior and Local
Governance, an anti-fraud operation was conducted on 31 October 2017, leading to
the arrest of the Administrator and the Chief Accounta nt of the Ministry. An
investigation was opened into the contract for the electrification of a town in the
North-East Department, and warrants were issued against two former Ministers on
allegations of mishandling of public funds. The Ministry of Education and Vocational
Training recovered some $1.1 million and the Haitian National Police recovered
$700,000 in fraudulent pay cheques. On 5 and 8 December, respectively, civil society
organizations and the Catholic Church held anti-corruption marches in Port-auPrince.
7.
A draft report by the Senate special investigative commission into the
management of the Petrocaribe fund, presented to the Senate for adoption on
10 November 2017, caused tension between parliamentarians, the Government and
civil society. According to the report, between September 2008 and September 2016,
the management of $1.57 billion of the Petrocaribe fund, which is generated by the
Haitian State under a preferential oil price programme with the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, was marked by possible acts of malfeasance. On 29 January a private
citizen, represented by a lawyer, filed the first of eight cases at the court of first
instance in Port-au-Prince against the management of the Petrocaribe fund. On
1 February, a majority Senate vote adopted a resolution requesting a thorough audit
on the management of the Petrocaribe fund by the Superior Court of Audits and
Administrative Disputes, thus transferring responsibility to this oversight body.
8.
On 8 January, in his first annual state of the nation address at the opening of the
first ordinary session of the 2018 legislative year, President Moïse stressed the need
for self-reliance and outlined the following policy priorities: the adoption of a new
joint legislative agenda to focus on laws stimulating investment; the strengthening
and modernizing of the justice sector; the enhancing of social services; the completion
of the 2017 legislative agenda; the establishment of key institutions, in particular, the
Permanent Electoral Council and the Constitutional Council; the promotion of
political dialogue with all key national sectors through the “États généraux sectoriels”
initiative to determine and define a negotiated programme towards sustainable
development over 25 years; and the review of the country’s development aid
cooperation mechanism with the international community, aimed at shifting from
external assistance to external investment.
9.
On 1 January, President Moïse assumed the Chair of the Caribbean Community.
On 26–27 February, Haiti hosted the 29th Intersessional Meeting of the Conference
of Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community in Port -au-Prince. The Heads
2/19

18-03983

S/2018/241

of Government agreed to create an intraregional task force to examine and suggest
innovative regional solutions to combat the rise in crime and violence in the region.
President Moïse also announced the organization of an international conference on
the strengthening of the mechanisms of resilience to the effects of climate change and
the management of natural disasters in the Caribbean.

B.

Security developments
10. Violent crime statistics continued to improve in line with a general decrease in
homicides observed over the last three years. According to data received from the
national police, between 16 October 2017 and 7 February 2018, 217 homicides were
reported, compared with 396 over the same period in 2016/17. The Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area continued to be the most affected by crime.
11. Similarly, statistics on rape and other sexual and gender-based violence
indicated a 68 per cent decrease in such crimes compared with the same period in
2016/17. However, cases of sexual and gender-based violence remain widely
underreported owing to, inter alia, social stigma. The prevalence of lynching
decreased, with 17 incidents registered in the reporting period, down from 31 in the
same period in 2016/17, while kidnapping statistics remained unchanged, with 13
incidents reported over the last four months.
12. The graduation of 1,022 cadets, including 125 women, on 18 December 2017
improved the police officer per citizen ratio to 1.36 per thousand inhabitants. This
development, combined with the implementation by the national police of awareness
campaigns, could have contributed to the decline in crime. Violence against poli ce
personnel also decreased noticeably over the same four-month period, which saw the
death of 6 and the wounding of 8 police officers compared with 10 killed and 10
wounded over the same period in 2016/17.
13. Civil unrest decreased by 63 per cent between 6 October 2017 and 23 February
2018, with 177 protests registered compared with 477 during the same period in
2016/17. The most significant demonstrations were those protesting the national
budget and deteriorating socioeconomic conditions, led by a coali tion of opposition
parties during the months of October and November 2017. The largest proportion, 46
per cent, of the demonstrations was recorded in the Port -au-Prince metropolitan area,
followed by 11 per cent in the North Department. The majority of the 177 protests
were non-violent, with demonstrators numbering in the low hundreds, and only two
exceeded 1,000 demonstrators.
14. The Mission’s police component continued to provide operational support to the
national police by participating in 376 joint te mporary checkpoints, 648 foot patrols,
1,497 vehicle patrols, 7 joint police operations, and 8 crowd control operations related
to protests in Port-au-Prince.
15. The Peacebuilding Fund has approved a new $3 million conflict prevention and
social cohesion project that the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the International Organization for Migration will begin
implementing in Jérémie. The project aims to strengthen the role of youth as change
agents and peacebuilders, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2250 (2015), by
facilitating the enhanced participation of young women and men in community affairs
and peaceful conflict resolution to reduce levels of violence against women and
among youths and strengthen the social contract in the municipality.

18-03983

3/19

S/2018/241

C.

Economic situation
16. Along with the improved supply of foreign currency following the inauguration
of the new President, the gourde appreciated against the dollar during the second
quarter of 2017, before stabilizing at the end of the year. However, inflation remained
in double digits, standing at 13.3 per cent in December 2017. On the fiscal front,
revenue collection increased, whereas expenditure remained under control through
the use of cash management. As a result, the overall fiscal deficit including grants
stood at 2.1 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), driven mostly by subsidies to
the State-owned electricity utility. For the first quarter of 2018, however, public
expenditure outpaced revenue collection, prompting a rise in monetary financing and
depreciation pressures on the gourde.

D.

Humanitarian situation
17. Some 16 months after Hurricane Matthew, 1 million people are still in need of
humanitarian assistance. Deportations and spontaneous returns of Haitians from the
Dominican Republic and neighbouring countries are expected to increase, likely
overwhelming the Government’s response capacity. The cumulative number of
migrants deported or spontaneously returning from the Dominican Republic increased
by 45 per cent, from 158,800 in December 2016 to 230,300 in October 2017.
Regrettably, funding constraints have reduced the capacity of t he International
Organization for Migration to collect data on cross-border movements, which will
have a negative impact on the ability of the United Nations to monitor deportations.
The United Nations Children’s Fund and partners provided assistance to 1,109
unaccompanied children, including 361 girls in need of reunification and reinsertion
support. Of these children, 31 per cent were reportedly deported by security services,
while 38 per cent were identified at unofficial border crossing points. Both
circumstances increase exposure to the risks of trafficking and exploitation.
18. The fight against cholera continues. Since the peak of the outbreak in 2010,
significant gains have been achieved: weekly transmission has been reduced by over
99 per cent, with deaths dropping by over 99.5 percent, and more than $680 million
has been mobilized by the international community. Thirty-one Member States
responded positively to my invitation in July 2017 to voluntarily waive the return of
the 2015–2016 unencumbered balances and credits from MINUSTAH to support the
new United Nations approach to cholera, turning over $3.3 million out of a total of
$40.5 million. An additional $4.4 million was given in fresh contributions to the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, resulting in a total
of $7.7 million in support of cholera efforts.
19. On 11 January, in close coordination with the Government of Haiti, the
Humanitarian Country Team in Haiti launched the revised Humanitarian Response
Plan for 2017–2018. Humanitarian challenges in Haiti remain directly related to
longer-term development constraints, as highlighted by the Deputy Secretary General, Amina J. Mohammed, following her visit to Haiti from 3 to 5 November,
together with the Special Envoy for Haiti, Josette Sheeran. On 7 December 2017, the
Minister of Planning and External Cooperation and the Deputy Special
Representative, together with the Heads of the United Nations country team in Haiti,
signed the joint workplans under the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2017–2021. The workplans cover the period from October 2017 to
December 2018 and include the country team activities relating to the five outcomes
of the Framework, namely poverty reduction and employment; access to basi c social
services; protection and gender equality; resilience; and governance. The outcomes
identify the Sustainable Development Goals to be addressed in each pillar. The joint

4/19

18-03983

S/2018/241

workplans were prepared by the outcome groups and national counterparts and
validated through a national consultation held on 31 October. In addition, a
mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support mission was conducted from
28 January to 3 February, aimed at informing the existing draft national road map on
the Sustainable Development Goals, including the selection of priority Goals. The
mission also helped to strengthen the humanitarian-development nexus and ascertain
that disaster-preparedness work and humanitarian interventions are reflected in the
process.

III. Mandate implementation
A.

Police development
20. With the graduation of the 1,022 cadets of the 28th class, the national police
increased its overall strength to 15,298, of whom 9.18 per cent are women. The
selection process for the 29th class was completed, with 750 successful applicants,
including 215 women (28 per cent), and training began on 18 February.
21. The MINUJUSTH police component, in close consultation with the national
police, established the mentoring and advisory programme, which aims at transferri ng
essential skills to the middle and senior leadership of the national police. Countrywide
initiatives were supported by MINUJUSTH to build the capacities of the national
police in strategic and operational planning, criminal intelligence, investigations,
organized crime, crime scene management, recruitment, training, gender
mainstreaming, crowd control, information technology, communications, logistics
and infrastructure maintenance. Efforts were also made to increase response capacity
in investigating and preventing sexual and gender-based violence incidents through a
training of trainers, courses in child interviewing and the management of crime
scenes. In addition, the Mission conducted a seminar on sexual and gender-based
violence for national police investigators and judges. In December, the DirectorGeneral of the national police approved measures to refurbish the premises of the
Sexual Crimes Unit and assign 10 new investigators.
22. From 24 to 27 October 2017, the General Inspectorate of the nation al police
organized inspection missions to the Nippes Department and the North Department
from 8 to 11 January 2018. MINUJUSTH police personnel stationed in the General
Inspectorate provided mentorship at 46 police stations in the planning and conducting
of inspection missions and in the preparation of after-action reports.
23. The Land Border Directorate of the national police, quartered in a former United
Nations facility in Morne Cassé in the North-East Department, was inaugurated on
27 December 2017. One hundred and fifty freshly graduated police officers, including
10 women, were assigned to the Directorate, which is expected to boost the security
presence along the 388-kilometre border with the Dominican Republic. In October
2017, a new General Intelligence Directorate was created. As part of supporting the
priority actions of the five-year plan of the national police, MINUJUSTH supported
the drafting of the legal framework and regular follow-up on the implementation of
activities of these two Directorates.
24. Nine new construction and renovation projects were completed, three of which
were financed through quick-impact projects, five through the joint rule of law
programme 2016/17, including the provision of equipment to four police facilities in
the Artibonite Department, and one by an international donor. The procurement of
specialized equipment and training was financed through the joint rule of law
programme to enhance the criminal investigation capacity of eight departmental
sections of the judicial police and the scientific and technical police. More than 100

18-03983

5/19

S/2018/241

national police investigators received training in interrogation techniques, search and
seizures, crime scene management and skills for interviewing victims and witnesses
of kidnapping, human trafficking and sexual and gender-based violence.

B.

Justice
25. Progress in the justice sector has been hampered by intermittent strikes by the
union of court clerks and by magistrates. The protests led to several weeks of paralysis
in the judicial system and to the suspension of the hearings planned under the
“Themis” programme of the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, aimed at
addressing prolonged pretrial detention. The signing of two memorandums of
understanding by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, one with the Superior
Council of the Judiciary on 20 October and the other with court clerks on 3 November
2017, led to the suspension of the strikes and the slow resumption of judicial
activities. President Moïse established an ad hoc committee on 17 January to remedy
multiple technical and financial deficiencies constraining the proper functioning and
independence of the judiciary. However, on 22 and 23 January, strikes again paralysed
courts in Cap Haïtien and Port-au-Prince, two of the country’s three largest
jurisdictions. On 22 February, the lower chamber passed a draft law on legal aid,
which the Senate is to harmonize with language adopted by the two parliamentary
chambers. The new law will, in particular, help to address the high rates of prolonged
pretrial detention.
26. A “penal chain committee”, bringing together all rule of law actors to tackle
prolonged pretrial detention, held its first coordination meeting in January in the
model jurisdiction of Port-au-Prince, where MINUJUSTH focuses its capacitybuilding support to ensure successful results. Initiatives leading to improvements
could become models for other jurisdictions throughout Haiti. Plans are being
finalized to address the situation of 3,770 defendants in pretrial dete ntion at the
National Penitentiary, which will include two legal aid projects financed by
MINUJUSTH and implemented by the Port-au-Prince Bar Association. The handling
of incoming case files by the prosecutor of the Port -au-Prince tribunal, through the
use of a real-time case file management system, dropped from 60 per cent in the
previous reporting period to 48 per cent owing to intermittent strikes by justice sector
workers.
27. On 6 November, the first class of court clerks, comprising 40 law graduates, 8
of whom were women, began training at the school of magistrates. MINUJUSTH
assisted the inaugural class through the delivery of courses on the management of
incriminating evidence and legal archiving. On 17 November, the Superior Council
of the Judiciary published the first results of the vetting of magistrates since it was
created in 2012 and the Technical Vetting Commission was established in 2014. An
administrative inquiry determined that 35 magistrates met the standards governing
the profession, while 7 were recommended for dismissal due to misconduct. In
December, President Moïse appointed 50 new judges on the basis of the
recommendations of the Superior Council of the Judiciary, although he expressed
some reservations on the soundness of a number of the recommendations.
MINUJUSTH held extensive discussions with the Superior Council of the Judiciary
to determine its needs and has been working closely with the Technical Vetting
Commission to provide a tailored programme of assistance. This includes tech nical
support for the validation of the vetting mechanism, as well as logistic assistance for
field travel during investigations and the provision of office supplies.
28. To help improve working conditions and access to justice in the Port -au-Prince
model jurisdiction, MINUJUSTH is financing the construction of the justice of the
peace tribunal of the Ministry of Justice and Public Security in Gressier. Preparations

6/19

18-03983

S/2018/241

are also under way for the reconstruction of the justice of the peace tribunal of the
Southern District of Port-au-Prince. Both tribunals were destroyed during the 2010
earthquake and have since been temporarily seated in prefabricated buildings.
29. On 8 February, MINUJUSTH and UNDP signed a memorandum of
understanding to contribute to the funding of a draft joint rule of law programme
2017–2021, with $2,286,025 in assessed contributions under the current fiscal year.
The draft joint rule of law programme will be aligned with the benchmarked exit
strategy and is part of a multi-year resource mobilization strategy for the transition.

C.

Corrections
30. Prison overcrowding continues to raise serious human rights concerns. As of
22 February, Haitian prisons held 11,859 detainees, including 424 women, and
282 male and 20 female juveniles. Of those detainees, 75 per cent were awaiting trial,
a 1 per cent increase since the issuance of my last report on MINUSTAH. While the
number of deaths in prison has decreased, an occupancy rate of approximately 356 per
cent, 23 hours of daily confinement, poor hygiene, poor sanitation and inadequate
medical services continue to characterize the extremely harsh detention conditions.
31. The Directorate of Prison Administration and MINUJUSTH adopted a joint
workplan aimed at improving detention conditions and mod ernizing the prison system
in order to meet international human rights standards. The Directorate, with
MINUJUSTH support, completed a draft penitentiary law, which is expected to be
reviewed by Parliament in the current legislative calendar. Under the dra ft law, the
Directorate of Prison Administration would be elevated to a central directorate within
the national police, with authority over its own operational budget and human
resources. MINUJUSTH also supported the drafting and launching on 10 November
of the medical road map of the Directorate for improved inmate health care.
32. The Mission continued to work with the Directorate of Prison Administration to
provide targeted support for the implementation of related provisions in the strategic
development plan of the national police for 2017–2021, in the areas of capacitybuilding, improvement in detention conditions and the reintegration of detainees upon
their release. On 5 December, MINUJUSTH officially handed over equipment to
record and manage data acquired through the joint rule of law programme for
2016/17, which will standardize detainee files, a valuable tool to protect prisoner
rights, strengthen transparency and accountability and address prolonged pretrial
detention.
33. Since December, MINUJUSTH has deployed 38 Government-provided
corrections personnel. Of those personnel, 23 were deployed to nine priority prisons,
identified jointly with the Directorate of Prison Administration, which receive
targeted support towards their certification as oper ating in accordance with minimum
international standards without the need for international support. The remaining 15
provide strategic advice to the senior leadership of the Directorate of Prison
Administration.

D.

Human rights
34. Two major incidents involving human rights violations by the national police
confirmed the need for continued close human rights monitoring and strengthened
human rights training. On 12 October 2017, a specialized police unit for departmental
interventions and operations, created on 24 June 2015 outside the legal framework of
the national police, conducted an unauthorized search operation at Lilavois (Croix -

18-03983

7/19

S/2018/241

des-Bouquets) after an agent from the unit was robbed and killed while returning from
a bank. As a result of the search operation, three adult males were killed and nine
persons were detained. Additional allegations of beatings and destruction of private
property were reported. Following an administrative inquiry conducted by the
Inspectorate General, three officers from the unit were temporarily placed in detention
on 10 November, for investigation purposes, and later released, within the framework
of the national police discipline regulations.
35. On 13 November, the national police conducted an operation in Grand -Ravine
(West Department), which sought to neutralize gang activity, with support from the
United Nations police, who were responsible for securing the operation ’s perimeter,
but which resulted in grave violations against residents of the area. Unauthorized
activities, beyond the scope of the operation, by national police officers resulted in
the death of eight adult civilians, including two women, the serious beating of three
persons and 32 arrests. In addition, one adult male was reported to have disappeared;
his whereabouts remain unknown. Police investigations confirmed that human rights
violations had been committed. One officer was dismissed from the police on
15 December 2017, but is still at large. The Inspectorate General conducted an
internal investigation and transmitted its report to the court in Port-au-Prince on
26 December 2017. To date, no judicial measures have been taken to hold those
involved accountable, despite repeated calls by MINUJUSTH for judicial
investigations to bring the perpetrators to justice. MINUJUSTH is developing
guidelines and standard operating procedures for the implementation of the United
Nations human rights due diligence policy in relation to the support it provides to the
national police. Through its police mentorship progr amme, and in collaboration with
the leadership of the national police, MINUJUSTH will help to prevent such
violations in the future.
36. On 25 October, President Moïse appointed a new national human rights
Ombudsperson. In compliance with Haitian law, the outgoing Ombudsperson had
continued to exercise her functions until the appointment. Haitian human rights and
women’s organizations have expressed concerns over the independence and integrity
of the successor, evoking past accusations of gender-based violence and bias. They
also complained about the lack of consultations with national civil society actors on
the selection. Owing to the recent appointment, the review by the Global Alliance of
National Human Rights Institutions of the full adherence of the Office of the
Ombudsperson to the Paris Principles, a set of international standards that frame the
work of national human rights institutions, which was initially scheduled for 2018,
has been postponed to 2019.
37. Despite continued advocacy by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, no progress was registered regarding the appointment of a high -level focal
point within the executive branch to coordinate action on human rights. Such an
appointment could be instrumental in developing an action plan to implement
recommendations by United Nations human rights mechanisms, including those made
by the Independent Expert in March 2017, pursuant to the request of the Human
Rights Council (see A/HRC/PRST/34/1).
38. On 21 December 2017, the Public Prosecutor of Port-au-Prince announced the
release of 243 detainees, 204 of whom were released. The Prosecutor had earlier
stated that the release would be conducted under the customary yearly presidential
pardon. No presidential pardon was granted, and the release orders failed to document
the legal grounds for the measure, raising questions about their legality. Haitian law
does not grant jurisdiction to Public Prosecutors over prison releases except in cases
of sentences nearing completion or dismissal orders. Many of the detainees released
from the National Penitentiary had served their sentences or were being held in
pretrial detention longer than the time they would have served for the petty crimes of
8/19

18-03983

S/2018/241

which they were accused. On 25 January 2018, the Minister of Justice and Public
Security formally reprimanded the Public Prosecutor for having obstructed the release
of detainees in his jurisdiction since September 2017 and having later ordered releases
without due process. The Public Prosecutor subsequently tendered his resignation on
2 February 2018, but it was refused by the Prime Minister.

E.

Mobile teams
39. As a part of the Mission’s innovative community-based, political, rule of law
and human rights approach, five multi-disciplinary and integrated mobile teams
carried out field visits covering the 18 jurisdictions of Haiti. The teams coordinated
with United Nations country team staff in the regions and met with representatives of
State and non-State entities, including the national police, the Directorate of Prison
Administration, political parties, labour unions, civil society and community -based
organizations, including those representing women. Police stations and prisons were
visited in all jurisdictions. Preliminary findings highlighted the negative influence of
certain political actors on the judiciary, shortcomings in good governance and in the
respect for the rule of law at all institutional levels across the country, as well as
sexual and gender-based violence as a major and underreported concern. These
observations and findings are being compiled into an overarching diagnostics report,
which will be shared with national authorities to encourage them to take action
towards strengthening rule of law institutions in the regions.
40. Mobile teams are currently facilitating the identification, implementation,
monitoring, and evaluation of community violence reduction projects and quick impact projects in order to address some of the shortcomings id entified during their
visits. While the latter will aim to improve infrastructure and provide equipment for
police, court and prison facilities, the community violence reduction projects will
address the nexus between the rule of law, human rights, justice and corrections, and
foster greater coordination among local authorities, communities, other national and
international actors and the media, including through public outreach and community
mediation. Two community violence reduction projects for the esta blishment of legal
aid offices in support of prison inmates were launched in Port -au-Prince. In parallel,
support for marginalized communities will be strengthened from the bottom up,
through the implementation of labour-intensive projects to improve access to public
services, reinsertion activities for male and female detainees and the creation of
income-generating activities to address the root causes of crime. The specific needs
of women, children and victims of sexual and gender-based violence will be
addressed throughout these projects.

IV. MINUJUSTH start-up and MINUSTAH liquidation
41. On 16 October, at the flag-raising ceremony to mark the opening of
MINUJUSTH, my Deputy Special Representative and the Haitian Minister of Foreign
Affairs signed the MINUJUSTH status-of-mission agreement. On 20 October,
President Moïse submitted the agreement for consideration and adoption by
Parliament, where it remains pending.
42. The MINUSTAH liquidation team carried out its activities up to 31 December
2017, when the remaining tasks were transferred to MINUJUSTH for completion.
MINUJUSTH will complete the liquidation by 30 June 2018, in particular the
finalization of the consolidation of camps and the rightsizing of the support
arrangements to match MINUJUSTH needs. MINUJUSTH has already progressively
absorbed many liquidation activities, in particular regarding finance and asset
18-03983

9/19

S/2018/241

management. In addition, MINUJUSTH is involved in the separation of all
MINUSTAH staff members, the management of archives, the negotiation of camp
closures and the organization of commercial sales of written-off assets.
43. Plans to outsource some 19 services have not proceeded at the anticipated pace
owing to significant staffing shortages. Nevertheless, in coordination with the Global
Service Centre in Brindisi, Italy, the scope of work for the provision of custodial
services, the operation and maintenance of power generators and water and
wastewater treatment systems, and various transport services has been completed and
expression of interest notices have been published, with a focus on soliciting local
providers. The services of one B1900D passenger aircraft, operating mainly between
Port-au-Prince and Santo Domingo, have been terminated. On medical services,
agreements with three certified local level II facilities have been put in place, and
level III services are referred to a facility in Santo Domingo.

V. Benchmarks for an exit strategy and transition
44. As requested in Security Council resolution 2350 (2017), 11 benchmarks for an
exit strategy to transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in the
country have been identified (see annex I). Key elements were discussed and
articulated by the senior management of MINUJUSTH and the country team, aiming
at aligning Mission initiatives with relevant elements of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework 2017–2021, developed jointly by the
Government of Haiti and the United Nations and signed on 30 June 2017. The
benchmarks have thus been informed by efforts to make progress on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, most notably Sustainable Development Goal 16.
45. In parallel to internal United Nations consultations, over the past three months
MINUJUSTH has introduced the concept of a benchmarked exit strategy to a number
of Haitian interlocutors, including in the Government, the Parliament, judicial
institutions, the national police and civil society organizations. The purpose of the
ongoing consultations is to reflect in the benchmarks a joint vision with local
institutions on common objectives, encourage the identification of Haitian -led
priorities and foster close cooperation with the Mission to achieve progress on these
objectives and priorities over the two-year period. The benchmarks were also
discussed with bilateral and multilateral partners.
46. During the visit to Haiti of the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Bintou Keita, on 5–9 February 2018, President Moïse agreed on the need
to take advantage of the opportunity presented by the presence and capacities of
MINUJUSTH during the two-year time frame and to redouble efforts to achieve
common objectives, including through the preparation of a benchmarked exit strategy
for the Mission. These views were reflected in a joint press release issued by President
Moïse and the Assistant Secretary-General at the end of her visit. MINUJUSTH will
continue to work closely with the Government of Haiti and institutions in ensuring a
closer convergence with Haitian priorities, as well as encouraging the Government ’s
sustained commitment and cooperation in achieving the benchmarks.
47. These 11 carefully designed benchmarks envisage the outcome of the work of
the Haitian institutions, with the support of MINUJUSTH, on justice, corrections,
police development and human rights within the coming two years. All Mission
activities supporting the Government of Haiti to reinforce the rule of law institutions
are being geared towards the achievement of the benchmarks. These include capacitybuilding for the justice sector, the national police and the Directorate of Prison
Administration, strengthening of internal oversight and accountability mechanisms,
and activities promoting an independent national human rights office and the ability
10/19

18-03983

S/2018/241

of civil society organizations to effectively seek redress for human rights violations.
Future planning for a staggered withdrawal of the formed police units will be linked
to progress against related benchmarks. In line with resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, gender elements are mainstreamed throughout the
benchmarks.
48. Collectively, the benchmarks describe a desired end state for the situation in
Haiti in the last quarter of 2019, allowing for a smooth transition to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence. A key element of the desired end state is
the strengthening of the population’s trust in the rule of law institutions, so that they
continue supporting positive reform and progress in related sectors, including through
their elected representatives. The benchmarks also acknowledge the interrelationship
in Haiti between politics, rule of law, security and development and hence the links
between progress in the core areas of the Mission’s mandate and other key
preconditions for stability in the country, including the fight against corruption,
socioeconomic development and the holding of fair and democratic elections,
expected in 2019.
49. To accompany the benchmarks, the Mission is finalizing a political strategy,
aimed at addressing political challenges to achieve progress in the rule of law and
creating momentum for systemic change. The political strategy will capitalize on the
strengths of the mobile teams in reaching out to the Haitian population and institutions
in all areas of the country and establishing direct links and dialogue with their elected
representatives in Parliament to leverage their desire for reform in the rule of law, as
well as on the good offices role of my Special Representative vis-à-vis the institutions
at the central level.
50. In terms of the next steps, the Mission will seek to establish a mechanism to
monitor progress against the benchmarks, in close cooperation with the Government
of Haiti, which would set the timeline and jointly agreed indicators as operational
components of the exit strategy. In addition, building on the benchmarked exit
strategy and the discussions with the Government on the 2030 Agenda, MINUJUSTH
and the United Nations country team will assess their preparedness for the upcoming
transition, including through a capacity assessment of the country team against the
programmatic aspects of the Mission’s mandate, informed by gender and women,
peace and security perspectives.

VI. Conduct and discipline
51. MINUJUSTH put in place, as a priority, a three-pronged conduct and discipline
strategy for all categories of United Nations personnel. The Mission pursued its
prevention activities, including training, public information and outreach, to sensitize
the Haitian population to United Nations standards of conduct, in particular the zero tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, complemented by remedial action
through assistance to victims. The Chief of the Human Rights Service of
MINUJUSTH and Representative in Haiti of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights was provisionally appointed Field Victims ’ Rights
Advocate for the United Nations in the country, pending the a ppointment of a
dedicated staff member to the role. Thirty-one cases, including one paternity claim,
were handed over from MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH.

VII. Financial aspects
52. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/260 of 24 December 2017,
appropriated the amount of $88.1 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the
18-03983

11/19

S/2018/241

period from 16 October 2017 to 30 June 2018. As of 26 February 2018, unpaid
assessed contributions to the Special Account for MINUJUSTH amounted to
$74.5 million. Reimbursement of formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 October 2017 in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations
53. The start of operations of MINUJUSTH provides an opportuni ty for a
reinvigorated partnership with Haiti. The establishment of MINUJUSTH reflects the
commitment of the United Nations to support the consolidation of previous gains and
peacebuilding goals, creating space for the promotion of longer-term stability and
sustainable development in Haiti, through the support for government efforts to
strengthen the rule of law. I reiterate the message that the Deputy Secretary -General,
Amina J. Mohammed, conveyed during her visit to Haiti in November: the United
Nations stands in full solidarity with the people and the Government of Haiti. I look
forward to concrete results emerging from this partnership, through the joint
implementation, by the Government and people of Haiti on the one hand, and
MINUJUSTH and the country team on the other, of common priorities based on
Security Council resolution 2350 (2017) and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
54. I would like to express my appreciation to the Government of H aiti and national
institutions for having acknowledged the fundamentals of the benchmarked exit
strategy, which is designed to help address some of the key rule of law and associated
challenges besetting the country. I encourage MINUJUSTH and its partners to
continue to consult extensively with the Government of Haiti to ensure a closer
convergence of views and priorities and to establish a joint programme of work that
will provide a road map for collaboration and joint action. A strong partnership with
and a resolute commitment by the Haitian counterparts, with the support of
international partners, are indispensable to ensure that adequate progress will be made
within the two-year time frame foreseen in Security Council resolution 2350 (2017).
55. I call on the Security Council to continue encouraging the Government and
national institutions to take full advantage of the expertise and capacities of
MINUJUSTH in producing concrete results towards the benchmarks, setting the stage
for a smooth exit of peacekeeping from the country. My future reports on
MINUJUSTH will be focused on presenting to the Council progress achieved in the
related benchmarks, as well as risks and challenges found in the implementation
process.
56. I look forward to seeing key legislation adopted during the 2018 legislative year,
including the draft Criminal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure, so critical to
buttressing the rule of law and moving the country’s security, political and
development agenda forward. The recent vote by the lower chamber on the draft legal
aid law can be used to create positive momentum to finally provide inmates with
greater access to legal counsel and reduce the high rates of prolonged pretrial
detention.
57. I welcome the discussions that President Moïse has initiated with Parliament on
the elaboration of a joint legislative agenda for 2018, and encourage all relevant actors
to fully engage in these efforts to achieve the long-awaited positive impact on the
justice system. In this regard, the establishment of a Permanent Electoral Council and
Constitutional Council, as well as the completion of the appointments to the Supreme
Court would send a strong message of progress towards a self-sustaining rule of law
framework.

12/19

18-03983

S/2018/241

58. Mindful of the human rights violations resulting from prolonged pretrial
detention and its impact on the overall functioning of the judicial system, I encourage
the Government of Haiti to extend the penal chain committee initiative created a t the
court of first instance in Port-au-Prince to the other 17 courts of first instance in the
country. This strategy to fight against prolonged pretrial detention aims to strengthen
coordination among actors in the penal chain, and consequently, the func tioning of
the judicial system.
59. The controversy surrounding the appointment of the new national human rights
Ombudsperson in October and the lack of progress on the appointment of a senior
government focal point to chair the Interministerial Committee on Human Rights
responsible for the development of a national action plan on human rights indicate
the need for continued international support in this critical area.
60. While I welcome the steady decline in violent crime throughout the country, I
remain concerned about human rights violations allegedly committed by the national
police and regret the lives lost and the suffering caused in relation to the police
operations in Lilavois and Grand-Ravine, which tarnish the image of the force and
diminish other notable achievements. I welcome the internal investigations conducted
into these events and call on the Haitian authorities to ensure that those found
responsible for such harm are brought to justice. Further action is needed to support
the General Inspectorate of the national police in efficiently carrying out its oversight
functions to ensure the application of the code of conduct and legal framework of the
national police. In that regard, and for the broader ongoing professionalization of the
national police, the MINUJUSTH mentoring and advisory programme is critical, and
I stress the need for police-contributing countries to provide the Mission with the
appropriate human resources, including in terms of expertise and gender
representation, to ensure that it delivers.
61. The progress achieved in professionalizing the national police must be
sustained. Shortfalls in the budget to meet its needs, identified in the strategic
development plan for 2017–2021, stand to jeopardize the achievements so far
attained. The Government will need to increase its efforts to ensure the continued
strengthening of police capacities. Similarly, action is still awaited to elevate the
Directorate of Prison Administration into a central-level body with the authority to
manage its own budget and human resources. I reiterate my call to the national
authorities to avert the risk that the re-establishment of the armed forces draw
resources and personnel away from the national police, thus leaving the country with
two partially structured and inadequately funded public security forces.
62. The progress achieved by Haiti in recent years in the areas of stability and
security should now be accompanied by additional gains across all rule of law sectors.
A strong political commitment and concrete strategies and actions from the
Government towards strengthening the rule of law institutions, ending impunity and
preventing corruption are required. Popular demand for the rule of law can be linked
to the initiatives of President Moïse on the “États généraux sectoriels” and the
“Caravane du changement”. MINUJUSTH will work with government officials, civil
society organizations and community leaders through the good offices of my Special
Representative and the mobile teams to propose a new way of dialogue, debate and
negotiation to ensure that rule of law institutions remain accountable and mechanisms
that promote equality before the law are strengthened, while also tailoring
interventions and investing in community-based activities that can have a greater
impact on the rule of law in Haiti, beyond the Mission’s two-year mandate.
63. I want to express my deep gratitude to all the countries that have provided
financial contributions, including through the United Nations Haiti Cholera Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund, to support the new approach to cholera, and I further
18-03983

13/19

S/2018/241

encourage other Member States to come forward with contributions and continue
supporting the path that Haiti is taking towards long-term stability and sustainable
development. I welcome the decision by the Government of Haiti to revise the
medium-term national plan for the elimination of cholera, aimed at reducing
transmission rates to zero. The revision of the plan, or its replacement by a more
forward-looking multi-year plan, is imperative to reach zero transmission and attack
the root causes of the epidemic. I stress the need to bolster our partnership with the
Government of Haiti and reinforce State institutions to take the practical steps
necessary to end the cholera outbreak, including through public-private partnerships.
I am grateful to the Special Envoy for Haiti for mobilizing some of the world ’s most
committed private sector innovators in finance, health and technology to stand with
the Government and people of Haiti to defeat the scourge of cholera and explore
game-changing ways of partnering and deploying new technologies. I look forward
to hosting a high-level retreat on the transformation of Haiti alongside the
Government of Haiti, with participation from high-level experts on impact bonds,
specialists in financing for development, partnership leaders, health experts and
leaders in the technology field, who will come together to support the launch of a
potential development impact bond or other instrument to raise the funds necessary
to end cholera in Haiti and channel the momentum on this front towards the country ’s
bold overall development agenda.
64. The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, visited Haiti on 14–15 March to underscore my intention to strengthen the
partnership between the Government and people of Haiti and the United Nations,
based on solidarity, mutual respect and trust. President Moïse and the Under Secretary-General also discussed the need to work together to prepare t he transition
to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 2350 (2017).
65. I recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of MINUJUSTH to
reflect the timeline defined by the benchmarked exit strategy. During that period, I
will continue to keep the structure of the Mission under constant review and will
revert to the Security Council with my recommendations for a staggered withdrawal
based on the results achieved against the benchmarks and the situation on the ground.
66. In conclusion, I would like to thank my Special Envoy, Josette Sheeran, my
Special Representative, Susan Page, and their teams, who are working to build a new
spirit of partnership with Haiti to strengthen the rule of law institutions as a
foundation for the country’s continued development. I would also like to express my
deep appreciation to the Member States who have contributed police personnel to
MINUJUSTH, as well as to the United Nations country team and other international
partners for their steadfast support to Haiti as it strives to achieve the Goals of the
2030 Agenda.

14/19

18-03983

S/2018/241

Annex I
Benchmarks for an exit strategy
Desired end state
By the end of the mandate of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), a solid foundation for longer-term political stability, security
and development in Haiti has been established. It is underpinned by nationally driven
initiatives designed to set the country on the path to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular
Goal 16, including adequate national budgetary allocations and proactive steps to
address corruption in State institutions.
The country’s rule of law and security institutions — justice, corrections and
police — are able to demonstrate increased professionalism, in particular in their
administrative management capacities, as well as in the ability and willingness to
cooperate to ensure a fully functioning criminal justice system, and increasingly
comply with international human rights standards, supported by functioning
accountability mechanisms. The independent performance of oversight functions by
the national human rights institutions and civil society organizations is able to help
Haiti to advance towards the fulfilment of its human rights obligations. Women and
men across the country express reasonable levels of confidence in the ability of the
rule of law and security institutions to provide security for all Haitians, impartial
access to justice and improved prison conditions, without substantial international
political engagement and operational support. These achievements pave the way for
the transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti.
Benchmarks
1.
The executive and legislative branches have promulgated legislation that
improves access to justice, enhances the development of the Haitian National Police
and addresses prolonged pretrial detention, which is a cause of prison overcrowding;
all branches have initiated implementation of the new legislation, including through
sustainable budget allocations.
2.
The Haitian authorities make timely, gender-balanced and merit-based
appointments in the justice sector, including in the Superior Council of the Judiciary,
the Court of Cassation and the Superior Court of Audits and Administrative Disputes.
3.
The Directorate of Prison Administration performs key management functions
providing basic services to all detainees and ensures respect for their rights.
4.
The national police responds to public disorder and manages security threats
throughout Haiti, demonstrating elevated levels of professionalism, human rights
awareness and gender sensitivity, without requiring international support, as a result
of the implementation of the relevant priorities of the strategic development plan of
the national police for 2017–2021.
5.
Strengthened internal oversight and accountability mechanisms in the justice,
corrections and police sectors address misconduct and ensure increased effectiveness
and compliance with human rights.
6.
Haitian women and men, in particular those from the most vulnerable and
marginalized communities, demonstrate increased trust in the capability and
willingness of the justice system to address crime and of the national police to provide
security.

18-03983

15/19

S/2018/241

7.
The national Office of the Ombudsperson functions independently and protects
citizens whose rights have been violated.
8.
Civil society organizations, including those representing women, engage with
the Haitian authorities to advocate the promotion and protection of human rights, and
are empowered to bring allegations of human rights violations to the competent
judicial or administrative authorities.
9.
National authorities comply with international human rights obligations,
including holding individuals responsible for current and past human rights violations
and fulfilling their reporting obligations to human rights treaty bodies.
10. Rule of law and anti-corruption institutions demonstrate increased capacity to
fight corruption.
11. The Permanent Electoral Council is established through a credible and
transparent process and exercises its electoral responsibilities in an independent and
transparent manner, without requiring international support.

16/19

18-03983

S/2018/241

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police as at 15 February 2018
United Nations police officers
Country

18-03983

Women

Formed police units

Men

Women

Men

Argentina

1

5

–

–

Benin

–

12

–

–

Bangladesh

–

8

–

140

Burkina Faso

1

7

–

–

Brazil

–

1

–

–

Canada

5

14

–

–

Chad

–

2

–

–

Chile

1

2

–

–

Cameroon

1

3

–

–

Colombia

–

6

–

–

Djibouti

–

2

–

–

El Salvador

–

5

–

–

France

–

2

–

–

Germany

1

1

–

–

Guinea

–

2

–

–

India

–

–

–

279

Indonesia

1

2

–

–

Jordan

–

6

–

140

Madagascar

1

8

–

–

Mali

2

28

–

–

Nepal

–

1

13

127

Niger

1

13

–

–

Nigeria

1

1

–

–

Norway

1

5

–

–

Pakistan

–

1

–

–

Portugal

–

1

–

–

Romania

–

5

–

–

Russian Federation

1

3

–

–

Rwanda

–

–

21

119

Senegal

–

3

17

122

Slovakia

–

2

–

–

Spain

–

1

–

–

Sri Lanka

–

1

–

–

Sweden

4

2

–

–

Togo

6

5

–

–

Tunisia

–

8

–

–

17/19

S/2018/241
United Nations police officers
Country

Women

Men

Women

Men

Turkey

–

14

–

–

United States of America

–

3

–

–

Uruguay

–

2

–

–

28

187

51

927

Subtotal
Total
Grand total

18/19

Formed police units

215

978
1 193

18-03983

S/2018/241

Annex III
Map

18-03983

19/19
