General Assembly - Thirty-eighth Session

224

ing its right to sclf-dctermination and indcpcndcncc in
conformity with thc purposcs and principies of thc Charter
and urges the administ<.'ring Powcr to takc ali neccssary
measures to comply fully with thc rclcvant rcsolutions:
6. Reajfirm.1 thc rl.'spons1bility of thc admini~tering
Power, undcr the Chartcr. frir the economic and social
devclopment of Guam and calls upon thc administering
Powcr to take ali necessary stcps to strengthen and divcrsify the economy of the Tcrritory. with a view to reducing
thc Territory's cconomic dcpendence on the administering
Power:
7. Rt'iterates it.1 cal/ upon the administcring Power. in
co-operation with the territorial Govcrnmcnt. to rcmovc
the constraints which limit growth in the rconomic development of the Terntory, part1cularly with rcgard to commercial fishing. agriculturc and thc transportation industry:
8. Cal/s upo11 thc adrninistcring Powcr. in co-operation
with the local authoritics. to accclcratc the transfer of land
to thc people of the Tcrritory.
9. Urges thc adrninistning Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Governmcnt. to continuc to takc effcctivc
measures to safeguard and guarantee the right of the people ofGuarn to thcir natural rcsources and to establish and
maintain control ovcr their future dcvclopment and
requests the administering Power to take ali necessarv
steps to protect the propcrty rights of the pcoplc of thc
Territory;
1O. Takes no/e of thc steps taken by the administering
Power to strengthen its efforts to develop and promote thc
language and culture of the ( 'hamorro people. who cornprise more than hatr of thc population of the Territory.
and reaffirms the importance of further efforts in that ficld:
11. Considers that thc possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Guam atan appropriate time should he
kept under rcview:
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue thc
consideration of this question at its next session. including
the possihle dispatch of a fu11her visiting mission to Guam
at an appropriate time aml in consultation with thc
administcring Power, and to report thereon to the ( ieneral
Assembly at its thirty-ninth ~ession.
86th p/cnar_r 111cctinx
7 /)ecembcr J983

38/43. Question of Bermuda
Thc Ueneral A.ssemh/1·.
Jlaving considcrcd the qucstion of Bermuda,
fiaving examined the relevan! chapters of the report or
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to thc
lmplementation or the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,"
Recalling its rcsolut1on 1514 (XV) of 14 Decemhcr
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs, and ali other
resolutions and decisions of the lJnitcd Nations relating to
Bermuda,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Powcr rclating to the Territory, 111 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes ofthe people of Bermuda in determining the future
constitutional status of thc Territory.
9 i!nd, chaps. 111-V and ;\J"\
!O lhtd., Th1rtr-,·1.l!.hth .)'es.\1011
lh.

Conscious of the nerd to ensure the ful! and speedy
implcmentation nf the Declaration in rcspect of the Territory.
Noling with appreciallon the continued active participation of the adm inistering Power in the work of the Special
( ·ommittee in rcgard to Bermuda. which contrihutes to
informed consideration of conditions in the Territory.
with a view to accclerating the process of decolonization
for the purpose of the full implementation of the Dedarallon,

Rccalling ali rclevant resolutions of the United Nations
rclating to military bases and installations in colonial and
Non-Self-Governmg Territories,
Noting that the economy ofthe Territory continues to he
based on revenue generated from tourism and the registration of foreign companies. which creatcs a heavy depcndence on those activities.
. l u·arc of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
hearing in mind the nccessity of diversifying and strengthcning further its cconomy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stahility.
Mindfúl that l 111tcd Nations visiting missions pro vide
an cffective mcans of asccrtaining the situation in the
small Territorie~.
1. .4pprores the chapter of the report of the Special
l'ommittee on the Situation with regard to the lmplemcntation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependencc
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda: 11
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Bermuda to sclf-detcrmination and indepcndence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, containcd in General
Assemhly resolution 1514 (XV):
3. Rci1cratc., the view that such factors as territorial
s1ze. geographical location. size of population and limited
natural resource~ should in no way dclay the speedy exercise by the people of thc Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and indepcndence. in conformit~
with the Declaration contained in General Asscmbly resolution 15 14 (XV). which fully applies to Bermuda;
4. Urges the administering Power. taking into account
the frecly expresscd will and desire of thc peoplc of Bermuda, to continue to take ali necessary steps to ensure thc
ful! and speedy 1mplementation ofGeneral Assembly resolution l514(XV):
5. Reitera/e, that it is the obligation ofthc administering Power to crcate such conditions in the Territory as will
cnahle the people of Bermuda to exercise frecly and without interference their inalienable right to sclfdetermination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and. in that connection. reaffirms thc importance of fostering an awareness
among the peoplc of Bermuda of thc possihilitics open to
them in the exercise of that right:
6. Reatfirms that, in accordance with the relevant provisions ofthe Chartcr ofthe United Nations and the Dcclaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV). it is ultimately for the people of Bermuda themselves to decide on thl'ir futurc political status:
7. No/es that general elcctions wcre held in the Tcrritorv in Februarv 1983 and also notes with interest that the
Go~ernment o( the Territory has expressed its intention to
revive discussion of the 1979 White Paper on lndepenr

- -- - -

11 11>,d. //11r11·-,·1c:l11/¡ Se111,,,, . .\11¡1¡1/m11111 \',, l3 (A .18 21). chap. XIX
h,11111, (

1111ru1tfl('1',

11th mccltng para-..

l/

dence and to promote public debate on Bermuda's futurc
status;
8. Reajfirms thc importancc of thc necd to fo_stcr
national unity anda national ident11y and takcs note ot thc
steps taken by the local authoritics in that regard. such as
the establishment of an institution with a view to preventing discrimination among thc pcoplc or thc Tcrritory on
racial, rcligious. social or polit1cal groumb;
9. Reaffirms its strong conrictiun that the administcring Power must cnsure that military bases and installations
do not hindcr the peoplc of thc Territory from cxercising
their right to self-determination ami indcpcndcnce in conformity with the purposcs and principies of the Charter
and urges the administering Powcr to takc ali neccssary
measures to comply fully with the n:levant resolutions of
the United Nations relating to military bases and installations in colonial and Non-Self-Cioverning Territories;
10. Urges once again the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial (iovernment, to continue to
take ali effective measures to guarantce thc right of the
peoplc of Bermuda to own and d1sposc of thcir natural
resources and to estabhsh ami maintain cont1ol or thcir
future developmcnt:
11. Strongly urges the administcring Powcr. in consultation with the Government of Bermuda, to make every
effort to diversify thc econorny of Bermuda, including
increased efforts to prornote agriculturc and fisherics and
thc manufacturing sector for thc benetit of the pcoplc of
the Territory;
12. VVelcomes the role bcing playcd in the Territory by
the Unitcd Nations Dcvcloprnent Programme in providing assistance in thc ficlds of agriculture. forestry and tisheries and urges thc speciali1cd agencies and ali other
organizations of the I J nited Nat1ons systcm to continue to
pay special attcntion to thc development nccds of Bermuda;
13. Reiterares ils cal/ upon the administering Powcr, 111
co-operation with thc local authorities. to continuc to
expedite the process of "bcrrnudianizalion" in the Tcrntory and, in that conncction, urges that particular attcnlion
be paid to greater localization of thc publtc servicc:
14. Calls upon thc Govcrnrncnt of the ll nitcd Kingdom of Great Hritain and Northcrn lreland to rcccivc a
visiting mission in the Tcrritory at an appropnate time:
15. Requcs/s the Special ( ·ommittcc to continue thc
examination of this question at its next session. including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to Bermuda at
an appropriatc time ami in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thn,·on to thc Cirneral Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
SMh p/cnarr meeting
7
/)eccmhcr 1983

38/44.

Question of thc British Virgin lslands

The General Asscmh/1,
Hal'ing cnnsidercd thc question of thc British Virgin

Islands,
Having cxamincd the relevant chapters of thc report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with rcgard to the
lmplemcntation of thc Declaration on thc Granting of
Independencc to Colonial Countries and Pcoples, 12
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Decernbcr
1960, containing the Declaration on thc Ciranting of Inde12 /bid .. chaps. 111 and XX
13 ihíd., Thírtr-/irst S1•11w11, .\11¡>¡•/c,11< m \,
chap. XX V 111. anncx. para I ó:'

_, i i ·\ '· 1 ." ! K,·1·. 1), wl IV.

pendence to Colonial ( ·ountries and Peoples. and ali othe1
resolutions and dccisions ofthc l lnitcd Nations rclating to
the British Virgin lslands.
J'ak1ng in/o 11ccoum thc statement of thc reprcscntati\'e
of thc administering l'owcr rclating to the Territ01"}. 1" in
which he said that his (iovernment would fully rcspcct tlw
,\ ishcs of the pcople or the British Virgin lslands in dctnmining thc future pohtical status of the Territory,
( ·011scious of thc nced to cnsurc thc full and spccd 1
irnplcmentation of the Declaration in rcspect of thc Tcrn•
tory,
!Voflng 11·ith 11pprcc1aIion the continued active participa
tion of thc administering Power in thc work of the Spcc1al
Committee in rcgard to thc British Virgin lslands. thercb 1
cnabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful
cxamination of the situation in the Territory, with a view
to accelerating the process of decolonization for thc purposc of thc full irnplcmentation of thc Dcclaration.
Rcaftirming the rcsponsibility of thc adrninislc'nng
Power for the cconomic and social dcvclopmcnl ni' thc
Tcrritory.
lúk111g note ofthc fact that thc econorny ofthe Terntor1
has continued to grow during the period undcr 1-c, iew.
particularly in the llt'ids of real estate and construction
industries. tourism and banking,
.-1 w11rc of thc special circumstanccs of the gcographiGII
locat1on and cconorn ic conditions of the Territor1 and
bcaring in mind thc nccessity of divcrsifying and strl'ngth
cning further its economy as a matter of priority in ordn
to prornote cconomic stability.
Rccu!líng the recommendation of the llnitcd Nation~
visiting mission dispatched to thc British Virgin lslands in
1976 11 that thc administering Powcr should facilitate thc
participation of the Territory as an associate rnernbn in
vanous organizations within thc United Nations system a,
part of the overall strategy of accelerating thc dccoloni1ation process, and the continuing assistance providcd by thc
l lnited Nations Developmcnt Programmc in thc den·lopmcnt of thc Territory_
H111dfú/ that llnitcd Nations visiting missions prnvilk
an etlectivc means of ascertaining the situation 111 thc
small Tcrritories and cxpressing its satisfaction at the wtllingncss of thc administcring Power to receive visiting rnissions in thc Tcrritorics under its administration.
1. . lpprol'cs thc chapter of the report of the Spccial
Comrnittee on the Situation with regard to thc lmplementation ofthe Declaration on thc Granting of lndependencc
to ( 'olonial Countrics and Pcoples relating to thc British
Virgin lslands: 14
2. Rca/firms the inalienable right of thc pcople of thc
British Virgin lsland~ to sclf-dctermination and indcpendcncl' in conformity w1th thl' Dcdaration on thc Ciranting
of lndcpendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. contained in General As~cmbly resolution 1514 (XV):
3. Reiterares thc l'iew that such factors as tcrri tonal
s1ze. geographical location. size of population and limikd
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation ofthe Declaration contained in General Assernbly rcsolution 1514 (X V). which fully applics to the Briti~h
Virgin lslands;
4. Reilerates that 1t is the responsibility ofthe administering Power to create such conditions in the Tcrritory as
will cnablc the peoplc of the British Virgin lslands to cxercise freely and without interference their inalienable right
to self-dctermination and indcpendence in accordancc
