S/2019/541

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 June 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the sixty-ninth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The report covers the period from 24 May to 23 June 2019.
Pursuant to the framework of the structured dialogue agreed between the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Arab Republic, the Declaration Assessment Team
continues its efforts to clarify all outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration
of the Syrian Arab Republic. The outcomes of the twentieth and twenty -first rounds
of technical consultations between the Team and the Syrian Arab Republic, held from
18 to 21 March 2019 in The Hague and from 10 to 17 April 2019 in Damascus,
respectively, will be reported to the OPCW Executive Council at its ninety -first
session.
On 28 May 2019, the Technical Secretariat briefed the States parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention on the status of the structured dialogue and on the
implementation by the Technical Secretariat of all activities related to the Syrian
chemical weapons programme.
The Director-General reported that the second round of high-level consultations
to continue the structured dialogue had been postponed following the receipt from the
Syrian Arab Republic of a note verbale dated 23 April 2019, in which it reiterated its
position that it did not recognize or accept the decision adopted by the Conference of
the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention at its fourth special session
on 27 June 2018. In the note verbal, the Syrian Arab Republic further stated that it
would not issue a visa to the Coordinator of the Investigation and Identification Team
to enable him to travel to Damascus. In response, on 9 May 2019, the Director General sent a letter to the Syrian Arab Republic in which he communicated his
decision to postpone the round of consultations and invited the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to reconsider its position.
As I have stated repeatedly, the use of chemical weapons by anyone and
anywhere is intolerable, and impunity for their use is equally unacceptable. It is
imperative to identify and hold accountable all those who have used chemical
weapons. Unity in the Security Council is essential to achieve this urgent obligation.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-11070 (E)

020719

*1911070*

S/2019/541

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
Elimination of the Syrian Chemical Weapons Programme” prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the OPCW Executive Council Decision EC -M33/DEC.1, and the United Nations Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), both
dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to the Security Council. My report covers
the period from 24 May 2019 to 23 June 2019 and also covers the repo rting
requirements of the Executive Council decision EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013.
(Signed) Fernando Arias

2/7

19-11070

S/2019/541

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]

Report of the Director-General of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
Background
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Detailed
Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian Chemical
Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013). In
paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat should report
on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by subparagraph
2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Reports
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February
2015) noting the Director-General’s intent to include reports of the OPCW Fact
Finding Mission in Syria (FFM), along with information on the Council ’s discussion
thereof, as part of the monthly reporting pursuant to United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013). Similarly, the Council, at its Eighty-First Session, adopted a
decision entitled “Report by the Director-General Regarding the Declaration and
Related Submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-81/DEC.4, dated 23 March
2016), noting the Director General’s intent to provide information on the
implementation of that decision.
4.
The Council, at its Eighty-Third Session, adopted a decision entitled “OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism Reports on Chemical Weapons Use in
the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-83/DEC.5, dated 11 November 2016). In
subparagraph 12(a) of that decision, the Council decided that the Director-General
shall “regularly inform the Council on the implementation of this decision and
incorporate information regarding the implementation of this decision into his
monthly reporting to the United Nations Security Council, through the United Nations
Secretary-General, regarding EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
5.
This, the sixty-ninth monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance with
the aforementioned Council decisions and includes information relevant to the period
from 24 May to 23 June 2019.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
Executive Council decisions EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
6.

19-11070

Progress by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:

3/7

S/2019/541

(a) As stated in previous reports, the Secretariat has verified the destruction
of all 27 chemical weapons production facilities (CWPFs) declared by the Syrian
Arab Republic;
(b) On 12 June 2019, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
sixty seventh monthly report (EC-91/P/NAT.4, dated 12 June 2019) regarding
activities on its territory related to the destruction of its CWPFs, as required by
paragraph 19 of EC M 34/DEC.1.
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties
hosting destruction activities
7.
As stated in previous reports, all of the chemicals declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic that were removed from its territory in 2014 have been destroyed.
Activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to Executive
Council decisions EC-81/DEC.4 and EC-83/DEC.5
8.
The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) continues its efforts to clarify all
outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic in
accordance with paragraph 3 of Council decision EC -81/DEC.4 and paragraph 6 of
Council decision EC-83/DEC.5.
9.
Pursuant to the framework of the Structured Dialogue agreed between the
Secretariat and the Syrian Arab Republic on all chemical weapons -related issues, the
twentieth and twenty-first rounds of technical consultations between the DAT and the
Syrian Arab Republic took place, respectively, between 18 and 21 March 2019 in The
Hague, and between 10 and 17 April 2019 in Damascus. During the twentieth round
of consultations, all outstanding issues were discussed and re -grouped, with a view
to developing a plan of future activities aimed at further clarifying these issues. The
DAT subsequently deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic between 10 and 17 April
2019 for the twenty-first round of consultations.
10. During this visit, the DAT held a number of technical meetings with the Syrian
National Authority, conducted one interview, and also conducted field visits to five
sites from which it collected a total of 33 samples for analysis by OPCW designated
laboratories. In the course of one of the field visits, the DAT n oted the absence of
remnants of destroyed production equipment and chemical munitions that the Syrian
Arab Republic and DAT had agreed in 2015 to preserve at their original locations, to
keep them available for activities aiming to help clarify gaps, incon sistencies, and
discrepancies in the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial declaration and subsequent
submissions. During a visit to a previously declared CWPF, the DAT also observed
the presence of several undestroyed cylinders. The DAT requested the Syrian Arab
Republic to retain these items untouched at their current location until further notice.
The outcome of these two rounds of consultations and the related field activities will
be reported in further detail to the Council at its Ninety-First Session.
11. The DAT will continue to analyse all information collected and received,
including the results of the analysis of samples collected during the twenty-first round
of consultations, together with any further information that may be provided by the
Syrian Arab Republic and/or collected from possible future DAT deployments, and
will report to the Council accordingly.
12. In accordance with paragraph 10 of Council decision EC -83/DEC.5, the
Secretariat continues to assess conditions for the conduct of inspections at the sites
identified by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in its third
and fourth reports. Pursuant to paragraph 11 of Council decision EC -83/DEC.5, the
Secretariat conducted the third and fourth rounds of inspections at the Barzah and
4/7

19-11070

S/2019/541

Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) in
November and December 2018, respectively. Samples were taken during both
inspections for analysis in OPCW designated laboratories. The results of these
analyses were received and subsequently shared with the Syrian Arab Republic.
13. During the third round of inspections, a Schedule 2.B.04 chemical was detected
in one of the samples taken at Barzah and reported as an uncertainty requiring
explanation from the Syrian Arab Republic. According to the reports of the two
designated laboratories, the chemical detected could be the primary hydrolysis
product of a Schedule 1.A.01 or 1.A.03 chemical. During the fourth round of
inspections, there were no indications of any activities that were inconsistent with the
obligations of the Syrian Arab Republic. The results of the third and fourth rounds of
inspections will be reported to the Council at its Ninety-First Session, and the
Secretariat is currently planning for the fifth round of ins pections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities.
Other activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to the
Syrian Arab Republic
14. On 28 May 2019, the Secretariat briefed States Parties on the status of the
Structured Dialogue and on the Secretariat’s implementation of all activities related
to the Syrian chemical weapons programme. The Director-General delivered opening
remarks at the briefing, in which he updated States Parties on recent developments in
the progress of the Structured Dialogue.
15. The Director-General reported that the second round of high-level consultations
to continue the Structured Dialogue had been initially planned to take place in
Damascus from 8 to 10 May 2019. In response to a note verbale from the Secreta riat
that proposed participants and an agenda for the meeting, which included the
Coordinator of the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) and issues related to
the IIT, on 23 April 2019, the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab
Republic, Mr Faisal Mekdad, sent a letter to the Director-General that reiterated the
Syrian Arab Republic’s refusal to recognise the decision of the Conference of the
States Parties (hereinafter “the Conference”) C-SS-4/DEC.3, (dated 27 June 2018),
entitled “Addressing the Threat from Chemical Weapons Use”. The note verbale
further stated that the Syrian Arab Republic refused to accept any of the implications
and effects of the decision, and that as a consequence of its position, the Syrian Arab
Republic would not issue a visa to the Coordinator of the IIT to visit Damascus.
16. On 9 May 2019, the Director-General sent a letter to Deputy Minister Mekdad
that recalled that all States Parties and the Secretariat have an obligation to implement
decisions adopted by the Conference, and that invited the Syrian Arab Republic to
reconsider its position regarding decision C-SS-4/DEC.3. In the letter, the Director
General also communicated his decision to postpone the second round of
consultations under the Structured Dialogue, and he invited a delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic to The Hague for further consultations on this issue.
17. In his remarks at the briefing on 28 May 2019, the Director-General further
addressed questions regarding the disclosure of an inter nal document relating to the
FFM report entitled “Report of the Fact-Finding Mission Regarding the Incident of
Alleged Use of Toxic Chemicals as a Weapon in Douma, Syrian Arab Republic, on
7 April 2018” (S/1731/2019, dated 1 March 2019). The Director-General’s remarks
on this matter have been published on the OPCW website.
18. Following the Director-General’s remarks, the Secretariat briefed States Parties
on the status of activities being implemented by the FFM, IIT, and DAT, and with
regard to the biannual inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities at the SSRC.
The Secretariat will continue to provide regular briefings to States Parties on the
19-11070

5/7

S/2019/541

status of progress in the Structured Dialogue and on all activities being implemented
by the Secretariat with regard to the Syrian chemical weapons programme.
19. The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) continues to provide
support to the OPCW mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in accordance wi th the
Tripartite Agreement concluded between the OPCW, UNOPS, and the Syrian Arab
Republic.
20. As at the cut-off date of this report, one OPCW staff member was deployed as
part of the OPCW mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
21. Guided by Council decisions EC-M-48/DEC.1 and EC-M-50/DEC.1 (dated
23 November 2015), as well as by United Nations Security Council resolution 2209
(2015), the FFM continues to study all available information relating to the
allegations of use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
22. At the end of September 2018, the FFM deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic
to gather further information and conduct interviews regarding five reported incidents
currently under investigation: two incidents in Kharbit Masasnah on 7 July 2017 and
4 August 2017; one incident in Qalib Al-Thawr, Al-Salamiyah on 9 August 2017; one
incident in Yarmouk, Damascus on 22 October 2017; and one incident in Al-Balil,
Souran on 8 November 2017. The FFM is currently analysing the information
collected with regard to these incidents and will report to the Council on the results
of this analysis in due course.
23. In response to a note verbale from the Syrian Arab Republic dated 28 November
2018, the Director-General deployed an advance team to Damascus from 4 to
6 December 2018 to collect information provided by the Syrian National Authority
regarding an incident of alleged use of chemicals as a weapon in Aleppo on
24 November 2018. The FFM deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic from 5 to
15 January 2019 to conduct interviews and visit hospitals in Aleppo, and to receive
samples provided by the Syrian authorities in Damascus. The Secretariat is analysing
the collected information.
Activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to decision
C-SS-4/DEC.3 of the Conference of the States Parties at its Fourth Special
Session related to the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic
24. Decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 addresses, inter alia, the use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic. In paragraph 8 of the decision, the Conference encouraged
the Director General to continue to provide regular upd ates on the FFM’s operations,
taking into account the need to protect the security and safety of Secretariat personnel.
25. Pursuant to paragraph 10 of C-SS-4/DEC.3, the Secretariat has established the
IIT, which has initiated its work to identify the perp etrators of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic by identifying and reporting on all information
potentially relevant to the origin of those chemical weapons in those instances in
which the FFM determines or has determined that use or likely use occurred, and
cases for which the OPCW United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has not
issued a report.
26. Pursuant to paragraph 24 of decision C-SS-4/DEC.3, the next progress report
on implementation of that decision will be submitted to the Council at its Ninety-First
Session.

6/7

19-11070

S/2019/541

Supplementary resources
27. As previously reported, the Trust Fund for Syria Missions was established in
November 2015 to support the FFM and other remaining activities, which include the
work of the DAT and IIT, and the biannual inspections of the SSRC. As at the cut -off
date of this report, total contributions to this fund stood at EUR 21.1 million.
Contribution agreements had been concluded with Australia, Canada, Chile,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Monaco, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America, and the European Union.
Conclusion
28. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic will be on the activities of the FFM; the implementation of Council
decisions EC-83/DEC.5 and EC-81/DEC.4, including declaration-related issues;
annual inspections of the underground structures already verified as d estroyed; and
the implementation of Conference decision C-SS-4/DEC.3. These activities will
continue to be implemented within the framework of the Structured Dialogue with
the Syrian Arab Republic.

19-11070

7/7
