S/2020/876

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 September 2020
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2491 (2019)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 3 of Security Council
resolution 2491 (2019), in which the Council renewed its request to me to report on
the implementation of resolution 2240 (2015), in particular the implementation of
paragraphs 7 to 10 of that resolution.
2.
The report covers developments since my previous report of 6 April 2020
(S/2020/275) until 20 August 2020. The information and observations herein are
based on submissions by Member States, relevant international and regional bodies
and United Nations entities.

II. Smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons in the
Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Libya
Update on developments along the central Mediterranean route
3.
The Mediterranean Sea remains a deadly thoroughfare for refugees and migrants
trying to reach European shores. During the reporting period, many people have again
perished or gone missing at sea on their way to Europe, and thousands have been
returned to Libya, where they remain at risk of grave harm. From 1 March to 31 July
2020, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) estimate that 168 refugees
and migrants perished or went missing at sea on the central Mediterranean route,
including at least 56 after departing from Libya. 1 During the same period in 2019,
UNHCR and IOM estimated that 441 refugees and migrants perished or went missing,
including 433 after departing from Libya. IOM estimated that an additional 60 people
may have died along the central Mediterranean route in the period from 1 March to
31 July 2020 as a result of so-called “invisible shipwrecks”, 2 where the final
__________________

According to the International Organization for Migration (IOM) Missing Migrants Project, there
were 416 deaths for 23,141 attempted crossings in the first seven months of 2020 (1.8 per cent),
compared with 921 deaths for 11,373 attempted crossings in the first seven months of 2019
(8.1 per cent).
2
“Invisible shipwrecks” refers to situations where the whereabouts of boats carrying re fugees and
migrants could not be established and no search and rescue operations were carried out, and
where no non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or family members have had contact with
those on board for at least one month following their disappearanc e.
1

20-11110 (E)

040920

*2011110*

S/2020/876

whereabouts of boats carrying refugees and migrants could not be established. Those
numbers, however, do not account for people who died or went missing after they
were returned to Libya. Beyond the central Mediterranean route, from 1 March to
31 July 2020, IOM and UNHCR recorded at least 24 refugees and migrants as having
died or gone missing at sea on the western Mediterranean rou te and 8 on the eastern
Mediterranean route, compared with 124 and 54, respectively, during the same period
in 2019.
4.
From 1 March to 31 July 2020, UNHCR and IOM recorded around 20,000
arrivals of refugees and migrants in Europe via the three main sea r outes across the
Mediterranean, a roughly 30 per cent decrease as compared with the same period in
2019, when over 28,000 arrivals by sea in Europe were recorded. The central
Mediterranean route accounted for roughly 60 per cent of these arrivals, with ove r
12,410 refugees and migrants coming mainly from Tunisia and Libya, but also from
Algeria (of this total over 11,460 arrived in Italy and over 950 in Malta). This
represents a 142 per cent increase for this route as compared with the almost 5,140
recorded arrivals from 1 March to 31 July 2019 (approximately 3,605 in Italy and
approximately 1,535 in Malta). The increase in arrivals in Europe through the central
Mediterranean route was mainly driven by an increase in departures from Libya and
Tunisia. 3 From 1 March to 31 July 2020, over 3,100 arrivals by sea in Greece through
the eastern Mediterranean route were recorded and almost 4,200 arrivals in Spain
through the western Mediterranean route, compared with over 14,500 arrivals by sea
in Greece and around 7,950 arrivals by sea in Spain during the same period in 2019.
5.
From 1 March to 31 July, UNHCR recorded 9,500 people (82 per cent men,
5 per cent women and 13 per cent children) as having departed from Libya, compared
with 6,636 people (79 per cent men, 6 per cent women and 15 per cent children)
during the same period the year before. The European Union noted that the
Tripolitania region was the most active area for departures from Libya during the
reporting period. Among those arriving in Italy from Libya during the reporting
period, IOM estimated that more than half (57 per cent) departed from Zuwarah,
14 per cent from Zawiyah, 5 per cent from Sabratah, with the rest departing from Qasr
al-Qarabulli, Khums, Zlitan and Tripoli. 4 Of those returned to Libya, IOM estimates
that approximately 60 per cent had embarked from the Khums and Qasr al -Qarabulli
area and roughly 35 per cent from the Zawiyah and Zuwarah areas.
6.
The European Union estimated that, from 1 March to 31 July 2020,
approximately 9,050 persons were rescued or intercepted in 128 operations 5 by
various vessels in the areas of operation of its Naval Force military operations in the
Southern Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA) and in the
Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED operation IRINI), 6 52 of which were conducted
by the Libyan coastguard and navy.
7.
According to UNHCR data, from 1 March to 31 July 2020, of those departing
from Libya, 45 per cent were rescued or intercepted by the Libyan coastguard in the
Libyan and Maltese search and rescue regions, 24 per cent were rescued by Italian
authorities, 8 per cent managed to reach Italy on their own, 7 per cent were rescued
by non-governmental organization (NGO) vessels, 7 per cent were rescued by the
__________________

From 1 March to 31 July 2020, IOM recorded 4,796 arrivals via the central Mediterranean route
from Libya in Italy and Malta, and 5,216 arrivals from Tunisia in Italy, compared with 2,465
arrivals from Libya in Italy and Malta and 1,226 arrivals from Tunisia in Italy during the same
period in 2019.
4
For 16 per cent of those who arrived by sea in Italy from Libya, the departure area was unknown.
5
128 safety of life at sea incidents in which a naval unit (civil or military) was involved.
6
According to the European Union, the areas of operation of EUNAVFOR MED operations
SOPHIA and IRINI are largely the same, with the area of operation of operation IRINI having
been expanded northwards up to the 37th parallel north.
3

2/16

20-11110

S/2020/876

Armed Forces of Malta, 4 per cent were rescued or intercepted by merchant vessels
(disembarking roughly a quarter of those rescued or intercepted at sea in Libya, and
the rest in Italy or Malta) and a small percentage (3 per cent) were rescued or
intercepted by fishing boats (some on behalf of the Maltese authorities).
Methods of migrant smugglers and traffickers in persons
8.
The European Union reported that the lack of effective State institutions and
continued instability in Libya have created a space in which illicit activities, including
trafficking in persons and smuggling of people, could thrive. The European Union
noted that migrant smugglers and human traffickers continued to use primarily rubber
and wooden boats, and secondarily fibreglass boats, with migrant smuggling groups
in the western launching area from Tripoli to Abu Kammash predominantly using
wooden or fibreglass boats, and groups operating in the eastern launching region from
Tripoli to Misratah mainly using rubber boats and occasionally fibreglass boats. The
individual fare for transport to Europe remained the same as during the previous
reporting periods, with cost of travel by inflatable boat ranging from EUR 500 to
EUR 1,400 and by wooden boat from EUR 800 to EUR 1,500, depending on the size
of the boat and the number of people on board. With rubber boats able to
accommodate up to 120 persons, migrant smugglers and human traffickers could
recoup up to EUR 168,000 per boat. IOM and UNHCR noted that, while the boats
used for the journey to Europe were often unseaworthy and overcrowded, the overall
number of people on each inflatable boat was generally less tha n during the height of
the crisis in 2017. Often, smugglers neither provided migrants and refugees with
sufficient food and water nor distributed life jackets.
9.
The European Union reported that tactics employed by people smugglers
remained the same as during the previous reporting period. The majority of boats
smuggling migrants and refugees along the central Mediterranean route were filled
with insufficient fuel to reach European shores, but enough to reach waters beyond
the 12 nautical mile limit of the territorial sea of Libya. UNHCR observed that, during
the reporting period, boats travelled further from the Libyan coast in an attempt to
pass beyond the Libyan Search and Rescue Region to avoid interception by the Libyan
coastguard and navy, to make rescue by European actors more likely, or to reach
Europe directly. The European Union further reported that, to avoid being
apprehended by the Libyan coastguard and navy, the smugglers would leave refugees
and migrants to travel alone, providing them with ba sic instructions on how to
navigate the sea using a Global Positioning System or directing towards oil rigs off
the coast of Libya. In some cases, upon reaching a certain point outside the territorial
sea of Libya, as indicated by the Global Positioning Sy stem, boat occupants were
instructed to use a satellite phone to call the Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre in
Rome or NGO entities, to alert them of their situation and await rescue. In other cases,
directions given by smugglers were limited to maintain ing a straight line in one
direction until no fuel was left.
Situation of migrants and refugees in Libya
10. As stressed repeatedly in previous and related reports, including in S/2020/275
and S/2020/832, given the considerable risk of being subjected to human rights abuses
and unsafe practices, Libya cannot be considered a place of safety for the
disembarkation of refugees and migrants under international law, including
international human rights law, international refugee law and the law of the sea.
Nevertheless, refugees and migrants continue to be disembarked in Libya, mainly
after interception by the Libyan coastguard and navy, but also by private vess els at
the direction of Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre or individual Member States,
with most of those disembarked in Libya subsequently sent to detention centres.
20-11110

3/16

S/2020/876

According to UNHCR, from 1 March to 31 July 2020, around 4,450 refugees and
migrants were intercepted and disembarked in Libya, compared with approximately
3,700 during the same period in 2019. According to IOM, 60 per cent of the refugees
and migrants disembarked by the Libyan coastguard during the reporting period were
disembarked at the Abu Sittah disembarkation point in Tripoli, and 23 per cent at the
main port of Tripoli. 7 There were reports of unsafe interception practices and use of
force during disembarkation. On 27 July, three migrants were killed and two others
were injured in a shooting at Khums disembarkation point shortly after they and
60 other people had been disembarked by the Libyan coastguard. 8 On 10 April,
artillery shelling on the main port of Tripoli, where a disembarkation operation had
just ended, endangered the lives of refugees and migrants, as well as IOM, UNHCR
and International Rescue Committee personnel providing humanitarian assistance and
the Libyan officials involved.
11. UNHCR reported that those intercepted at sea by the Libyan authorities during
the reporting period originated primarily from the Sudan (50 per cent), Bangladesh
(19 per cent) and Mali (8 per cent). 9 On the basis of available data, adult men
accounted for about 85 per cent, women for 8 per cent and children for 7 per cent of
those disembarked. 10 Information on nationality, age or gender of those disembarked
in Libya could not always be gathered, owing to the speed of disembarkation and
subsequent transfer, lack of systematic access to monitor disembarkations by some
agencies and lack of systematic reporting of those figures by the Libyan authorities.
While data on disabilities among intercepted refugees and migrants is not
systematically recorded, it is estimated that 15 per cent of those disembarked had
some form of disability. Despite challenges, IOM and UNHCR, in cooperation with
the International Rescue Committee, continued to provide medical assistance and core
relief items to people upon disembarkation and before their transfer by the Libyan
authorities to detention centres and other destinations. In the light of the COVID-19
pandemic, IOM supported the Libyan coastguard through the provision of personal
protective equipment for its officers, as well as body temperature testing devices.
Owing to the paucity of resources and testing capacities, only in some cases, mostly
in the Tripoli area, did the National Centre for Disease Control perform medical
checks at disembarkation.
12. Libya has acceded to seven of the nine core international human rights
instruments, including the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in 2004. 11 Libya is not a party
to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees but is a signatory to the
1969 Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of
Refugee Problems in Africa. However, Libya has not yet adopted asylum legislation
__________________

For comparison, during the same period in 2019, according to IOM, 47 per cent of
disembarkations by the Libyan coastguard were at Khums disembarkation point, and 34 per cent
at the Abu Sittah disembarkation point in Tripoli.
8
UNHCR, “UNHCR urges investigation following deadly incident at Libya disembarkation point”,
28 July 2020; and IOM, “IOM deplores killing of two migrants returned from sea to Libya”,
dated 28 July 2020.
9
Percentages are calculated on the basis of the number of persons whose nationality was known.
Data on nationality was not available for 22 per cent of those disembarked.
10
Percentages are calculated on the basis of the number of persons whose age and gender were
known.
11
Libya has ratified several relevant treaty instruments that apply without discrimination to refugees
and migrants, including: the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination; the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women; the Convention against Torture and other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the Convention on the Rights of the Child; and
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
7

4/16

20-11110

S/2020/876

or established asylum procedures and Libyan authorities continue not to fully
recognize the mandate of UNHCR in providing and overseeing the application of
international refugee protection. Under Libyan law, all irregular entries, stays or
departures continue to be criminalized, and migrants and refugees continue to be
subjected to arbitrary and indefinite detention upon disembarkation by the Libyan
Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration. With the formal policy of detention
remaining in place in Libya, IOM and UNHCR reported that, from 1 March until
31 July 2020, about half of the refugees and migrants disembarked in Libya were
transferred to detention centres managed by the Directorate for Combating Illegal
Migration. Over 20 per cent were released or escaped immediately after
disembarkation. In at least one instance in late July 2020, those seeking to escape
were shot at and some were killed. 12 Of those disembarked, over 1,200 individuals
were taken to an investigation and transit centre wh ere violations of their human
rights are reported to have occurred.
13. As at 31 July 2020, more than 2,780 people, 22 per cent of whom are children,
are estimated to be detained in detention centres managed by the Directorate for
Combating Illegal Migration throughout Libya. Of this total, 44 per cent are UNHCR
persons of concern. Horrific conditions and ill-treatment in detention persist,
including reports of torture, enforced disappearances and sexual and gender-based
violence at the hands of Directorate officials, together with a lack of food and health
care. Men and boys are routinely threatened with violence when they are calling their
families, to pressure them to send ransom money. Migrants and refugees have been
shot at when they attempted to escape, resulting in injuries and deaths. When it is
believed that migrants and refugees are too weak to survive, they are often taken to
nearby hospitals and left there or left on the streets or in the bushes to die.
14. Despite overcrowding, Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration detention
centres in Tariq al-Sikkah in Tripoli, Nasir in Zawiyah, Dahr al-Jabal, and Suq
al-Khamis (Khums 2) continue to receive new detainees following their arrest or
interception at sea. In the Suq al-Khamis detention centre, the Directorate and armed
police have beaten detainees protesting their deplorable conditions with metal bars,
resulting in injuries. In the Dahr al-Jabal in Zintan and Suq al-Khamis detention
centres, detainees have been kept in courtyards with no roof, exposed to extreme heat.
Others have been held in cells with no ventilation, electricity or any kind of lighting.
Many of the detainees have not been provided with mattresses and sleep on the floor.
The United Nations continues to receive reports of extortion for money, forced labour,
and disappearances of migrants and asylum seekers from the Suq al-Khamis and Nasir
and Abu Isa in Zawiyah detention centres. For fear of retaliation and abuse,
individuals with diverse sexual orientations and gender identities are believed to be
unlikely to come forward to report abuse and seek related protection and urgent
assistance. Refugees and migrants with disabilities continue to be at particular risk of
violence in detention centres.
15. Detained migrants and refugees in Libya, both women and girls as well as men
and boys, remain at high risk of sexual and gender-based violence, including rape,
which is used as a form of torture, with some cases resulting in death. Sexual violence
has been committed by guards of the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration and
non-State armed groups and used as a routine method for controlling and humiliating
migrants and refugees. It continues to be perpetrated with impunity. Women and girls
are routinely held in facilities without female guards and strip-searched by, or in front
of, male guards. Systematic disregard for their privacy in sanitation facilities
__________________
12

20-11110

UNHCR, “UNHCR urges investigation following deadly incident at Libya disembarkation point”,
28 July 2020; and IOM, “IOM deplores killing of two migrants returned from sea to Libya”,
8 July 2020.
5/16

S/2020/876

continues. Women and girls also lack access to sexual and reproductive health
services, including menstrual hygiene products and provisions for pregnant or nursing
women. Not only do pregnant women face the same threats of rape and other forms
of sexual abuse as all other women, they also have very limited or no access to the
health care that they need, often leading to miscarriage. 13 The United Nations also
received reports that boys in the Abu Isa detention centre in Zawiyah were sexually
abused.
16. The United Nations continues to receive reports of heavy weapons and
ammunition being stored at several Libyan detention centres. Refugees and migrants
in detention centres continue to be subjected to forced labour, including being forced
to load weapons and repair machine guns and cars belonging to armed groups. The
Organization has also received credible information of forced recruitment among
refugees and migrants. The ongoing clashes between non-State armed groups in
Tripoli, which started following the withdrawal of the Libyan National Army from
the front lines in greater Tripoli, will likely continue and may furth er endanger the
lives of migrants and refugees, including those in detention centres. More than a year
after the air strike on 2 July 2019 by an unmanned aerial vehicle on the Tajura’
detention centre outside Tripoli, which resulted in the death of over 50 refugees and
migrants and left many more injured, those responsible have still not been held to
account.
17. In addition to the violations reported in the detention centres managed by the
Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration, there are reports of g rave human rights
violations, including child rights violations, in detention facilities run by armed
groups affiliated with the Government of National Accord, where hundreds were
detained. Traffickers in persons and migrant smugglers have detained hundred s of
migrants and refugees in camps within and on the outskirts of a number of towns and
cities. 14 Some of those camps are under the control of Libyan armed groups, including
groups affiliated with the Libyan National Army or the Government of National
Accord, and are usually managed by foreign nationals. In late May, in one of these
camps situated in the town of Mizdah, south-west of Tripoli, 26 migrants from
Bangladesh 15 and 4 from Sub-Saharan Africa were shot dead by relatives of the
smugglers, while another 11 sustained severe injuries. IOM medical staff who referred
those in critical condition to clinics in Tripoli reported that some of the migrants bore
the marks of beatings and physical abuse. As at 31 July 2020, no arrests have been
reported in connection with the incident.
18. UNHCR reported that, since June 2020, over 100 individuals had arrived in
Tripoli from trafficking camps in Bani Walid, often in very poor physical condition
and in dire need of assistance, among them one young asylum seeker who died shortly
after reaching Tripoli. 16 The United Nations in Libya further received reports of
bodies of migrants and refugees being dumped in dry rivers and in the desert, 17
following their deaths in camps at the hands of traffickers and smugglers as a result
of torture, gunshots and disease. Abuse in Libya is in addition to the extreme peril

__________________

United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), Desperate and Dangerous: Report on the Human
Rights Situation of Migrants and Refugees in Libya (2018).
14
In Tazirbu, Kufrah, Birak al-Shati’, Shuwayrif, Bani Walid, Zawiyah, Nasamah and Mizdah.
15
The 26 Bangladeshi nationals reportedly travelled to Libya (Benghazi) via several stops between
January 2019 and March 2020.
16
UNHCR, “UNHCR expresses condolences over tragic death of asylum-seeker in Libya, urges
more action against criminal smuggling and trafficking”, 24 July 2020.
17
In Mizdah, Shuwayrif, Birak al-Shati’ and Bani Walid.
13

6/16

20-11110

S/2020/876

and human rights violations that refugees and migrants experience along the route to
Libya from western and eastern Africa. 18
19. On 28 April, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) raised serious concerns over collective expulsions and summary
deportations of migrants and asylum seekers from Libya without access to due process
or respect for the principle of non-refoulement, noting that those practices violated
the country’s international human rights law obligations.

III. Impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on the situation
in the central Mediterranean and migrants and refugees
in Libya
20. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further increased the
vulnerabilities of migrants and refugees, including those returned to Libya after
interception at sea. 19 On 8 and 9 April, respectively, Italy and Malta declared their
ports unsafe for disembarkation owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. Also in April,
Malta announced that it could not ensure the rescue of persons in distress at sea and
on several occasions asked private fishing boats to rescue boats with refugees and
migrants in distress at sea on its behalf. On one occasion in mid-April, a vessel
intercepted a boat in the Maltese Search and Rescue Region carrying refugees and
migrants who were subsequently disembarked in Libya, with 12 of them having died
or gone missing at sea. 20 There were reports of delays in response to boats in distress
at sea. Some NGO vessels saw their operations temporarily suspended owing to
quarantine procedures after disembarkations as part of COVID -19 prevention
measures, for administrative or technical reasons. As a consequence, for several
weeks during the reporting period, no NGO vessels performed search and rescue
missions along the central Mediterranean route, further exacerbating the risks facing
refugees and migrants in the central Mediterranean. According to UNHCR, between
January and July 2020, the average time between rescue by NGO or merchant vessels
and disembarkation was four days or longer, negatively impacting the mental health
of those on board, in some cases reportedly leading in some cases to extreme anxiety
or suicide attempts.
21. From the end of April, Malta began to transfer people rescued at sea onto
commercial tourist vessels off the Maltese coast for quarantine purposes. Those ships
remained operational until early June, with some migrants and refugees having spent
up to 39 days in quarantine before being disembarked in Malta. Italy also used vessels
moored offshore, on which refugees and migrants rescued at sea underwent a 14 -day
quarantine period before being allowed to disembark.
22. UNHCR denounced the dangers of delayed rescue or failure to promptly
disembark boats with migrants and refugees and called for greater solidarity and
__________________

UNHCR and Mixed Migration Centre, “On this journey no one cares if you live or die: abuse,
protection, and justice along routes between East and West Africa and Africa’s Mediterranean
coast” (29 July 2020).
19
UNHCR and IOM, “COVID-19 and mixed population movements”, May 2020; Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Wome n
(UN-Women), Addressing Emerging Human Trafficking Trends and Consequences of the
COVID-19 Pandemic (July 2020).
20
In a separate incident, on 15 April, a vessel reportedly returned 51 migrants and 5 dead bodies to
the Abu Sittah disembarkation point in Libya. There was also a report of a merchant vessel
returning migrants and refugees to Libya in late May.
18

20-11110

7/16

S/2020/876

responsibility-sharing with regard to search and rescue in the Mediterranean Sea. 21
On 8 May, OHCHR expressed deep concern regarding coordinated pushbacks and
failure to assist boats of migrants in the central Mediterranean Sea, and about “reports
that Maltese authorities requested commercial ships to push boats with migrants in
distress back to the high seas”. OHCHR further called for the immed iate lifting of
restrictions on the life-saving work of NGO vessels. 22 After at least 45 migrants and
refugees died in the largest recorded shipwreck off the Libyan coast in 2020, on
19 August, IOM and UNHCR called for urgent action to strengthen the searc h and
rescue capacity to respond to distress calls. 23
23. In June and July 2020, more than 100 migrants and refugees rescued at sea after
departing Libya tested positive for COVID-19, prompting concerns that the virus
could be spreading among refugees and migrants in Libya, who often have no access
to health services. There is deep concern over the situation in detention centres amid
the pandemic due to overcrowding, which makes social distancing impossible, and
substandard sanitary and hygiene conditions. In many cases, detainees’ weak
nutritional status and severe medical conditions, including tuberculosis, put them at
greater risk of contracting COVID-19. The limited opportunities to temporarily exit
detention centres to seek work to support basic needs have been severely reduced
amid the pandemic, increasing the socioeconomic pressure for refugees and migrants
in Libya. According to IOM, unemployment among migrants in Libya rose from 7 per
cent in February to 24 per cent by late April. Closed borders, together with the
deteriorating socioeconomic situation in Libya and the lack of access to basic
services, have made refugees and migrants in Libya more prone to seek the services
of human smugglers. A recent report based on findings from surveys conducted with
survivors and front-line organizations working on trafficking in persons found that
travel restrictions and loss of economic opportunities are putting migrants, in
particular, women migrant workers, at increased risk of trafficking in persons. 24 The
COVID-19 pandemic has also placed enormous strain on humanitarian resources,
affecting the ability of humanitarian actors in Libya to provide assistance to victims of
trafficking and refugees and migrants and to carry out important monitoring function s.

IV. Measures to counter migrant smuggling and trafficking in
persons off the coast of Libya and related efforts
24. Despite being a destination as well as a transit country for smuggled migrants
and trafficked persons, Libya does not have stand-alone legislation criminalizing
trafficking in persons. As outlined in my previous report ( S/2020/275), many migrant
smugglers and human traffickers continue to be protected by well -known militias. 25
The volatile political context and security situation in Libya continue to create
conditions for the flourishing of networks of migrant smuggling and trafficking in
persons, and these networks take advantage of weak border management and rule of
law institutions. The continued fighting, in particular in the western and central parts

__________________

UNHCR, “News comment on search and rescue in the central Mediterranean, by Gillian Triggs,
Assistant High Commissioner for Protection at UNHCR, the UN refugee agency”, 1 May 2020.
22
OHCHR, press briefing note on migrant rescues in the Mediterranean, 8 May 2020.
23
IOM and UNHCR, “IOM, UNHCR call for urgent action after 45 die in largest recorded
shipwreck off Libya coast in 2020”, 19 August 2020.
24
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of OSCE and UN-Women, Addressing
Emerging Human Trafficking Trends and Consequences of the COVID-19 Pandemic.
25
See also S/2019/914.
21

8/16

20-11110

S/2020/876

of the country, has created conditions for the reactivation or strengthening of migrant
smuggling networks. 26
25. Member States continued their efforts to prevent and combat the smuggli ng of
migrants and trafficking in persons off the coast of Libya, in support of Security
Council resolution 2240 (2015) and subsequent resolution 2491 (2019), including
through information gathering and capacity-building of and support to Libyan
authorities. Six individuals listed on 7 June 2018 by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for involvement in
the smuggling of migrants continued to be subject to the travel ban and asset freeze
measures. 27 In March 2020, two traffickers in persons named in the 2018 final report
of the United Nations Panel of Experts on Libya 28 were arrested in separate operations
in Ethiopia. It remains difficult to ascertain the combined impact of those measures.
26. On 31 March 2020, the European Union closed EUNAVFOR MED operation
SOPHIA and launched a new Common Security and Defence Policy operation,
EUNAVFOR MED operation IRINI. The primary objective of the new operation is
the implementation of the United Nations arms embargo on Libya. The operation’s
mandate includes, as secondary tasks, efforts to contribute to the implementation of
United Nations measures to prevent the illicit export of petroleum from Libya; the
disruption of the business model of networks of human smuggling and trafficking in
persons in the central Mediterranean region; and capacity-building and training of the
Libyan coastguard and navy. While operation IRINI does not have a search and rescue
mandate, the European Union stated that the operation vessels would conduct rescue
at sea operations if they found someone in distress at sea, in lin e with their obligations
under international law. 29
27. Since 2004, Libya has been a State party to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. As reported
previously, to create conditions for the Libyan coastguard and navy to progressively
take ownership of the implementation of those Protocols within the territorial sea of
Libya, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA, from June 2017 until its closure on
31 March 2020, gradually assumed a second-line posture that centred on capacitybuilding efforts supported by the provision of equipment, with the Libyan coastguard
and navy increasingly exercising all coastguard functions in the territorial sea of
Libya and beyond, including search and rescue within the Libyan Search and Res cue
Region. According to the European Union, the Libyan coastguard and navy have
proven capable of coordinating several vessels and events at the same time and
undertaking law enforcement and coastguard duties, including at night. During the
reporting period, under EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA, no training took place
from 1 March until its closure on 31 March 2020. 30 Since the launch of operation
IRINI, capacity-building and training activities, including monitoring, remain frozen
__________________

Especially in areas like Nasamah, Mizdah, Sabratah and Zawiyah/Abu Isa, Abu Kammash and
Abu Surrah.
27
As previously reported (see S/2020/275, para. 16), the Panel of Experts on Libya noted continued
difficulties in acquiring information from Member States on the implementation of the targeted
sanctions.
28
S/2018/812 and S/2018/812/Corr.1.
29
Remarks by the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, Josep Borrell, following the launch of
EUNAVFOR MED operation IRINI, 31 March 2020.
30
According to the European Union, operation SOPHIA continued monitoring of the Libyan
coastguard and navy until its closure on 31 March.
26

20-11110

9/16

S/2020/876

as at 31 July 2020, pending the agreement of the Libyan Government of National
Accord. In the light of COVID-19, operation IRINI developed a series of online
courses that could be used by Libyan trainees when training resumes.
28. The European Union reported that, until its closure on 31 March 2020, operation
SOPHIA continued air patrols in its area of operation in areas established within the
Libyan Search and Rescue Region, primarily to the north of Tripolitania and off the
territorial sea of Libya. In March 2020, Operation SOPHI A conducted 40 flights,
comprising a total of 161 flight hours. From its launch on 31 March to 31 July 2020,
EUNAVFOR MED Operation IRINI conducted 111 flights (620 flight hours) in the
mission’s area of operation in support of its secondary task, the “disruption of the
business model of human smuggling and trafficking networks”. The European Union
noted that sightings of boats in distress or potential distress (such as unseaworthy
boats) were shared with all competent maritime rescue coordination centres. After the
closure of operation SOPHIA, its crime information cell, 31 which contributed to
information-sharing in the European Union on criminal activities in the central
Mediterranean Sea, was deployed to operation IRINI headquarters.
29. Until its closure on 31 March 2020, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA
shared information and coordinated with several European Union agencies, as well as
with national, international and regional organizations and entities, to help develop a
common understanding of the smugglers’ business model and the key factors and
phenomena affecting the area of operation. 32 Cooperation between the Operation and
the National Anti-Mafia and Counterterrorism Prosecutor’s Office of Italy also
facilitated more effective prosecution of those inv olved in people smuggling. With
the establishment of EUNAVFOR MED operation IRINI on 31 March 2020, requests
for a roll-over of cooperation arrangements were sent to operation SOPHIA key
partners. 33 As at 31 July 2020, most of those requests have been gran ted and
implemented.
30. At the end of May, Malta and Libya signed a memorandum of understanding to
establish two centres to improve coordination and support in tackling irregular
migration. On 13 July, Italy hosted a ministerial summit by videoconferenc e with the
participation of the European Union and some European Union member States, as
well as Libya and other North African countries. Discussions were focused on the
fight against migrant smuggling and an effective return policy. 34 Egypt reported that
it had enforced stricter measures to combat illegal migration through Egyptian coasts
and continued to enhance controls over its maritime borders with Libya.
31. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, in July 2020, the African Union
launched a new programme on migration and health which recognizes the inadequate
access to health services and unfavourable conditions in which many migrants,
refugees and internally displaced persons live and work, making them subject to
numerous health risks. Participants at a webinar hosted by the African Union stressed
the importance for Africa of developing a continental migration and health -themed
policy initiative to highlight the key priorities upon which African Union
interventions could be anchored. The United Nations continues to support the African
Union in these initiatives.
__________________

See also S/2019/711, para. 25.
See also S/2020/275, para. 22.
33
Key partners include Frontex, Europol, Eurojust, IOM, OSCE, INTERPOL, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), the national Anti-Mafia and Counterterrorism Prosecutor ’s Office
of Italy, the International Criminal Court, UNSMIL and European Union Border Assistance
Mission in Libya.
34
See www.interno.gov.it/it/stampa-e-comunicazione/comunicati-stampa/traffico-migranti-verticeministri-dellinterno-lunedi-13-luglio.
31
32

10/16

20-11110

S/2020/876

V. Support for Libya and related efforts to combat migrant
smuggling and trafficking in persons
32. On 29 July 2020, UNHCR and the Mixed Migration Centre at the Danish
Refugee Council released a report detailing how most refugees and migrants taking
the Mediterranean routes suffer or witness unspeakable brutality and inhumanity at
the hands of smugglers, traffickers, militias and even, in some cases, State officials. 35
The report contains recommendations on preventing and responding to trafficking,
exploitation and other protection risks faced by refugees and migrants on the move.
33. In June 2020, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, IOM and the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) commenced a joint study on the
smuggling of migrants and trafficking in persons in Libya. In June 2020, UNHCR
launched two research and mapping projects to promote the establishment of
protection networks and a “communication with communities” hub across northern
Africa to raise awareness of trafficking and exploitation risks, facilitate disclosure of
victims of trafficking and persons at risk of being trafficked and enhance their access
to documentation, international protection, justice and solutions.
34. The Observatory on Smuggling of Migrants 36 continued to collect data,
information and analysis on the smuggling of migrants, with research activities
carried out in West Africa, North Africa and Southern Europe to provide an updated
overview of smuggling trends in the regions. The information gathered for the
Observatory will be accessible through an online platform set to go live by the end of
2020. In May 2020, several IOM country offices initiated a joint study on smuggling
practices along the central Mediterranean route, in particular in Algeria Libya, Mali
and the Niger, which is set to be completed by October 2020. IOM has commissioned
the development of a practical guide on existing counter-trafficking and smuggling
mechanisms in the region, aimed at strengthening cooperation between State
authorities. 37
35. UNHCR and its partners, the International Rescue Committee, Première
Urgence-aide Humanitaire Internationale and the Libyan Humanitarian Relief
Agency, conducted 43 protection monitoring or medical visits to detention centres
managed by the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration from 1 March until
31 July 2020. Nevertheless, access by UNHCR, as well as United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) human rights personnel to Directorate-managed detention
centres has not been consistent, owing to security restrictions, as well as bureaucratic
obstacles posed by the detaining authorities. IOM continued to provide humanitarian
assistance to migrants in Directorate-managed detention centres. Since April, as part
of the humanitarian response to COVID-19, IOM migration health teams, UNHCR
and humanitarian partners have provided life-saving assistance, in particular, health
care and hygiene kits, on humanitarian grounds in detention c entres. Communication
with communities has also been strengthened to ensure more effective risk
communication, as well as access to information and services for the most vulnerable.
IOM also performed health prevention and COVID-19 awareness campaigns in
detention centres, as well as regular fumigation and disinfection interventions. It also
provided personal protective equipment for the use of detainees and Directorate staff.
36. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to advocate for and
work with authorities on the release of refugees and migrants from detention and the
__________________

UNHCR and Mixed Migration Centre, “On this journey no one cares if you live or die” .
See S/2020/275, para. 33.
37
The project covers 18 countries and regional institutions, including major countries and major
countries of origin, transit and destination.
35
36

20-11110

11/16

S/2020/876

establishment of alternatives to detention following interception or rescue at sea. 38
The United Nations country team in Libya continued to engage with relevant national
authorities to support the release of persons of concern from detention, also in
consideration of the risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. UNHCR advocated for
the release of all refugees and asylum-seekers identified in detention and undertook
specific interventions with regard to the release of particularly vulnerable individuals,
including women and children at risk of being trafficked, exploited or abused and
those with serious medical needs. UNHCR supported those released with cash and
other services. UNICEF worked with the authorities to develop alternatives to
detention and provided life-saving assistance to detained children. To facilitate long term solutions, UNICEF, together with UNHCR and IOM, put in place a “best interest
determination” panel for unaccompanied and separated children to identify durable
solutions for them. 39 UNICEF has also worked with Libyan authorities and partners
to establish temporary centres for children as an alternative to detention through the
provision of services to vulnerable children. UNHCR, together with the International
Refugee Assistant Project, continued the implementation of a family reunification
project for unaccompanied and separated children on the central Mediterranean route.
In 2020, it profiled 299 children, referred 151 for resettlement and 2 for voluntary
repatriation.
37. In June 2020, the World Food Programme (WFP) and UNHCR began providing
food assistance to refugees and asylum-seekers released from detention, prioritizing
support for survivors of trafficking or individuals at risk of being trafficked. Under
the project, those released from detention centres received emergency life -saving
food rations to help sustain them until they settled in urban settings. During the pilot
phase of a separate project implemented from November 2019 to May 2020, WFP and
IOM assisted some 21,000 migrants outside of detention centres with ready -to-eat
rations.
38. UNICEF has continued to provide critical child protection and psychosocial
support services to vulnerable children, including children on the move and children
affected by armed conflict and displacement, to enhance their psychosocial well being and resilience. From January to June 2020, more than 13,000 children (about
45 per cent boys, 55 per cent girls) benefited from child protection services, including
mental health and psychosocial support activities and case management through
schools, Bayti (“home”) centres, internally displaced person shelters and other urban
settings across Libya. Moreover, UNICEF and partners provided gender-based
violence response services to more than 2,500 individuals (over 1,900 women and
girls and 600 men and boys), as well as prevention and risk mitigation.
39. According to the latest IOM Displacement Tracking Matrix from June 2020 ,
there are at least 600,300 migrants in Libya. As at 31 July 2020, 48,826 refugees and
asylum-seekers were registered with UNHCR in Libya, primarily from the Syrian
Arab Republic (34.3 per cent), the Sudan (31.9 per cent) and Eritrea (12.1 per cent).
In March 2020, UNHCR evacuated 128 refugees through the emergency transit
mechanism to Niger. On 18 March, UNHCR evacuation and third-country
resettlement departures were suspended globally owing to COVID -19. Evacuation
flights remain suspended as at 31 July 2020. Because of the closure of international
borders as part of COVID-19 preventive measures, the IOM voluntary humanitarian

__________________

OHCHR, IOM, UNHCR and World Health Organization, joint press release, “The rights and health
of refugees, migrants and stateless must be protected in COVID -19 response”, 31 March 2020.
39
Including voluntary repatriation, local integration resettlement or access to a complementary
pathway for admission.
38

12/16

20-11110

S/2020/876

return programme was suspended during most of the reporting period but was finally
able to resume on 20 August with the first flight in five months. 40
40. Of the 1 million people identified by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs as needing humanitarian assistance in Libya in 2020, over one
third (358,000) are migrants and refugees and roughly 30 per cent are child ren.
Humanitarian partners planned to target 134,000 of the migrants and refugees for
assistance under the 2020 Libya Humanitarian Response Plan, including through
protection services and the provision of life-saving food, non-food, shelter, health and
education assistance. To date, in 2020, the United Nations has facilitated humanitarian
assistance to more than 49,000 migrants and refugees in the country.
41. In May 2020, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court reported to the
Security Council that her Office continued to investigate arbitrary detention and
serious mistreatment of migrants and refugees attempting to transit through Libya. 41
42. On 22 June, the Human Rights Council adopted a resolution establishing an
international fact-finding mission to Libya, with the mandate to establish the facts
and circumstances of the human rights situation throughout Libya and to document
alleged violations and abuses of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law by all parties in Libya since the beginning of 2016.

VI. Observations
43. Many people have once again perished in the Mediterranean Sea in their
desperate attempt to reach safe shores. We mourn them. I am deeply alarmed by
reports of delays in responses to distress calls, coordinated pushbacks and private
vessels being used for returning refugees and migrants to Libya. I call upon all
Member States to comply with their obligations under international law to promptly
rescue people in distress at sea.
44. I would like to stress once again that Libya does not qualify as a place of safety
or as a safe third country for the purpose of disembarkation of refugees and migrants.
Member States are obliged under international law to ensure that persons rescued at
sea are delivered to a place of safety and in conditions that uphold their human rights,
including the principle of non-refoulement. In this regard, I echo the call of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for a moratorium on all interceptions
at sea and returns to Libya. 42 An alternative scheme whereby those rescued and
intercepted at sea are brought to safe ports must be established as a matter of urgency.
45. I am grateful to the many people who continue to risk their lives searching for
and rescuing people in the central Mediterranean Sea. They deserve our solidarity and
full support. Restrictions impeding their work must be rescinded immediately. Delays
in vessels’ entry into ports and in disembarkation of migrants and refugees may deter
other ships from fulfilling their rescue at sea obligations, with grave implications for
anyone in distress at sea, in the central Mediterranean and beyond. Legitimate public
health concerns amid the COVID-19 pandemic can be addressed through time-limited
quarantine, health checks and other measures. Such measures should be applied
without discrimination and within the specified national health protocols. The United
Nations stands ready to support the effective and speedy processing of disembarked
refugees and migrants.
__________________

IOM, “First IOM Libya voluntary return charter in five months assists over 10 0 Ghanaian
migrants”, 21 August 2020.
41
See www.icc-cpi.int/Pages/item.aspx?name=200505-statement-prosecutor-unsc-libya.
42
OHCHR, press briefing note on migrant rescues in the Mediterranean Sea, 8 May 2020.
40

20-11110

13/16

S/2020/876

46. As I have stressed before, European Union member States receiving the majority
of refugees and migrants arriving by sea deserve the solidarity of their fellow
European Union countries. The current ad hoc arrangements under which relocation
of rescued persons within the European Union is negotiated on a boat-by-boat basis
are unsustainable. I renew my call for a credible and predictable agreement for
disembarkation encompassing all European Union members, guided by solidarity and
responsibility-sharing, and hope that such an arrangement can be found through the
ongoing discussions on a possible European Commission pact on migration and
asylum. 43 I hope that such an agreement would ultimately lead towards a predictable
disembarkation agreement encompassing all coastal States in the Mediterranean
basin. I reiterate the availability of the United Nations system to support the
development of a predictable regional disembarkation and solidarity mechanism
based on the 2018 joint proposal by UNHCR and IOM.
47. I would like to thank the European Union for its efforts since 2015 in support of
Security Council resolution 2240 (2015) and subsequent resolutions through
EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA. I take note that the disruption of the business
model of migrant smugglers and human traffickers and capacity -building and training
of the Libyan coastguard and navy remain tasks of the new EUNAVFOR MED
operation IRINI.
48. Libyan authorities have shown commitment to save those in danger at sea, even
in very challenging circumstances. Reports of unsafe interception practices and
violence during disembarkation in Libya are troubling. The safety of migrants and
refugees should be the utmost priority at interception, rescue, disembarkation and
beyond. I thank all those that have supported the Libyan coastguard and navy and call
on all actors to ensure that support to the Libyan coastguard entails clear and effective
measures to mitigate the risk of human rights violations. Enhanced coordination and
information flow between all actors involved in disembarkations is urgently needed.
I call on Libyan authorities to allow unhindered access for the United Nations to
disembarkation points and investigation and transit centr es. A national registration
system for refugees and migrants, including at disembarkation points, in detention
centres and in urban areas, is urgently needed to avoid refugees and migrants going
missing.
49. Nothing can justify the horrendous conditions under which refugees and
migrants are detained in Libya. The sexual and gender-based violence they face is a
severe violation of their human rights and needs to be addressed as a matter of
urgency. I renew my appeal to the Libyan authorities, even more urgen t now amid the
COVID-19 pandemic, to fulfil their obligations under international law and to close
all detention centres, in close coordination with United Nations entities. As a matter
of urgency, human rights-compliant and non-custodial alternatives to detention need
to be established. Children should never be detained, in particular when they are
unaccompanied or separated from their parents. I urge the Libyan authorities to ensure
that these children are referred to adequate protection services and appr opriate care
options until long-term solutions are identified. Their transfer to safer locations out
of detention centres is critical. In the meantime, I call for unhindered and
unconditional access to the detention centres for United Nations personnel.
50. Human traffickers and migrant smugglers continue to exploit the volatile
security situation in Libya. Finding lasting, sustainable solutions to the Libyan
conflict remains the overarching goal. A lasting ceasefire and a return to the political
dialogue remains essential. I am alarmed at the increase in direct foreign interference
in the conflict, with military support for the fighting parties arriving by land, air and
__________________
43

14/16

UNHCR recommendations for the European Commission’s proposed pact on migration a nd
asylum, January 2020.
20-11110

S/2020/876

sea. The full implementation of the arms embargo remains of utmost priority and I
urge members of the international community to fully support it, in line with the
outcomes of the Berlin Conference and Security Council resolution 2510 (2020). In
this regard, I welcome the efforts of the new EUNAVFOR MED operation IRINI in
supporting the implementation of United Nations arms embargo on Libya. I also hope
for progress towards greater respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights by all parties in Libya, including facilitating h umanitarian access, as agreed
under the Berlin process.
51. Current practices in human trafficking and migrant smuggling as detailed in the
present report constitute grave violations of international human rights law, with such
conduct explicitly recognized as criminal acts in the national law of most States. The
impunity with which smugglers and traffickers operate in Libya and beyond must end.
I urge the Libyan authorities to ensure that the heinous acts committed in Mizdah are
investigated promptly, and that those responsible are held to account. Greater
cooperation between States on both sides of the Mediterranean, in line with
international human rights and refugee law, is needed to ensure that perpetrators are
identified and held accountable. Coordination and cooperation between law
enforcement, protection and community actors, including across borders, as well as
enhanced efforts to investigate financial transactions associated with migrant
smuggling and trafficking in persons, are important steps towa rds identifying and
disbanding smuggling and trafficking networks. I call upon Member States to support
the work of relevant United Nations panels of experts to identify those engaged in
migrant smuggling and human trafficking and to consider designating m igrant
smugglers and human traffickers who meet sanctions designation criteria.
Communities and civil society play an important role in the prevention of and the
response to trafficking in persons and migrant smuggling, and their role should be
enhanced. More needs to be done to strengthen protection and access to justice for
victims along the central Mediterranean route, in particular in Libya.
52. It is disconcerting that the COVID-19 pandemic has further increased the
vulnerabilities of migrants and refugees along the central Mediterranean route,
including in Libya. 44 With many borders closed, legal pathways severely restricted,
access to asylum curtailed and the socioeconomic situation deteriorating, refugees
fleeing war and persecution and stranded migrants are prone, in their desperation, to
turn in even greater numbers to migrant smugglers. Owing to COVID-19 related
restrictions, migrant smugglers and human traffickers may also be inclined to take
riskier routes to avoid checkpoints and medical checks, increasing the risks for
refugees and migrants. With resources focused on the COVID-19 response, the
capacity of State authorities and humanitarian actors to provide essential services to
victims of human traffickers and abuses by migrant smugglers, including those along
the central Mediterranean route, is further reduced. I call upon all Member States to
remain vigilant in addressing new and evolving crime patterns to prevent impunity
for migrant smugglers and human traffickers amid the pandemic and to ensure
assistance to victims.
53. The root causes of displacement in the Mediterranean must be addressed in a
holistic manner. The Sustainable Development Goals lead the way, by facilitating the
strengthening of democratic governance, rule of law and human rights; by working
towards stronger, more resilient and accountable State institutions; and by fostering
sustainable and equitable economic development. Measures to combat climate change
and build the resilience of countries in the face of natural disasters also contribute to
prevention. The United Nations will continue to make every effort to support Member
__________________
44

20-11110

United Nations, “Policy brief: Covid-19 and people on the move” (June 2020); and UNHCR and
IOM, “Covid-19 and mixed population movements” (May 2020).
15/16

S/2020/876

States in addressing the causes of forced displacement and the drivers of irregular
migration, while assisting origin, transit and destination countries. The Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and the global compact on refugees
highlight the need to address the root causes of refugee and migrant situations through
enhanced cooperation and solidarity and offer important guidance in this regard.
Addressing the root causes that drive refugees and migra nts to attempt these
precarious journeys along the central Mediterranean route require urgent investments
in strengthened asylum systems, legal pathways for refugees and migrants in
vulnerable situations, including family reunification, education and labou r mobility.
Without those legal pathways, refugees and migrants will continue to attempt these
dangerous journeys, putting them at heightened risk of human trafficking and abuse
by smugglers.

16/16

20-11110
