United Nations

S/PV.6520

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6520th meeting
Thursday, 21 April 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio/Mr. Alzate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-30692 (E)

*1130692*

S/PV.6520

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representatives of Australia,
Bangladesh, Cuba, Egypt, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia,
Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
18 April 2011 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2011/259 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Thursday, 21 April 2011, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diallo, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

2

Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: As always, it is a pleasure and an
honour to be here to report to the Security Council. I
regret to report that the stalemate in the IsraeliPalestinian negotiations has persisted in the last month.
This is of particular concern given the institutional
achievements of the Palestinian Authority and the
evolving regional situation. Bold and decisive steps are
needed to resolve this decades-long conflict, with
vision, leadership and responsibility on the part of all
concerned. It is also important that any outbreaks of
violence that could undermine political efforts be
prevented and that the parties refrain from provocative
steps on the ground.
Quartet envoys continued to work with the
Israelis and the Palestinians to maximize prospects for
resuming direct negotiations on a two-State solution.
Regrettably, after follow-up meetings with the parties
on 5 April, it was determined that more time was
needed for consultations before the next Quartet
meeting could be scheduled. The Quartet remains
committed to convening such a meeting as soon as
possible. The United Nations continues to work for a
balanced and effective Quartet initiative that could help
the parties to engage meaningfully in direct
negotiations and give a clear international signal of the
importance of finding a way forward.
Both parties should be concerned at the fact that
the political track is falling behind the significant
progress being made by the Palestinian Authority in its
State-building agenda. In its report to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC)
meeting in Brussels on 13 April, the United Nations
made clear its assessment that in the six areas where
we are most engaged with the Palestinian Authority,
governmental functions are now sufficient for a viable
Government of a State. The six areas include
governance, rule of law and human rights; livelihoods
and productive sectors; education and culture; health;
social protection; and infrastructure and water. In
parallel, Israeli measures to facilitate movement have

11-30692

S/PV.6520

also supported economic activity and access to basic
services.
The World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund also reported strong progress in institutionbuilding at the AHLC meeting, and the AHLC Chair
concluded that the Palestinian Authority was above the
threshold for a functioning State in the key sectors
studied. However, we must be aware that these
admirable achievements have been to date limited to
certain areas of the occupied Palestinian territory and
do not apply yet to East Jerusalem, much of Area C and
Gaza.
The reporting period saw the highest levels of
violence in Gaza and Israel since Operation Cast Lead
more than two years ago. Violence was ongoing at the
time of the last briefing, on 22 March. That same day,
four members of a Palestinian family, including three
children, were killed by an Israeli strike in Gaza.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu expressed
regret at the unintentional killing of civilians, while
stating that Israel was responding to the firing of
rockets at Israeli civilians from populated civilian areas
in Gaza. The next day, on 23 March, an Israeli civilian
was injured in Be’er Sheva by a Grad rocket fired from
Gaza.
Efforts to de-escalate the violence led to a brief
lull. However, on 2 April, an Israeli airstrike killed
three leaders of the Hamas military wing who were
allegedly involved in plans to kidnap Israeli citizens in
the Sinai during Passover. The Hamas military wing
used a guided anti-tank missile to hit a school bus on
7 April, injuring two people, one of whom, a teenager,
died last week. Between 7 and 10 April, Israel
launched heavy military operations in Gaza. Rockets
continued to be fired into Israel, a number of them
reportedly intercepted by Israel’s new Iron Dome
anti-missile defence system. Following further efforts
to de-escalate the violence, a new, uneasy calm was
restored on 10 April. It has been largely respected
since, notwithstanding the firing of two Grad rockets
towards Ashdod on 15 April. The Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and the Egyptian authorities were actively
engaged in efforts to de-escalate the violence.
Overall, Palestinian militant groups, including
Hamas, have fired 111 mortar shells and 155 rockets,
while Israel has conducted six incursions and 57 air
strikes into Gaza since the last briefing to the Security

11-30692

Council. One Israeli child, referred to earlier in the
context of the bus incident, was killed, and two
civilians were injured by Palestinian rocket fire.
Nineteen Palestinian militants and 15 civilians were
killed, while 17 militants and 60 civilians were injured
in Israeli military actions.
We are alarmed at the actions of Hamas to
escalate violence, endangering civilians on both sides
and risking a deeper confrontation with Israel. We are
also deeply concerned at civilian casualties on both
sides. The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
firing of rockets from Gaza and calls for it to end. He
also reiterates his calls for maximum restraint by
Israel. All parties must fully respect international
humanitarian law. In the interests of the civilian
populations on both sides, we call on the parties to
uphold and solidify the prevailing fragile calm.
Citing security concerns, Israel closed the Kerem
Shalom crossing point to Gaza from 5 to 12 April. This
illustrates the detrimental effect of the violence on the
humanitarian situation and the importance of
implementing Security Council resolution 1860 (2009)
in all its aspects. The weekly average of truckloads
entering the Strip during the reporting period was 909,
compared with 566 in June 2010 before the
announcement of the revised Israeli policy, but still far
below pre-closure levels.
During the reporting period, Israel approved six
additional United Nations school and road projects in
Gaza. However, we urge Israel to give early approval
to two United Nations housing projects in Rafah and
Khan Yunis comprising 1,100 units. We also hope that
coordination procedures to facilitate the entry of
approved material will be further streamlined. Greater
liberalization of the import of construction materials
into Gaza, including aggregate, iron bar and cement, is
essential for recovery, as is an increase in exports.
I emphasize the importance of the Government of
Israel making more sustained and far-reaching progress
towards ending the closure of Gaza, within the
framework of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).
It is essential for the operation of legitimate crossings
to be adequate to meeting the needs of Gaza’s civilian
population.
In the context of media reports of potential
flotillas, let me state our belief that the appropriate way
to meet needs in Gaza is through legitimate crossings.
In this regard, I wish to recall the position of the

3

S/PV.6520

Quartet, as expressed in its 21 June 2010 statement,
that those wishing to deliver goods to Gaza should do
so through established channels so that their cargoes
can be inspected and transferred via land crossings into
Gaza. The Quartet emphasized that there is no need for
unnecessary confrontations and called on all parties to
act responsibly in meeting the needs of the people of
Gaza. The AHLC also called on all international
supporters to make use of existing land crossings to
channel their support to Gaza and to abstain from
provocations.
We deplore the abduction and murder of Vittorio
Arrigoni, an Italian citizen and activist, in Gaza on
15 April, allegedly by a Salafist group. A number of
suspects have reportedly clashed with and been
arrested by the de facto authorities in Gaza.
I regret to report no progress in efforts to secure
the release of Israeli Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit, who
has been in Hamas captivity since 25 June 2006. We
continue to call for his release and for immediate
humanitarian access to him. We also continue to follow
closely the situation of several thousand Palestinians in
Israeli prisons, whose human rights must be respected.
We continue to underscore the importance of releases
of prisoners to the Palestinian Authority.
We also remain concerned that the Palestinian
Authority is not able to extend its State-building work
to Gaza due to the ongoing Palestinian political divide.
This only underscores the need for progress towards
Palestinian unity within the framework of the
Palestinian Authority and the commitments of the
Palestine Liberation Organization. In this regard, I note
that consultations on the Palestinian reconciliation
continue, although they have not led to the formation
of a unity Government, as President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad had hoped they would.
In the meantime, preparations for municipal
elections on 9 July continue in the West Bank. Hamas
has yet to authorize electoral work in Gaza. The
Palestinian Central Election Commission opened voter
lists for exhibition and challenges between 9 and
14 April in the West Bank, including for the
approximately 40,000 newly registered voters.
We are very concerned at ongoing Israeli
settlement activity and demolition of Palestinian
structures in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
On 4 April, the Government of Israel retroactively
authorized construction work and plans for further

4

expansion in the West Bank settlements. We remain
very concerned at plans for more than 2,200 settlement
units in East Jerusalem, although we note that their
further consideration has been postponed until May.
More permanent measures to curtail and halt settlement
expansion are needed. Settlement activity is contrary to
international law and Israel’s commitments under the
Road Map, and detrimentally affects Palestinian
readiness to return to direct negotiations. We call on
Israel to respect international humanitarian law.
Palestinian security forces continued to work to
maintain law and order in the West Bank. Investigation
is ongoing into the murder on 4 April of the actor and
director Juliano MerKhamis, who will be remembered
as a symbol of coexistence and peace.
Following the Itamar murder on 11 March, two
suspects from the neighbouring Palestinian village of
Awarta were recently arrested for allegedly
perpetrating the killing, and a number of others were
arrested as alleged accomplices. During the
investigations, the 6,500 inhabitants of Awarta were
placed under several curfews. Over 400 men and 80
women were reportedly interrogated, and many homes
were searched.
Since last month’s briefing to this Council, Israeli
security forces conducted 321 search operations in the
West Bank, during which 38 Palestinians were injured
and 228 arrested. Ten Palestinians were injured by
Israeli settlers during the reporting period.
Demonstrations continued against the barrier, which
deviates from the Green Line in contravention of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
resulting in 19 Palestinian injuries and a number of
arrests.
We welcome the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
decision of 6 April to systematically investigate all
Palestinian casualties in the West Bank caused by IDF
fire among individuals not engaged in hostilities. We
look forward to the effective implementation of this
important measure of accountability.
Turning to the subject of Lebanon, almost three
months after his nomination as Prime Ministerdesignate by President Sleiman, consultations by Najib
Mikati have not yet led to the formation of a new
Government. Mr. Mikati and the President have
decided to give additional time to the process in order
to ensure that the composition of the next Government

11-30692

S/PV.6520

will be as desired by all Lebanese and in accordance
with the Constitution.

Map and the agreements previously reached between
the parties.

Against this background, there have been some
security incidents in Lebanon. On 27 March, a small
bomb exploded in a church in the eastern city of
Zahleh, causing damage but no causalities. No party
claimed responsibility for the attack, which came four
days after seven Estonian nationals were kidnapped
while cycling on a road near Zahleh, in an area close to
the border with Syria. Despite several arrests, the
motives of the kidnappers and the fate of the cyclists
are not known.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.

In Nahr el-Bared camp, the first delivery of homes
in the reconstructed camp took place on 19 April. This
was a significant milestone, giving hope to the
community displaced since the destruction of their camp
in 2007. I call upon donors to also contribute towards
the full reconstruction Nahr el-Bared.
The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has
remained generally quiet and stable. Israeli air
violations continued on an almost daily basis.
The international community is rightly concerned
over the protracted stalemate in the peace process. We
stress the importance of supporting and empowering
the leadership of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad and of bringing the parties back to the table.
Despite the Palestinian Authority’s accomplishments,
the institutional achievements of the State-building
agenda are approaching their limits within the political
and physical space currently available. Far-reaching
rather than incremental steps should be taken by Israel
to lead to progress on the ground and to roll back
measures of occupation to match the Palestinian
Authority’s achievements.
At the same time, the resumption of IsraeliPalestinian peace negotiations on all final status issues
is urgent. We believe that the international community
must play its part in helping the parties to move
forward, and we will continue to engage Quartet
partners, hoping that the conditions will be met for the
holding of a principals’ meeting as soon as possible.
The United Nations will continue to work for a
comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
on the basis of the Security Council’s resolutions, the
Madrid principles, including land for peace, the Road

11-30692

Before I give the floor to delegations wishing to
make statements, I remind all speakers that their
statements should be reasonably brief in the light of the
43 requests for the floor today.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, I express
warm congratulations to your country, Colombia, on its
presidency and skilled guidance of the Security Council
this month. We also express appreciation to the People’s
Republic of China for its wise stewardship of the
Council last month.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lynne
Pascoe for his briefing, and renew our appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his efforts to
uphold the Charter and the principles of United
Nations resolutions aimed at realizing a peaceful, just
solution to the question of Palestine.
We come before the Security Council at a most
historic time in our region, and for our world. The
dramatic developments taking place in the Middle East
are altering the geopolitical landscape and bringing to
the fore the universal aspirations of all peoples for
freedom, social and economic justice, democracy and
respect for human rights. Those are goals for which the
Palestinian people have struggled for decades in their
quest to realize their legitimate national aspirations,
foremost among them the aspiration to exercise their
inalienable right to self-determination in their
homeland of Palestine. Tragically, the Palestinian wish
to live as an independent, free and dignified people in
peace and security with all their neighbours —
developing, prospering and responsibly contributing as
full members of the region and the community of
nations — continues to be denied and obstructed.
In the twenty-first century — in spite of the calls
by all peace-loving nations and champions of human
rights for an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
and other Arab lands; the realization of an independent
State of Palestine, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security on the basis of the 1967 borders;
and a just solution to the plight of Palestine refugees —
finding the political will to confront this injustice

5

S/PV.6520

remains elusive. Israel’s military occupation and
oppression of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
continues in defiance of all legal, moral and political
norms and principles. It is an injustice being
systematically perpetrated in full view of the
international community, under distorted and illogical
pretexts intended to justify the unjustifiable, namely,
the subjugation of an entire nation of people.

maintenance of international peace and security vis-à-vis
the question of Palestine. The Council’s resolutions
remain valid, and we call for all necessary efforts for the
implementation of those resolutions. The Council cannot
surrender in the face of continued Israeli defiance. It
must be unwavering in its calls for respect for the law
and its own resolutions and act with conviction to
compel Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its
obstruction of peace and stability in our region.

Regrettably, the appeals to the Security Council
to resolve this prolonged conflict, which is the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, by applying to Israel the same
legal and moral yardstick applied to all other issues on
the global agenda remain unheeded. Consequently, the
occupying Power has continued to breach the law,
belittling and violating the resolutions of international
legitimacy adopted by the Council and other United
Nations organs, and to defy the international
community with total impunity.

In a series of letters sent to the President of the
Council in the period since the last open debate in
January (see S/PV.6470), we have conveyed in detail
the gravity of the current situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Israel’s
intransigence and the lack of political will to confront
it have kept the political process frozen and allowed
for the continuation of Israeli violations that have
further destabilized the situation on the ground.

The result has been continued conflict, loss of life
and turmoil — to the detriment of Palestinians and
Israelis, regional and global peace and security, the rule
of law, particularly humanitarian and human rights law
and the collective and individual obligations derived
therefrom, and the credibility of the international
system. The Palestinian people thus remain under
occupation, prisoners in their own homeland, besieged
and blockaded in the Gaza Strip and confined and
abused between settlements, walls and a matrix of
hundreds of military checkpoints and Israeli-only roads
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, subject to
the mercy of the occupying Power and its destructive
acts of aggression, colonization and repression.
This is the present-day reality of the Palestinian
people. This is in spite of the fact that their right to
self-determination has been reaffirmed annually by the
General Assembly and recognized by the International
Court of Justice as a right erga omnes; in spite of the
reaffirmations of their right to independence and
statehood; and in spite of serious efforts by the
Palestinian leadership and all concerned regional and
international parties aimed at the realization of that
right and a just peace settlement based on relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.
We therefore return to the Security Council with
an appeal that it uphold its responsibility for the

6

While the international community decries the
killing of civilians, invoking the responsibility to
protect and acting to protect civilians in armed conflict,
in the Gaza Strip we witness once again a resurgence
of the cycle of violence and an escalation of Israeli
military attacks, killing and wounding more Palestinian
civilians. The deliberate isolation and deprivation of
the civilians in Gaza also continues as a result of the
Israeli blockade, which is a massive form of collective
punishment that amounts to a war crime and a crime
against humanity.
We reiterate our call for the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population, as well as for the
immediate lifting of the Israeli blockade. The easing of
restrictions is insufficient. An end to the blockade must
mean the freedom of movement of persons and goods
into and out of Gaza; the reconstruction of homes,
infrastructure and the facilities of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East; commercial flows for the rehabilitation of
industry and the economy; and the restoration of the
link between the West Bank and Gaza. All of this is
essential for the revival of hope among our people.
Resolution 1860 (2009) must be fully implemented.
The Fourth Geneva Convention must be respected. And
the occupying Power must be held accountable for its
breaches.
In that regard, we reiterate our call for
accountability for all the crimes perpetrated by Israel
against the Palestinian civilian population, including in

11-30692

S/PV.6520

particular in connection with its destructive and deadly
military aggression against the Gaza Strip during
December 2008. We will continue our efforts to followup on the findings and recommendations of the United
Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict —
the so-called Goldstone report (A/HRC/112/48) — to
ensure that justice is served.
Today, I must also reaffirm the strong
condemnation by the Palestinian people and their
leadership of the killing of Italian peace activist
Vittorio Arrigoni by extremists in Gaza. We convey our
deepest condolences and sorrow to the victim’s family
on their tragic loss. We reaffirm that this brutal act in
no way reflects the values and sentiments of the
Palestinian people, who are so deeply grateful for the
support and solidarity they receive from all over the
world for their just cause.
As detailed in our letters, Israel has also persisted
with its illegal settlement campaign in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in a
most flagrant manner. Despite the veto regrettably cast
on 18 February (see S/PV.6484), we believe that the
international community sent a clear message to the
Israeli Government that it rejects this illegal practice
and demands the complete cessation of all settlement
activities, including in East Jerusalem. Yet, Israel
chooses to ignore that message, acting contrary to the
law and sabotaging the two-State solution, in spite the
international
consensus
and
Israel’s
alleged
commitment to it.
Rather than rolling back and moving to ultimately
end the occupation, Israel continues to illegally
confiscate Palestinian land, expand settlements unit by
unit, build the wall, demolish homes and strip
Palestinians of their residency rights — practices that
are most intense in and around occupied East
Jerusalem — in an attempt to alter the territory’s
demographic composition and physical contiguity in its
favour. The settlers, whose terrorism is increasing and
who constitute the core of the illegal colonizing force,
also continue to rampage against the indigenous
Palestinian population. Palestinian civilians peacefully
protesting that rabid Israeli colonization of their land
continue to be beaten, injured, killed, detained, jailed
and vilified, along with the Israeli and international
activists joining them in protests. These demonstrators
deserve the same protection as all other civilians
peacefully protesting abuse of their rights.

11-30692

In recent weeks, Israel has also escalated military
raids in Palestinian towns and villages, and continues
to arbitrarily detain and imprison Palestinian civilians.
Most disturbingly, nearly the entire village of Awarta
has been detained in connection with the killing of a
settler family. This has included the violent forced
entry of homes, round-ups of civilians in the dead of
night, and the detention of more than 100 women,
including the elderly and infirm, who were forced into
a camp for interrogation and DNA testing by the
occupying forces. This incident underscores yet again
the sheer lack of respect for human rights and due
process of law by Israel, which continues to imprison
thousands of Palestinian civilians, and its total reliance
on force, intimidation, humiliation and collective
punishment vis-à-vis the Palestinian people under its
occupation.
We are at a critical crossroads and believe that no
further proof is needed to confirm that the situation
will worsen drastically if action is not taken to stem the
deterioration and revive the path to peace. What more
must we wait for — another Israeli attack against Gaza
that will bring more bloodshed, destruction and
suffering of innocents, or the further acceleration of the
colonization of the West Bank that will result in the
collapse of the two-State solution? We cannot allow
this to happen. The time for decisive action is now, and
we believe that the international community is in full
agreement on the matter.
Seizing the small window of opportunity before
us will require taking immediate steps to address this
volatile crisis and resume a credible peace process on
the basis of the internationally supported parameters
for a solution. We regret the loss of momentum,
including as a result of the repeated postponement of
Quartet meetings and a lack of action consistent with
the Quartet’s target date of September 2011 for the
conclusion of a peace settlement, as well as of a lack of
unanimity that has to date prevented the arrangement
of the long-overdue Security Council mission to the
Middle East region proposed by the Russian
Federation. The political will must be found to act
collectively on the basis of the relevant resolutions and
the well-known terms of reference of the peace
process. In this regard, we stress the importance of the
Arab Peace Initiative and the need to seize the
opportunity for peace, security and normalization that
this bold initiative presents.

7

S/PV.6520

We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
uphold its obligations and take the necessary measures
to bring an end to Israel’s violations against the
Palestinian people. We also renew our appeals to all the
Quartet members, in the light of the clear commitments
they have undertaken in this regard, and call for bold
leadership, including on the part of the United States,
bearing in mind the role it has assumed in the peace
process. A clear endorsement of the parameters of the
solution, as reflected in the statement articulated in the
Council on 18 February by the United Kingdom,
France and Germany and supported by the rest of the
European Union and countless other countries, is long
overdue and would make a serious contribution to a
revival of the political process on a credible basis.
Israeli defiance must no longer be rewarded or
tolerated. Israel must be called on to demonstrate its
commitment to peace with actions, not just empty
words. It must be called on to cease its illegal
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and uphold its
obligations under international law, as well as the Road
Map obligation of a settlement freeze. It must be called
upon to cease all actions aimed at fragmenting and
altering the Palestinian-Arab character and identity of
the territory in order to advance its unlawful
annexation. Israel must also be called on to respect the
sensitivity and sanctity of Christian and Muslim holy
sites, with an immediate appeal not to obstruct the
celebrations
of
Christian
pilgrims,
including
Palestinians, this Easter in Bethlehem and Jerusalem.
Only respect for the law and responsible actions,
including ending incitement and provocation, can build
trust and demonstrate to the Palestinian people whether
or not Israel is a credible peace partner. This is
imperative to reviving negotiations on all final status
issues in order to achieve a resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict that will bring an end to the Israeli
occupation and realize the two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with an independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side with Israel in peace and security, and a just,
agreed solution for the Palestine refugee question
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
Despite recent serious disappointments, the
Palestinian people have not lost hope, and their
leadership remains committed to achieving by political
means a just peace settlement that will ensure the
resolution of all final status issues. We continue to

8

exert every effort in this regard, working proactively
and constructively to alleviate the suffering of our
people and to promote the ultimate fulfilment of their
legitimate national aspirations, including their right to
self-determination and freedom — an inalienable right
that is non-negotiable.
This has recently included renewed efforts to
promote Palestinian reconciliation and unity. Fully
recognizing the damage inflicted on our just cause by
internal division, President Mahmoud Abbas has
announced an initiative to go to Gaza as soon as
possible with the aim of ending the division and a dark
chapter in our history, and of restoring the unity of our
people and land. We believe that this is imperative in
order to heal and strengthen our people as they
continue on the journey towards realizing their noble
national goals, and we call on all concerned parties to
support this effort.
The leadership also continues to work non-stop to
implement the State-building plan launched nearly two
years ago by Prime Minister Salam Fayyad. This plan
is rapidly advancing to completion by August 2011,
with the only obstacle to the full realization of its
objectives being the ongoing Israeli occupation. We
welcome the endorsements of the United Nations, the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians regarding
Palestinian readiness for independence. We reiterate
our gratitude for the strong international support of this
important initiative, which is an integral part of our
national efforts to achieve independence. In that
connection, we also reiterate our gratitude to all
Member States that have extended recognition to
Palestine on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the international consensus on the twoState solution. We urge countries that have not yet
recognized the State of Palestine to do so at the earliest
possible time in order to contribute to making our
independence a reality soon.
I reaffirm our determination to achieve an end to
the Israeli occupation begun in 1967, and the
independence this year of the State of Palestine on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, by the target date of September 2011 set by the
Quartet, announced by United States President Obama,
and endorsed by the General Assembly. We remain
committed to the path of peace and call on the Security
Council and the entire international community to

11-30692

S/PV.6520

redouble their efforts at this critical time to uphold the
principles for which the United Nations stands in order
to bring an end to this conflict, enable Palestine to take
its rightful place among the community of nations with
pride and dignity, and allow peace and security to
flourish in our region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Reuben (Israel) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, and the
Colombian delegation for your efforts in carrying out
the work of the Security Council during this month.
(spoke in English)
Today’s debate occurs in the midst of historic
changes in the Middle East. With these changes, which
hold the promise of spreading new freedom and
prosperity in our region, we also see many challenges.
Extremists and terrorists continue to pursue the same
destructive agendas, seeking to take advantage of the
turbulence created by the transformations that are now
occurring.
Recent events in the Gaza Strip provide another
clear example of the destabilizing threat posed by these
terrorists and their patrons, bringing to light once
again, the depth of their callousness in carrying out
violent attacks that deliberately target innocent
civilians — men, women and children.
Since the beginning of March, Hamas and other
terrorist groups have launched some 92 rockets and
141 mortars at civilians throughout southern Israel, as
part of what is the most serious escalation of projectile
fire emanating from Gaza in more than two years.
There is no question about the intended targets of these
attacks. They have launched rocket after rocket at
major Israeli population centres that are home to
hundreds of thousands of people. They have struck
houses and buses, factories and farms, synagogues and
schools.
Just two weeks ago, on 7 April, Hamas members
used an anti-tank missile that they had smuggled into
the Gaza Strip to strike and completely destroy a
school bus travelling in southern Israel. This act of
terrorism injured the bus driver and fatally wounded
16-year-old Daniel Aryeh Wildfich, who passed away
this week from injuries he sustained in that attack.

11-30692

As residents of New York, we all see the yellow
school buses that bring local children to school. Some
in the Hall entrust those buses to safely transport their
own children. I ask my colleagues sitting around the
table, Can you imagine how you would feel if an
anti-tank missile was deliberately fired at such a bus in
Manhattan or Brooklyn? This is the reality facing many
Israelis today. This is also the reality facing the Israeli
Government as it seeks to pursue the terrorists that
carry out these horrific attacks — terrorists who
consistently demonstrate their disregard for any
considerations of human life and basic precepts of
international law.
I am continually astonished that some in the
international community express the belief that the de
facto terrorist organization now in control of Gaza can
conduct an independent, credible and impartial
investigation into the crimes that it commits on a daily
basis. It is naive, at best, to put such faith in that
terrorist group, which time and again shows only
disdain for the universal human values on which such
an investigation would be based.
The use of an anti-tank missile to attack an Israeli
school bus reminds us of the dangerous consequences
of the continued smuggling of arms into the Gaza Strip.
Iran and Syria remain the primary sponsors of this
illegal activity, which is carried out by both land and
sea.
On March 15, Israel made the international
community aware of one recent attempt by Iran and
Syria to smuggle weapons into Gaza when three
containers carrying some 40 tons of weaponry —
including C-704 advanced anti-ship missiles — were
captured on-board the MV Victoria cargo vessel. These
containers of weapons were concealed among a cargo
of lentils and cotton, providing yet another example of
Iran and Syria’s cynical and dangerous practice of
using civilian ships and airplanes to transfer weapons
to their proxies in our region. This incident reveals
only the tip of the iceberg of Iran and Syria’s illegal
smuggling activities.
Unfortunately, the Security Council and the
international community do not pay appropriate
attention to the illegal smuggling of arms into Gaza —
a critical aspect of resolution 1860 (2009). In spite of
the frequent discussions held in the Security Council
about the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip,
there has never been a serious debate in this forum

9

S/PV.6520

about the clear threat that arms smuggling into Gaza
poses to the security of Israel and to the stability of our
region. Every day, more Israelis are placed within the
range of terrorist rockets as a result of illegal arms
smuggling into Gaza. The alarming potential for using
these smuggled weapons to attack civilian targets in
our country continues to be demonstrated over and
over again. This month, terrorists in Gaza struck a
school bus. Next month, it may be a ship or a civilian
airliner. Israel calls on the Security Council and the
international community to devote much more
attention to the issue of arms smuggling to the Gaza
Strip and to take tangible measures to halt this illegal
activity.
On the subject of the Gaza Strip, allow me also to
draw the Council’s attention to plans for a provocative
action that holds the potential to escalate conflict and
create instability in our already very fragile region. A
number of non-governmental organizations and other
groups have made public their intention to direct a
large flotilla of some 15 ships and more than 1,000
individuals to challenge Israel’s naval blockade of the
Gaza Strip. This action, which seems to be planned for
the second half of May, has been organized by groups
and individuals that hold many ties to Hamas and other
terrorist organizations. Numerous participants engaged
in the planning of this flotilla have made very troubling
statements expressing their willingness to become
martyrs in this effort.
As is widely known, there are established
mechanisms through which humanitarian assistance
can be delivered to the Gaza Strip through Israel. These
channels are being used daily by United Nations
agencies and other international actors. My country
remains ready to receive such goods in the Port of
Ashdod and to transfer them to the Gaza Strip after
security inspection.
Many
international
leaders,
including
representatives of the United Nations, have spoken out
clearly against such flotillas and about the need for
humanitarian supplies to be transferred to the Gaza
Strip only through established channels. For example,
in his briefing before the Council today and last July
(see S/PV.6363), Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Lynn Pascoe said that such convoys were not
helpful in resolving the basic economic problems in
Gaza and needlessly carried the potential for
escalation.

10

Many statements issued at the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meeting in Brussels last week offered the
same perspective, including the Chair’s summary,
which called on all international supporters to make
use of the existing land crossings to channel their
support to Gaza, and abstain from provocations.
The flotilla anticipated for May is clearly
designed to serve purely as a political provocation, and
not to advance any humanitarian goal. Let me stress
that Israel is not interested in confrontation. However,
we are firmly determined to enforce our naval blockade
on Gaza, which is solely intended to prevent the illicit
trafficking of arms and ammunition to the Gaza Strip
and to stop additional terrorists from infiltrating the
area.
Israel calls on the United Nations and all
members of the international community to speak with
a clear and resolute voice against this new provocation
and to take all necessary measures to prevent it from
occurring.
Israel continues to implement significant measures
to improve life for Palestinians on the ground. In the
West Bank, my Government is working closely with the
Palestinian Authority to promote economic growth and
institution-building. Since the beginning of 2010, Israel
has removed more than two thirds of the roadblocks in
the West Bank and expanded its professional dialogue
with the Palestinian Authority in a variety of areas.
These and other measures helped to grow the West Bank
economy by approximately 8 per cent over the course of
2010, prompting a consistent rise in the area’s standard
of living.
In spite of the fact that Palestinian terrorists
continue to launch attacks against Israeli towns from
the Gaza Strip, Israel has taken significant steps to
improve life for the area’s residents. For instance,
Israel has put in place new arrangements and
mechanisms to usher in a substantial increase in the
quantities and variety of products available for import
and export, which have helped grow the Gaza Strip
economy by approximately 15 per cent over the course
of 2010.
An average of 159 truckloads of supplies were
delivered to Gaza daily during the second half of 2010,
which was nearly double the number of truckloads that
were delivered during the first half of the year. Israel
has also established a new joint coordination and
supervision mechanism to move forward international

11-30692

S/PV.6520

humanitarian projects in the Gaza Strip overseen by
third parties, such as the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the United Nations Development Programme. As
of the beginning of March, Israel had approved 121
such projects in Gaza, in a wide range of fields, such as
education and water and sewage infrastructure. We
have facilitated the transfer of more than 55,000 tons
of building materials for use in those projects since the
beginning of 2010.
As I have done in the Council before, I reiterate
Israel’s call to the Palestinians to rejoin us in direct
negotiations without delay; for it is clear that peace can
only be achieved through direct negotiations. It cannot
be imposed from the outside. Any lasting peace
agreement must be built on the core principles of
mutual recognition and security. As Israel’s President
Shimon Peres made clear to United Nations
Ambassadors during his visit to New York this month,
we need solutions, not resolutions.
I urge all members of the Council to consider that
in just the past two months Israelis have witnessed
hundreds of projectiles fired at our communities from
Gaza, the brutal murder of five members of the Fogel
family in Itamar and the explosion of a bomb at a bus
stop in the centre of Jerusalem, which killed a woman
from the United Kingdom and injured some 50 other
people. Those are just a few examples of the complex
security challenges that Israel continues to face on a
daily basis, which must be addressed in any future
peace agreement.
Security, however, is not the only obstacle to
peace. Enjoying lasting peace will also require that we
build a culture of mutual understanding and tolerance,
based on clear recognition of both peoples’ right to
exist. Israel’s commitment to recognizing a future
Palestinian State must be met with an equal
acknowledgement that Israel is the Jewish State for the
Jewish people. The Palestinian leadership must be
unambiguous in its recognition of my nation’s right to
exist and take real steps to prepare its population to
live side by side with Israelis. They must also show
their
commitment
to
peace
by
accepting
responsibilities and not just demanding rights, meeting
directly with Israeli leaders, who are just minutes
away, to get down to the real work of negotiating two
States for two peoples.

11-30692

This week the Jewish people are observing the
holiday of Passover, during which we remember our
deliverance from slavery thousands of years ago and
reaffirm our commitment to the importance of freedom
for all people. However, this year, as we cherish our
own freedom, Israelis continue to hope and pray for the
freedom of our kidnapped soldier, Gilad Shalit. Israel
remains deeply concerned about Gilad’s continued
captivity and the fact that he has been deprived of his
most basic human rights, including any visit from the
Red Cross, for nearly five years. The international
community must do all in its power — and more than
has been done thus far — to bring about his swift
release.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
give the floor to the members of the Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing
today.
The United States remains deeply committed to a
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
agreed to by the parties. As President Obama said after
his recent meeting with Israeli President Peres,
“With the winds of change blowing through the
Arab world, it is more urgent than ever that we
try to seize the opportunity to create a peaceful
solution between the Palestinians and the
Israelis”.
We continue to consult with the Israelis and the
Palestinians, as well as to work with the Quartet and
our partners in the region, towards our shared goal of a
two-State solution. Negotiations between the parties
remain the only path to a solution that resolves all
issues and establishes a sovereign State of Palestine
alongside a secure State of Israel as a key part of a
comprehensive peace among Israel and all of its
neighbours.
In that regard, let me say a word about
settlements. Like every United States Administration
for decades, we do not accept the legitimacy of
continued Israeli settlement activity. We have long
urged both parties to avoid actions, including in
Jerusalem, that could undermine trust or prejudge
negotiations. The fate of existing settlements must be
dealt with by the parties along with the other
permanent status issues.

11

S/PV.6520

We will continue to work with the Palestinian
people as they lay the foundations for a future
Palestinian State. At the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians held in Brussels on 13 April,
the United States welcomed the progress the
Palestinian Authority has made on the crucial task of
building public institutions and capacities and
improving conditions for economic growth. We also
underscore the importance of moving forward on the
other track — political negotiations that will result in a
future Palestinian State. Palestinians deserve the
dignity and justice of a State of their own and the
freedom to chart their own destiny, and Israelis deserve
to live in security, at peace with their neighbours and
confident in their future.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms
recent attacks on innocent civilians. We are deeply
concerned by the escalation of rocket and mortar fire
from Gaza into southern Israel. We are particularly
disturbed by reports indicating the increased use of
advanced weaponry, including rockets, in attacks
against Israeli civilians. After enduring dozens of
rocket attacks on civilian targets in southern Israel,
including the deeply disturbing use of an advanced
anti-tank missile in a fatal attack on a yellow school
bus, Israel responded by exercising its inalienable right
to self-defence.
We must work together to stop Hamas and other
violent extremists from launching terrorist attacks and
bringing increased misery to the people of Gaza. Let
there be no doubt: there is no justification for targeting
innocent civilians, and those responsible for these
terrorist acts must be held accountable. We also call
again on Hamas to immediately release Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit, abducted and held by Hamas since 2006.
The United States remains concerned about
conditions in Gaza. We note that the humanitarian
situation has improved over the past year, including
increases in the range and scope of goods and materials
moving in, an increase in international reconstruction
activity and a gradual expansion of exports. We will
continue to work with Israel, the Palestinian Authority
and others to do more to ensure that the needs of the
people of Gaza are being met. That includes increasing
the flow of commercial goods and construction
supplies while taking appropriate measures to ensure
that they do not fall into the wrong hands.

12

We strongly condemn Iran’s recent attempts to
export advanced weapons and munitions in violation of
several resolutions, including resolution 1947 (2010).
The interception of Iranian weapons in Turkey, along the
Egyptian-Sudanese border and aboard the MV Victoria,
which was carrying sophisticated anti-ship cruise
missiles and other munitions, all clearly demonstrate
that Iran is trying to flout the Council’s will,
dramatically increasing the risks of conflict and
instability in the region. We urge all Member States to
make clear to Iran the consequences for regional
security of its reckless behaviour. All countries have
obligations under Security Council resolutions to
prevent illicit trafficking in arms and ammunition.
We are also deeply concerned about reports that
groups are organizing another flotilla that will attempt
to sail to Gaza, ostensibly to deliver humanitarian
assistance. The recent seizures of advanced weaponry
underscore that Israel has clear security interests
regarding cargo bound for Gaza. There are existing
mechanisms to deliver goods to Gaza and there is no
justification for attempts to sail directly to Gaza. We
therefore strongly urge all those who wish to deliver
goods and assistance to Gaza to do so through existing
mechanisms and avoid any provocative actions. That
will ensure that the Palestinians’ humanitarian needs
are addressed and that Israel’s legitimate security needs
are met. We also urge all Member States to reinforce
this message with their nationals and organizations,
and to use every legal means at their disposal to
discourage additional flotillas to Gaza.
As colleagues know, the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48) is back in the news. We have long said
that the issues that it raised should be resolved through
credible domestic investigations and follow-up. Israel
has the democratic institutions and the ability to carry
out serious investigations and is doing so. Justice
Goldstone recently concluded that Israel had
undertaken an appropriate review process and made
changes in its combat doctrine.
As we made clear when the Goldstone report was
first presented, we did not see evidence that the Israeli
Government had intentionally targeted civilians.
Justice Goldstone has now reached the same
conclusion. He also concluded that Hamas had “done
nothing” to investigate the allegations of its war crimes
and possible crimes against humanity. The United
States urges the United Nations to end once and for all
its actions in relation to the Goldstone report.

11-30692

S/PV.6520

Let me now turn to Lebanon. We continue to urge
that Lebanon’s constitutional process be followed as it
forms its next Government. We encourage all parties to
avoid threats or other actions that could cause
instability in Lebanon and the region. The Council and
the international community as a whole must remain
firm in their support for Lebanon’s sovereignty and
independence, resolute in their commitment to all
Security Council resolutions related to Lebanon, and
vigilant to threats to international peace and security.
We likewise continue to support the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon, and we reiterate our call on all
parties to refrain from any interference or attempts to
influence its work. The United States is pleased that,
during the 14 April incident along the Blue Line, both
parties demonstrated restraint, and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) immediately
dispatched patrols to defuse tensions and prevent
escalation. We continue to urge both parties to
cooperate with UNIFIL in swiftly marking the entire
Blue Line to help prevent such incidents. The parties
must respect the Blue Line in its entirety.
We are deeply concerned by continuing violence
and arrests in Syria, where the Government’s brutal
crackdown on political protests has already resulted in
more than 200 deaths and hundreds of arbitrary arrests,
according to credible human rights organizations. We
are particularly disturbed by reports that medical
personnel have been targeted while attempting to help
people injured at the hands of their own Government,
and by reports that the injured fear seeking medical
attention at hospitals owing to the presence of Syrian
secret police. We urge the Syrian Government to allow
foreign media, diplomats and human rights
organizations to independently verify humanitarian
conditions throughout all of Syria. Finally, we urge the
Syrian Government to respect the human rights of its
people and to implement meaningful political reforms
that meet their legitimate aspirations.
Let me close by restating my Government’s
deeply held commitment to promoting and protecting
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
people in the region and around the world, including
the freedoms of expression and association. We
demand accountability wherever those freedoms are
violated. We urge all Governments to create an
environment in which journalists can carry out their
work free from fear and intimidation. We call on all
Governments to protect civilians, not to attack them,

11-30692

and to respect their citizens’ rights to peaceful
assembly and free expression.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing and to stress again the leading
role that we believe the United Nations should play in
the resolution of the Middle East conflict.
It is clear that the prevailing sentiment in the
Arab world is one of deep frustration following the
failure of this Council earlier this year to express itself
on the critical issue of Israeli settlements, even though
the draft resolution (S/2011/24) that my delegation had
presented to the Council had been sponsored by an
unprecedented number of States. It is a critical issue
indeed, not only because settlements are illegal and
obstruct peace, but also because they undermine the
two-State solution and continue to sow the seeds of
hatred that will yield more and more violence in the
absence of peace.
Arabs are not only frustrated with the failure of
the Council earlier this year to pronounce itself on the
illegality of all Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, but they are also outraged that,
two years after the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009),
Israel continues its illegal and immoral blockade of the
Gaza Strip and its repeated attacks against its civilian
population. It is the duty of the Council to compel
Israel to abide by its responsibilities under
international law and international humanitarian law, as
well as Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, to protect the civilians of Gaza and those
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory.
What we are witnessing today is how the Israeli
Government continues to choose the expansion of
settlements over peace. In doing so, it is also
deliberately choosing to block the United States-lead
peace efforts, rather than to help them succeed. Above
all, it is knowingly choosing to continue to defy
international law and the will of the international
community, as expressed by all the main organs of the
United Nations, namely, this Council, the General
Assembly and the International Court of justice.
Settlement-building is certainly not a trivial issue,
as the Prime Minister of Israel said. In fact, in addition
to evictions and house demolitions, residency
revocations and land confiscations, settlement-building
is part of a campaign that is eating up Palestinian land

13

S/PV.6520

and seeks to change the identity and legal status of East
Jerusalem.
We are extremely concerned at and disappointed
by the postponement of the Quartet meeting initially
scheduled for l4 March, and later rescheduled for
15 April but again postponed. In spite of our strong
reservations at the manner in which Israel dealt with
the previously planned separate meetings of the
Quartet with the parties, we continue to support the
Quartet and believe that it must adopt and clearly spell
out the well-known parameters for the resolution of the
conflict, in particular the 1967 lines as the basis of the
Palestinian State.
The Quartet should further set a clear timetable
up to August 2011 for negotiations on the final status
issues and ensure that the goal of a free and
independent Palestinian State with full membership in
the United Nations is realized by September of this
year.
In contrast, such interim approaches as the idea
of a provisional arrangement, short of a two-State
solution and even without Palestinian agreement, are
now clearly inconclusive and completely unacceptable
20 years after the Madrid Peace Conference, 18 years
after the Oslo interim accords and eight years after the
Road Map.
On the question of Palestinian statehood, let me,
like Mr. Pascoe, underline that in its report to the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians in Brussels on 13 April, entitled
“Palestinian State-building: a decisive period”, the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process concluded that
“in the limited territory under its control and
within the constraints on the ground imposed by
unresolved political issues, the Palestinian
Authority has accelerated progress in improving
its governmental functions”.
In the areas enumerated by Mr. Pascoe where the
United Nations is most engaged, the same report
confirmed that “governmental functions are now
sufficient for a functioning Government of a State”.
However, the report adds:
“Despite the progress achieved, the key
constraints to the existence and successful

14

functioning of the institutions of a potential State
of Palestine arise primarily from the persistence
of occupation and the unresolved issues in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict … [M]easures of
occupation which stifle Palestinian life [need to
be] fundamentally rolled back … It is vitally
important that the State-building and political
processes be brought into alignment by
September 2011.”
In turn, the World Bank, in its 13 April economic
monitoring report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
reiterates:
“The World Bank has noted in previous
reports to meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC) that if the Palestinian
Authority (PA) maintains its performance in
institution-building and delivery of public
services, it is well positioned for the establishment
of a State at any point in the near future.”
The report concludes:
“Since the last AHLC meeting, the PA has
continued to strengthen its institutions, delivering
public services and promoting reforms that many
existing States struggle with.”
Finally, let me quote from the International
Monetary Fund staff report “Macroeconomic and
Fiscal Framework for the West Bank and Gaza”,
submitted to the same Brussels meeting. It considers
that:
“The Palestinian Authority (PA) is now able
to conduct the sound economic policies expected
of a future well-functioning Palestinian State,
given its solid track record in reforms and
institution-building in the public finance and
financial areas. Steady reforms in the public
finance management system have enabled the PA
to tightly control expenditures, apply rigorous
budget preparation and execution practices, and
establish fiscal transparency and accountability in
line with international standards.”
In that regard, a Security Council trip to the
Middle East would not only assert the role of this
Council in the peace process and its responsibility
towards international peace and security, but also offer
all members of the Council the opportunity to have a
first-hand and on-the-ground assessment of the
Government functions carried out by the Palestinian

11-30692

S/PV.6520

institutions and to judge how sufficient they have
become for a functioning Government of a State.

the hopes of the Palestinian people were left unfulfilled
while the region is transformed around them.

The Arab world is witnessing an unprecedented
momentum for change. People across the region are
now voicing their aspirations to freedom, dignity and a
better life. However, let us keep in mind that the
greatest source of frustration in our region remains the
unresolved Arab-Israeli conflict and the historic
injustice to the Palestinian people.

It is therefore crucial that urgent progress in the
peace process be made. We are fast approaching
September, which is the time frame set out by
President Obama and the Quartet to welcome Palestine
as a full Member of the United Nations, and the month
that will mark the completion of the Palestinian
Authority’s State-building programme. If progress is to
be made, the current impasse must be broken. The
parties should commit to a new phase of direct
negotiations. In order for negotiations to be credible,
they must be based on a clearly articulated set of
parameters that are well known to us all: two States
based on the 1967 borders with equivalent land swaps;
security arrangements that protect Palestinian
sovereignty, while also providing sufficient assurance
to Israel; Jerusalem as the capital of both States; and a
just solution for refugees.

A lasting peace in our part of the world needs to
be a comprehensive and just peace. Accordingly, it will
also require that Israel fully withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967 and
from the remaining occupied parts of southern
Lebanon.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.
Over the past few months, we have witnessed
seismic shifts across the Middle East. There have been
tragic events, the loss of innocent lives and
Governments’ brutal repression of aspirations to
change. However, there has also been the inspirational
determination of people to struggle for their universal
rights against seemingly insurmountable obstacles. The
key lesson has been that people’s aspiration to freedom
cannot be crushed. The only credible answer to
legitimate popular demands is sustainable reform.
As we speak, events continue to unfold across the
region, including in Yemen and Syria. We
unequivocally condemn the violence against and,
indeed, the killing of peaceful demonstrators by the
security forces of both countries. Both Governments
must respect the right to peaceful protest and free
speech, address the legitimate aspirations of the
protesters, bring forward the reforms that have been
promised by Presidents Saleh and Al-Assad, and ensure
that those reforms mark the start of a sustainable
transition to new political systems that meet the
aspirations of their people.
Such events in the wider Middle East are relevant
to the efforts to find a long-term solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. Just as populations in the region are
finding their voices and, in some cases, winning their
rights, Palestinians, too, must realize their goal for a
viable independent State of Palestine. It would be a great
shame and, indeed, a source of continued instability if

11-30692

For there to be credible progress, the leaders of
both parties must do more to narrow the gulf between
them and to counter the growing lack of trust. I would
highlight three points.
First, they must do more to avoid violence,
strengthen accountability, reduce tensions and avoid
further loss of innocent lives. The recent escalation in
violence is of great concern and only serves to widen
the gulf between Palestinians and Israelis. The surge in
rocket attacks from Gaza that have injured Israeli
citizens has to stop. Those responsible for the recent
attacks on a Jerusalem bus station and an Israeli school
bus must be brought to justice. Israel has a right to
defend its citizens, but it must take care to avoid
civilian casualties. As we have heard, action in Gaza
over the past month has killed 18 civilians, including
four children.
Secondly, settlement activity, which has
continued apace in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
must stop. It is illegal and undermines trust and the
prospects for peace. We condemn Israel’s decision to
approve more than 900 settlement units in Gilo and the
retrospective approval for construction in five West
Bank settlements. The Israeli authorities should
reconsider their decisions.
Thirdly, there needs to be improved access to
Gaza. Its isolation only breeds radicalism, extremism
and violence. However, the answer is not more
flotillas, which are likely only to provoke violence and

15

S/PV.6520

do not provide a solution. Israel must speed up the
approvals process for international projects and move
forward with the proposal of the Office of the Quartet
Representative for imports of construction materials by
private companies.
Skepticism about the prospects for peace in the
Middle East is not in short supply, but it is incumbent
upon both Israeli and Palestinian leaders to look
beyond immediate obstacles, to rise above domestic
pressures and to give their people a sense of optimism
for the future. As I said at the start, the lesson of the
past months across the Middle East has been that
people’s demands cannot be crushed. Each country in
the region faces a unique set of circumstances, but at
the very core of all the protests has been a desire for
basic freedoms. Those aspirations must be met. That is
as true for Palestinians as it is for Libyans, Tunisians,
Egyptians, Yemenis or Syrians.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): First of all, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing, even if it was a
particularly sombre one.
Dramatic events in the region are quickly changing
the face of the Middle East, presenting its people with
tremendous challenges but also with far-reaching
opportunities. The one and only way to address such
daunting challenges is through dialogue and reform.
Portugal unequivocally condemns the use of force
against peaceful demonstrations. We are concerned by
increasing levels of violence in a number of countries
in the region and deplore the many deaths it has
caused. We urge all parties to exercise the utmost
restraint. We are particularly worried and shocked by
the number of children falling victim to this violence,
as reported by UNICEF, and call upon all parties to
protect children from direct and indirect effects of
violence. Violence and repression can never be the
answer. Only genuine comprehensive and inclusive
dialogue will allow the important issues at stake to be
addressed and solved in a peaceful and sustainable way
that meets the legitimate aspirations expressed by
peoples in several countries.
The winds of change sweeping through the Middle
East render progress on the Arab-Israeli peace process
all the more pressing. The status quo is simply not
sustainable. The absence of a timely comprehensive
settlement will only further undermine confidence,
exacerbate tensions and propitiate more violence.

16

At the core of this regional conflict is the sixdecade-old Israeli-Palestinian conflict. A comprehensive
peace between Israel and its neighbours will remain
elusive in the absence of an agreement between Israelis
and Palestinians. Decisive action and strong political
will are needed to relaunch negotiations and bring them
to a meaningful conclusion. As the Under-SecretaryGeneral recalled, violence is yet again on the rise in the
region.
Portugal vehemently condemns the heinous
killing of a settler family in Itamar and the fatal
terrorist attack in East Jerusalem last month. The
perpetrators of such odious crimes must be brought to
justice and held accountable for their acts. We are also
concerned by the rising violence between settlers and
Palestinians. Unjustifiable actions cannot be redeemed
by vindictive retaliation taken against innocent
individuals.
Violence in and around Gaza also continues to
escalate. Only last week, an Italian human rights
activist was brutally murdered. Portugal unequivocally
condemns the indiscriminate firing of mortars and
rockets by militant groups in Gaza and calls for their
immediate halt. The targeting of an obvious civilian
objective such as a school bus merits absolute
condemnation.
We recognize Israel’s right to self-defence,
consistent with international law and international
humanitarian law. But we also urge it to use maximum
restraint and ensure that civilians are not endangered.
Attacks on civilians are completely unacceptable in
any circumstances. We appeal to all parties to act
responsibly and avoid further and very dangerous
escalation.
We also note with concern the continued captivity
of Staff Sergeant Shalit and call for his immediate
release. It is unacceptable that he continues to be
detained and denied access in violation of humanitarian
law and practice.
Portugal welcomes the positive steps taken by the
Government of Israel concerning the easing of the
closure of Gaza. Nevertheless, as stated by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee last week,
“more is needed for a fundamental change of the
situation in the Gaza Strip. A lasting recovery
will require a removal of the ban on exports and
private sector imports of investment inputs, as

11-30692

S/PV.6520

well as lifting restrictions on the legitimate
passage of people”.
Likewise, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
remains one of great concern. We thus reiterate our call
for the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).
It is in the interest of everyone, and particularly of
Israel, not to reinforce extremism or foster a more
broadly radicalized environment in Gaza.
Once again, we join the international community
in appealing to Israel to cease all settlement activities
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. These
settlement activities, including natural growth, are
illegal under international law. They undermine trust
between the parties, erode the prerequisites for a twoState solution and constitute an obstacle to peace.
It is thus unacceptable that settlement
construction proceeds unabated and that plans for its
extension continue to be announced regularly. Also,
regrettably, evictions and demolitions continue to
render Palestinians homeless throughout the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, depriving many
families of their livelihoods. Likewise, an increasing
number of Palestinian residents of Jerusalem have been
denied their right to live in the city.
Reuniting the West Bank and Gaza also remains
an important objective. Portugal fully supports the
efforts of President Abbas in favour of Palestinian
reconciliation within the framework of the Palestinian
Authority and the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.
Let me reiterate what I have often said here.
Portugal condemns all actions that undermine trust and
opposes all unilateral actions that prejudge the outcome
of negotiations on final status issues, including
Jerusalem. On the contrary, it is by building trust and
building on trust that Israelis and Palestinians will be
able to settle their differences and ensure a lasting and
comprehensive peace.
The foregoing brings me to the crux of our
concern. Peace between Israelis and Palestinians can be
reached only through a direct, genuine and politically
negotiated process leading to the establishment of a
Palestinian State. The dual deadline for reaching an
Israeli-Palestinian agreement on permanent status
issues and completing the Palestinian two-year Statebuilding plan is fast approaching. Yet, the negotiations
process is at a standstill. The Quartet was due to meet

11-30692

in March. The April meeting was again postponed.
Portugal wishes for a new meeting to be scheduled as
soon as possible and encourages the active
involvement of the Quartet to bring the negotiations
process forward.
It is essential that the international community
clearly set out the parameters of a peace agreement and
a clear calendar to attain this objective. As underscored
by the four European Union countries in the Security
Council in their explanations of vote on 18 February,
when we voted on the draft resolution on settlements
(see S/PV.6484), direct negotiations should seek to
achieve, first, an agreement on the borders of the two
States based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent
land swaps as may be agreed between the parties;
secondly, security arrangements that respect the
sovereignty of the Palestinians, end the occupation and
protect Israel’s security; thirdly, a just solution to the
refugee question; and lastly, the fulfilment of the
aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem, solving
through negotiations the status of the city as the future
capital of both States. That is also the position of the
European Union, which will be expressed later on in
this debate.
At the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in
Brussels last week, the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the United Nations concurred that
the Palestinian Authority is above the threshold for a
functioning State in a number of key sectors, and is
close to reaching the objectives of the State-building
programme. Nevertheless, the Palestinian Authority’s
institution-building achievements can be sustainable
only if they are matched with progress in the peace
talks. Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas
set for themselves the goal of reaching a framework
agreement on all core issues by September. It is vitally
important that by then the State-building and political
process be brought into alignment. We thus again urge
the parties to resume with the utmost urgency
meaningful direct negotiations.
While we welcome all the measures aimed at
supporting the Palestinian Authority State-building
exercise and the economic development of the
occupied Palestinian territory, those measures are not
to be considered as a substitute for timely negotiations
on all final status issues. Likewise, as events all
throughout the region are showing us, temporary and
interim solutions are simply not an option, either.

17

S/PV.6520

The peace we all hope for in the Middle East is a
lasting and comprehensive one that would enable the
full integration of Israel into its regional environment.
A breakthrough in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, would contribute to
appease a region in turmoil. The Israel-Syria and
Israel-Lebanon tracks are equally important and need
to be pursued in tandem.
The region is living through times of change.
Israelis and Palestinians must seize this opportunity to
engage diligently and fruitfully with each other. Now is
the moment for bold and brave leadership to focus on
the only solution that can bring sustainable peace and
prosperity to Israelis and Palestinians alike: an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.
I would like to say a few words on the situation
in Lebanon. Portugal hopes for the formation of a new
Government in keeping with the provisions of the
Constitution. We expect a new Government, once
formed, to fulfil its obligations under all relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004), and to reiterate its
commitment to all international obligations, including
those concerning the Special Tribunal.
We remain concerned by the almost daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty by Israeli
overflights of Lebanon, which exacerbate tensions in
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon area of
operations. Portugal reaffirms its full support for
Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence and the need
for its sovereignty to be fully respected in land, sea and
air.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing. I, too, have listened carefully to the
statements made by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the representative of Israel. China has
always advocated for the settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict by political diplomatic means on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Middle East Road Map for peace. The ultimate
goal is to establish an independent Palestinian State,
with full sovereignty and living side by side with Israel
in peace.
At present, the Israeli-Palestinian talks are at a
standstill. China opposes Israel’s settlement activities

18

in the occupied Palestinian territories, which are not
conducive to breaking the deadlock or to establishing
mutual political trust. We hope that Israel will exercise
restraint and caution, and adopt practical measures to
create conditions conducive to the early resumption of
the talks between the two sides.
China is deeply concerned about the escalating
tension in the Gaza Strip. China hopes that the parties
will effectively honour the ceasefire commitments they
made recently, exercise restraint, refrain from
unilateral and provocative actions and avoid
unnecessary innocent civilian casualties so as to
stabilize the situation and restore calm on the ground.
Without progress, the Middle East peace process
will suffer setbacks. In the face of increasing
difficulties, the international community should be
more coordinated and united as it steps up its efforts to
promote peace talks and spare no effort to promote the
resumption of talks between Israel and Palestine as
soon as possible and to secure the advancement of the
peace process.
We hope that the Quartet will play an active role
in finding a solution that can break the impasse in the
Middle East. At this critical juncture, China supports a
greater role for the Security Council in finding a
solution to the question of the Middle East.
Peace talks on other tracks, including the
Lebanon-Israel and Syria-Israel tracks, should also be
promoted in parallel. All of the parties concerned
should seek to create conditions conducive to a
resumption of dialogue and negotiations and to
bringing the prolonged confrontation and tension in the
region to an end.
China has always supported the just cause of the
Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national
rights and has provided assistance, within its abilities,
to help ease the suffering of the Palestinian people and
assist them in their State-building efforts. China
supports all efforts aimed at facilitating the Middle
East peace process and will continue to play a positive
and constructive role in promoting the achievement of
a comprehensive, lasting and just peace in the Middle
East.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his comprehensive briefing.

11-30692

S/PV.6520

For more than two decades, the Middle East
peace process has been mediated diligently by the
international community. Undoubtedly, the process has
been characterized by rigorous negotiations, hints of
progress and compromise, followed by seemingly
intractable political stalemates. With the failure of the
parties to resume direct negotiations, we are witnessing
another moment of uncertainty. The parties must now
demonstrate their undivided commitment to peace and
remove all impediments to the resumption of direct
negotiations to resolve the outstanding permanent
status issues.
While it is regrettable that the meeting of the
Quartet scheduled for this month failed to take place,
we welcome the prospect of new proposals by the
United States and Israeli authorities to re-open the
stalled talks. We believe, however, that the Quartet
Road Map offers a viable pathway to peace and
progress. The parties should embrace it as a basis for
substantive engagement towards the creation of an
independent Palestinian State living in peace and
security alongside Israel by the end of this year. This
goal will be difficult to achieve if the vicious cycle of
violence, attacks and reprisals continues in the region.

The key lesson we must draw from the tragic
events of 31 May 2010 is that confrontation must be
avoided in the future delivery of humanitarian aid to
Gaza. While we commend Israel for further easing the
blockade on Gaza, we stress its obligation to provide
unhindered access for humanitarian and other goods
into Gaza. At the same time, we urge the people of
Gaza to utilize only legitimate channels to transport
persons, goods and materials out of the territory in
order to address Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
In this regard, we note the positive role the Palestinian
Authority is playing in addressing Israel’s security
concerns.
The fragile security situations in North Africa and
parts of the Middle East present challenges and fresh
opportunities that demand renewed vigilance and
commitment to peace by all stakeholders. It is in that
regard that we welcome the proposal by the Russian
delegation for a visit to the Middle East at an
appropriate time and believe that this will further
strengthen our collective resolve for peace in the
Middle East, even as we are optimistic that, with our
collective engagement, the vision of statehood can be
achieved before the end of the year.

However, there are a number of specific actions
that are certain to foster mutual respect and
compromise, build confidence, and pave the way for
the realization of the two-State solution. In this regard,
we encourage Israel to take concrete steps to freeze all
settlement-related activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. The planned construction of new settler
homes will provide fodder for resentment and
increased violence. In the same vein, military
incursions into Gaza and retaliation for militant attacks
are unhelpful to the peace process.

With regard to Lebanon, we support its
sovereignty and territorial integrity and urge the new
Government to remain steadfast in the implementation
of its international obligations, including resolution
1701 (2006). In that connection, we welcome the
Government’s pledge to assist the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and restore regional peace
and security in line with that resolution. We urge Israel
to halt further incursions into Lebanese territory to
avoid an escalation of violence. We also stress the
importance of maintaining calm along the Blue Line.

Palestinian leaders must signal their readiness to
return to the negotiating table by making enhanced
efforts to forge unity and deal with militancy and other
internal security challenges. It is beyond doubt that
neither military might nor militancy will resolve the
protracted conflict. We therefore reiterate our
condemnation of recent rocket attacks on southern
Israel by Palestinian militants in the Gaza Strip, and
call for maximum restraint from both sides.

On the Golan Heights, we encourage Israel and
Syria to seek a mutually acceptable solution. We
underscore the need for all parties to engage in fruitful
dialogue and longer-term political reconciliation, even
in the face of provocations.

A prisoner-exchange programme between the two
sides at this point in time would no doubt ease tensions
and build trust, as would the unconditional release of
Gilad Shalit after more than five years in detention.

11-30692

Finally, by acting together to build confidence,
the search for peace will be significantly enhanced. In
words and deeds, the parties should demonstrate a
strong desire to re-engage in a negotiated settlement of
all the core issues of the conflict.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his

19

S/PV.6520

update on recent developments in the Middle East. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of Israel and
the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their presence
and their contribution to our debate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be
concerned about the absence of any progress in the
Middle East peace process. We strongly believe that
time is not on the side of the parties concerned and fear
that the prolonged impasse is making the necessary
positive breakthrough more difficult.
Our concerns are further heightened by reports of
the latest escalation in violence, which we condemn in
the strongest possible terms. We fully concur with the
Secretary-General’s call for respect for international
humanitarian law, de-escalation and calm to prevent
any further bloodshed.
We cannot but underscore the fact that the
scheduled time frame for the conclusion of peace
negotiations is rapidly approaching, while the Israelis
and Palestinians appear to be no closer to even the
resumption of direct talks. In such circumstances, it is
perfectly clear that urgent, bold and responsible moves
are needed in order to end the ongoing erosion in the
Middle East peace process.
We would like to recall that it is also the
responsibility of the Security Council, the Quartet, the
League of Arab States and other international and
regional actors to help the parties transform this
deplorable state of affairs into a politically sustainable
negotiating process.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply disappointed
by the approval of 942 new housing units in Israel’s
settlement in Gilo, East Jerusalem, and the upcoming
plans for new settlements. We reiterate that all
settlement activities on occupied land are illegal under
international law and contrary to Israel’s obligations
under the Road Map. These activities therefore
represent an obstacle on the road to comprehensive
peace. Bosnia and Herzegovina calls upon Israel to
respond positively to appeals by the international
community and end all settlement activities in
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.
Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina does not
recognize the annexation of East Jerusalem, and
underlines that the status of Jerusalem is a permanent

20

status issue that must be resolved through negotiations
between the parties.
I would like to stress once again that, for my
country, any act of violence against civilians is
unacceptable, wherever it originates. We would also
like to reiterate that civilian populations must be
protected. All violence must stop immediately, in
particular terrorist attacks and mortar and rocket fire.
Therefore, we urge the parties to observe restraint and
make every effort to avoid further escalation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that securing
lasting peace and stability in the region of the Middle
East is possible only through diplomatic efforts and
full commitment to the peace process. We therefore
urge both Israelis and Palestinians to immediately start
the unconditional implementation of their obligations
as stipulated by the relevant resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the Road Map and
the agreements previously reached by the parties, as
well as the Arab Peace Initiative.
With regard to the situation in the Gaza Strip,
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to call for the
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza, in accordance
with resolution 1860 (2009). Israeli security concerns,
including a complete stop to all violence and arms
smuggling into Gaza, must also be addressed.
In conclusion, allow me to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina will remain committed to the twoState solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security. In order to
achieve this goal of fundamental interest to all parties
in the Middle East, the Israelis and Palestinians have to
make the decisions necessary to overcome this
extremely worrisome impasse and return to direct talks
without delay. Bosnia and Herzegovina urges them to
do so.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of the State of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements.

11-30692

S/PV.6520

France associates itself with the statement to be
made by the head of the delegation of the European
Union.
I would like to bring up the following points. The
Council is today considering a peace process that is
making no progress in a region that is experiencing a
remarkable groundswell of popular will. Tunisia and
Egypt are currently managing their post-revolutionary
periods and, together with the European Union, we
confirmed our full support to them during this
demanding phase of democratic transition.
In Bahrain, we must encourage the resumption of
dialogue so that the current difficulties can be
overcome in the interests of all Bahrainis.
Other situations, namely, in Yemen and Syria, are
also of concern to us. We call for the necessary respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms. We
support the mediation efforts carried out by the Gulf
Cooperation Council. We call on all Yemeni parties to
immediately begin a constructive dialogue under its
auspices, leading to a peaceful political transition.
In Syria, the authorities must renounce the use of
force against demonstrators and translate into facts,
without further delay, the announced reforms,
especially the lifting of the state of emergency, in order
to respond to the aspirations of the population. The end
of repression, the release of all political prisoners and
respect for the right to peacefully demonstrate and for
the freedom of the press must be implemented. Arrests
must be stopped and light must be shed on recent
events. An inclusive political dialogue should take
place for effective political reforms that will respond to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, thereby
contributing to the country’s stability.
In Libya, we call on the international community,
especially the Tripoli regime, to respect Security
Council resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).
Until there is respect for a genuine, verifiable and
lasting ceasefire that meets the requirements of the
international community, the coalition will continue its
actions aimed at protecting the civilian population and
ensuring respect for the no-fly zone and the arms
embargo. We welcome the role played by the
Secretary-General and the United Nations to ensure
that everywhere, dialogue and respect for fundamental
freedoms prevail over violence.

11-30692

The aspirations of the Palestinian people to a
viable, sovereign State living in peace and security side
by side with Israel are no less legitimate than the
concerns expressed throughout the region. We must
respond to those aspirations and to those of the Israeli
people to regional security and integrity.
France believes that there can be no alternative to
a negotiated solution to put an end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. That is why for several months
now we have been advocating that the Quartet endorse
the parameters we defined in this very Chamber on
18 February, so that direct negotiations can resume
between the parties on that basis with respect to all
final-status-related questions. The postponement once
again of the Quartet meeting, which we deplore, will
not help us to draw closer to that goal. Quartet envoys
will meet on 5 May; they must work to ensure that a
meeting of principals is held as soon as possible.
A long-lasting impasse in the peace process could
jeopardize the credibility of the two-State solution and
lead to a deterioration of the situation on the ground.
France remains determined to see that significant
progress is made before the September 2011 deadline
set by the Quartet.
The recognition of a State of Palestine is one of
the options that France is considering, together with its
European partners, with the goal of creating political
prospects conducive to a resumption of the peace
process. If we were to adopt this solution, it should
encourage the resumption of negotiations on the basis
of internationally known parameters. The reaffirmation
of our unwavering support for the State of Israel is
paired with a clear political message aimed at
dissuading both parties from pursuing unilateral
strategies or imposing faits accomplis on the ground
that would hinder our efforts to achieve peace.
In that connection, our stance on settlements is a
consistent one: settlements are illegal under
international law; they undermine confidence between
the parties; and they pose a threat to the two-State
solution. It is for that reason that, subsequently to the
open debate held in February (see S/PV.6470), we voted
in favour of the draft resolution submitted to the
Council. We call on Israel to abandon any further
construction activities, which are to be reviewed shortly.
We have taken note of the announcement that a
speech will be made by President Obama and a
diplomatic initiative undertaken by the Israeli Prime

21

S/PV.6520

Minister, to be presented to the United States Congress
on 24 May. We do not know the terms of those
initiatives, but we are, of course, prepared to support
any effort aimed at relaunching a dynamic involving
direct negotiations. Any proposal targeted at advancing
the peace process must be based on a set of credible
parameters that will make it possible to overcome the
crisis of confidence between the parties.
Eighteen years after the launch of the Oslo peace
process, we no longer have time to consider new, interim
solutions. Measures aimed at improving the situation on
the ground are welcome, but they cannot be an end in
and of themselves; they must be linked to prospects for a
definitive solution and cannot substitute for it.
If we do not respond to the aspirations for peace
expressed by the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, the
recent upsurge of violence in Gaza makes clear that
there is a risk of a flare-up. We condemn the Itamar
assassination and the firing of rockets, missiles and
shells at the civilian population in the south of Israel.
We call for respect for international humanitarian law
in the case of Gilad Shalit. The firing of an anti-tank
missile at an Israeli school bus marked a new stage in
the violence. We also condemn the humanitarian
consequences of the Israeli operations undertaken in
response to those attacks, which led to several civilian
deaths in the Gaza Strip. Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) offers a suitable framework for the
implementation of a durable truce, for which we call.
We continue to call for the implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) in all its aspects, especially in
connection with the need to lift the blockade and the
provision of access for humanitarian goods to the
territory, which should take place through existing
channels established by the Israeli authorities.
In Gaza, too, we must respond to the aspirations
of the people through a fundamental change of policy
without compromising Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. It is imperative that the measures aimed at
easing the blockade, which were put in place in June
2010, be implemented, including with respect to the
authorization of exports of commercial goods and the
liberalization of conditions for the movement of
individuals. The people of Gaza have also expressed
their desire for Palestinian unity, and we wish to affirm
our support for President Abbas in his efforts to
respond.

22

In this very volatile context, we cannot overlook
the regional aspect of the peace process. In Lebanon,
we hope that the parties will show restraint and
continue to cooperate, in the framework of the
Tripartite Commission, in order to avert any problems
along the Blue Line. A new Government has not yet
been formed, but the Lebanese authorities must respect
all of the country’s international obligations, especially
those related to the Special Tribunal and resolution
1701 (2006).
In conclusion, I wish once again to stress the
international community’s pressing obligation not to
allow this impasse, which has lasted more than seven
months, to continue. The conclusions of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians have
strengthened our conviction that the Palestinians are
more than ever prepared to establish their State and to
administer it in a credible and responsible manner. To
let the stalemate continue without responding to the
expectations raised by the prospects offered by
September 2011 — prospects that were underlined by
President Obama — would be to undermine the only
tangible asset towards the creation of a Palestinian
State — the Fayyad plan. To consolidate the gains
made, in June France will organize a donor conference
for the State of Palestine. However, that exercise will
be a meaningful one only if it is linked to the
indispensable resumption of the political process, the
conditions for which I recalled earlier.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of the European
Union.
Members of the Council, whenever they were
meeting on the situation in the Middle East in recent
months, were entirely in agreement on the urgency of
making progress in the Middle East peace process.
With little more than four months to go until
September, this sense of urgency is growing
considerably. Every day that passes without the
re-establishment of a credible political process is a lost
day. We must not allow this to continue; risks are
growing, and chances are dwindling. We must
overcome the deadlock and re-establish a credible
political process, well in advance of the September
deadlines.

11-30692

S/PV.6520

We want to see the State of Israel and a
sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security. There is no alternative to the two-State
solution. Making decisive progress by September is
possible, and the window of opportunity is still open.
Negotiations are the only viable way forward.
The international community must set a framework.
We remain convinced that clear parameters are a
prerequisite if negotiations are to be successful.
Germany set out its view on parameters along with the
United Kingdom and France on 18 February in the
Council (see S/PV.6484), supported by EU member
States and many others. We call on the Quartet to work
in this direction and to bring about the progress
required prior to the September deadline it has itself
endorsed. Within this context, we look forward to the
speech President Obama will deliver on the region.
Strong United States leadership is required.
The parties must commit unequivocally to
returning to meaningful direct negotiations on this
basis as soon as possible and without setting additional
conditions. We call on President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu to show flexibility and, within this
context, on the Prime Minister to open a forwardlooking perspective in his address to Congress.
Germany remains strongly opposed to unilateral
action impacting on final status issues, whether from
the Palestinian or from the Israeli side. Seeking
statehood through unilateral steps will not bring
sustainable peace. Israeli settlement activity should
cease immediately. It is illegal under international law,
constitutes an obstacle to peace and threatens to make a
two-State solution impossible. New construction plans
should be abandoned. All members of the Council are
in agreement that continued settlement activity
seriously threatens the prospects for peace.
Gaza remains a serious concern. Developments
over the past two weeks have demonstrated once again
the fragility of the current situation. A ceasefire agreed
on 14 April held for only three days. Germany strongly
condemns the continued firing of rockets and mortars
into Israeli territory, in particular the targeting of a
school bus with an anti-tank missile. This type of
action is utterly unacceptable. Germany recognizes
Israel’s right to protect its citizens against attacks. At
the same time, we look to Israel to exercise this right

11-30692

judiciously. The loss of civilian lives in Gaza is deeply
regrettable. Further escalation must be prevented.
We continue to call for the immediate and
unconditional release of Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit,
who has been held hostage for almost five years now.
We would like to express our concern with regard
to a possible second Gaza flotilla. The planned
activities bear considerable potential for escalation. In
line with what was said by Lynn Pascoe earlier, we call
on the organizations involved to find other ways to
deliver aid to the people of Gaza. The appropriate way
ahead is the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) calling for the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for goods and
people to and from Gaza, and for the prevention of the
illicit trafficking of arms and ammunition. In this
context, we call on all international supporters to make
use of the existing land crossings to channel their
support to Gaza, and to abstain from provocations.
Despite the concerns to which I have referred,
there is some positive news as well. On 13 April, the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians met and
acknowledged the Palestinian Authority’s Statebuilding efforts, stating that the Authority is above the
threshold for a functioning State in the key sectors.
Germany has been a major donor to the Palestinian
Authority, nationally and through the EU. We have
made a major political and financial investment in
Palestinian State-building. This investment has been
made to achieve a two-State solution and sustainable
peace for Israelis and Palestinians.
For too long, the people of the Middle East have
suffered from conflict and confrontation. It is time to
reach a final and comprehensive settlement that will
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and end the
occupation that began in 1967. The status quo is not
sustainable. Our goal remains a framework agreement
on all final status issues by September. Germany will
contribute to achieving this goal.
The deteriorating situation in Syria, violence
across that country and the rising death toll remain of
serious concern. We condemn the use of force by
security forces against peaceful demonstrators, and call
on Syria to address the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people by urgently implementing a credible
programme of political reforms as a path to long-term
stability. We acknowledge the Syrian Government’s

23

S/PV.6520

announcements of reforms, including the lifting of the
state of emergency today through decree No. 161. If
fully and swiftly implemented, it could be a first step
in a wider programme of necessary reforms.

on the urgent need for concrete decisions. Brazil was
deeply disappointed at the new postponement of the
Quartet’s meeting. Unfortunately, this lack of
movement creates a void in which radicals thrive.

In Yemen, the protests against the Government of
President Saleh have risen sharply in number and
strength since their onset in January 2011. The security
situation, in particular, and continued news of violence
coming from many Yemeni cities continue to give rise
to great concern. Despite a wide range of efforts, also
by members of the international community, we are
facing an intractable political impasse that has put the
country at the brink of a political and economic
tragedy. We call on the Government of Yemen to abide
by its responsibility to respect and protect the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons,
including their freedom of expression, to ensure safety
and to prevent further bloodshed. Likewise, the
opposition should show restraint and its determination
to engage in a peaceful dialogue about Yemen’s future.

That is why we continue to advocate that this
Council should play a greater role in support of the
peace process. We also welcome the proposal for a
Security Council mission to the region. Twenty years
after Madrid, 18 years after Oslo, and eight years since
the Road Map, the painful cost of the absence of
progress is more visible than ever. It is time for bold
decisions that set forth the well-known parameters of
an agreement on all final status issues.

It must be clear to all parties concerned that
Yemen’s problems cannot be solved with violence. The
future of the country has to be laid out by a
comprehensive and inclusive dialogue and courageous
reforms. We fully support the mediation efforts of the
Gulf Cooperation Council in this regard. All Yemeni
actors are called upon to engage in these negotiations
towards a peaceful future for the Yemeni people.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. I
also thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.
I begin by expressing profound sorrow over the
loss of innocent life in the recent escalation of violence
in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel. The death of a
16-year-old Israeli boy in an attack on a school bus and
the killings of civilians — including children — as a
result of Israeli reprisals against militants in the Gaza
Strip are appalling. We were also dismayed by the
killing of Italian peace activist Vittorio Arrigoni by
extremists in Gaza. Brazil condemns these heinous
attacks in the strongest terms. Violence by settlers and
against settlers has reached shocking levels. All
involved in such acts must be brought to justice. All
parties must respect and ensure respect for
international humanitarian law and protect civilians.
All this has occurred as the stalemate in the peace
process regrettably persists in spite of broad consensus

24

It is unfortunate that illegal settlement activity is
continuing. This logic further distances the political
discourse from reality as regards the two-State solution.
We fail to see how such a policy can advance the
security concerns of Israel and its citizens, whose
legitimacy we fully recognize and seek to advance.
Settlement activity in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
is illegal and an obstacle to peace. It has become the
single most serious threat to the two-State solution and
to the prospects for peace. It stands in defiance of
international law and the very set of international norms
and institutions that serve the purpose of protecting
civilians, including in Israel. It runs counter to the
decisions of the Security Council and threatens the
viability of the future Palestinian State.
We welcome the report submitted to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee last week by the Special
Coordinator for the Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry,
on the progress of the State-building efforts carried out
by the Palestinian Authority. We commend the
Palestinian Authority on the remarkable achievements
in all areas of its State-building programme in a
manner consistent with the goal of establishing the
functioning institutions of the Palestinian State by this
fall. Such achievement must be reinforced with
concrete steps in the peace negotiations.
The situation in Gaza remains a source of grave
concern. We welcome the implementation of measures
by Israel aimed at alleviating the suffering of the
population, specially the approval of United Nations
projects at a higher rate. These are positives steps,
although access to basic goods and services remains
vastly insufficient. The lifting of the blockade is
urgently required, as called for in resolution 1860
(2009).

11-30692

S/PV.6520

The historic events and changes taking place in
the broader Middle East are a natural expression of
legitimate aspirations for political and economic
progress and social justice. We support those
aspirations. It is also natural that those events, coming
from within, run different courses in different national
contexts. Principles and values, nevertheless, apply
across the board. As a matter of coherence, the
international community cannot tolerate violence
against unarmed civilians, regardless of where it is
committed.
At the same time, we call on leaders facing
peaceful demonstrations to uphold basic freedoms and
to engage in meaningful dialogue towards needed
reforms. Statesmanship, broad vision and political will
are essential to addressing the legitimate demands of
the respective populations in an environment of peace
and stability.
Let me say a word on the situation in Lebanon.
We look forward to the formation of a new
Government in a process that runs its course in a
peaceful manner and in line with the constitutional
framework. A democratic, prosperous, stable and
sovereign Lebanon will continue to be a fundamental
dimension of peace and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Council.
My delegation would also like to associate itself with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
As we gather here today to consider the situation
in the Middle East, we cannot ignore the uprisings that
have engulfed the region and the Arab world in
general. These developments have so far resulted in the
fall of long-standing regimes in Tunisia and Egypt. The
authorities in other countries in the region are being
challenged by their populations. The international
community will certainly gather some important
lessons from this historic chapter. What is clear is that
the status quo in which the rights of people have gone
unfulfilled for decades cannot continue. In that light,
the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict must be
resolved. The two peoples deserve to live in peace and
security.
The September deadline by which we hope to
achieve a viable, independent and contiguous
Palestinian State is almost upon us. Yet, the parties do

11-30692

not seem any nearer to returning to the negotiating
table to achieve that goal. A return to negotiations by
both sides is critical. However, Israel’s continued
disrespect for the decisions of the Security Council,
and the United Nations in general, by continuing to
build illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, remains an
obstacle. These actions change facts on the ground and
make agreement on final status issues much more
difficult to achieve. The inability of the Council to
adopt a resolution condemning such action despite the
overwhelming support for it is unfortunate. We
nonetheless call on Israel to respect the myriad
resolutions adopted by the Council and immediately
cease the construction of illegal settlements.
We had hoped that today’s debate would have
taken place after a meeting of the Quartet, whose
outcome we had hoped would have been critical to the
resumption of direct negotiations. We had expected the
Quartet to take up its responsibility and draw parameters
within which the parties could constructively engage.
Those parameters essentially include an agreement on
the borders of the two States based on the 4 June 1967
lines, security arrangements, a just, fair and agreed
solution to the refugee question and the fulfilment of the
aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem. We urge the
Quartet, of which we as the United Nations are an
essential part, to convene soon to proceed on that basis.
Intra-Palestinian unity is essential to move the
peace process forward. We encourage all efforts to
achieve that important objective. In that regard, we
welcome the ongoing negotiations between Fatah and
Hamas and hope that they will yield a positive result.
We also welcome the Palestinian announcement to hold
elections before September.
South Africa welcomes the Palestinian institutionbuilding efforts under the leadership of Prime Minister
Fayyad. We urge the international community to
continue to support those initiatives.
With regard to Gaza, we remain deeply concerned
about Israel’s continued blockade. The international
community’s demand that Israel end the illegal
blockade that has exacerbated the suffering of ordinary
civilians must be adhered to. The blockade and the
restrictions being imposed are in violation of
international humanitarian law, including article 23 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as contrary to
the will of the international community as expressed in

25

S/PV.6520

resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and
1860 (2009).

holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis, including
the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.

We reiterate the call for accountability for crimes
committed during the 2008-2009 Gaza conflict. In that
regard, in order to ensure justice, it is vital for the
parties to implement the recommendations of the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48).

Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on developments in the
Middle East. We have listened attentively to the
statements by the representatives of Palestine and
Israel.

South Africa also stresses the urgency of
reconstruction in Gaza. We call upon the international
community to exert serious efforts to compel Israel to
allow for the entry of all necessary construction
materials for at least the repair of destroyed and
damaged humanitarian infrastructure and United
Nations facilities, including schools of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, in order that dignity can be
restored to the people of Gaza. We also stress the
necessity of sustained commercial activity, including
both imports and exports, to promote the economic
recovery of livelihoods, businesses and industry in
Gaza.
We condemn the recent attacks from both Gaza
and southern Israel, which resulted in the deaths of
civilians, including school children. We urge the
parties to exercise restrain and to refrain from using
indiscriminate missile and other forms of air attacks,
which further exacerbate tensions in the area and bring
further untold suffering to ordinary civilians.
Israeli military attacks earlier this month on
Gaza, which led to civilian deaths, should be
condemned. We urge Israel to exercise restraint in
defending itself, to ensure that its actions do not harm
innocent civilians.
South Africa also joins those calling for the
release of the Israeli Staff Sergeant, as well as the
many Palestinian political prisoners held in Israeli
jails.
In conclusion, we believe that the current
developments in the Arab world will undoubtedly have
a bearing on the future of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the broader Arab-Israeli conflict. In our
search for a solution to the Palestinian question, it is
now clearer than ever that we must not lose sight of the
broader regional question to which Palestine is
inextricably linked. We therefore call on the Council
and other stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards the

26

As the Middle East is going through an
unprecedentedly intense and historic period, with
problems that have accumulated over the years
becoming more and more acute, the task of achieving a
comprehensive Arab-Israeli settlement is especially
pressing. To attempt to sidestep this fundamental issue
of Middle Eastern politics would be a serious mistake.
Unfortunately, instead of stepping up international
efforts, which the Russian Federation has consistently
called for, we have already seen the ministerial
meeting of the members of the Quartet postponed
twice — and this time to an as yet undetermined date.
This is deeply disappointing, particularly since we and
our partners had already done much preparatory work
ahead of the meeting.
Today as never before, Israelis and Palestinians
need international assistance to transcend their mutual
mistrust, forge constructive dialogue on the familiar
international legal foundations, and move towards a
mutually
acceptable
two-State
solution.
The
fundamental task of resuming negotiations has been
further complicated by the fact that the frequent calls
of the international community on the parties to reject
unilateral action that prejudges a final settlement
remain unheeded. Israel continues to build settlements
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. This illegal
practice must come to an end immediately.
The absence of any progress in diplomatic efforts
creates a vacuum that heightened confrontation and a
further build-up of mistrust threaten to fill. A sad
confirmation of this was the escalation of violence
around the Gaza Strip between 7 and 9 April, in which
dozens of people died or were injured, at a level not
seen since 2009. We strongly urge all sides to show
restraint and to implement the provisions of resolution
1860 (2009). We support the complete lifting of the
Gaza blockade. We recognize the importance of
protecting the unhindered access of humanitarian
assistance to and throughout the entire territory of

11-30692

S/PV.6520

Gaza. However, we deem it important to avoid actions
that could be perceived as provocations.
An additional factor exacerbating the situation in
Gaza is the increased activity of radical groups. Like
everyone here, we were shaken by the killing by
extremists of the Italian human rights activist Vittorio
Arrigoni. We urge Hamas, the controlling authority in
Gaza, to do everything necessary to ensure security in
the Strip. Abductions and assaults on individuals
cannot be allowed to become daily political practice.
We believe that, in the context of the creation of an
independent, viable, sovereign Palestinian State with
territorial integrity, overcoming the divisions within
Palestinian ranks is of paramount importance. Russia
has consistently called for such unity, which would lay
the necessary foundation for substantive PalestinianIsraeli talks and future agreements.
Considering that September is only months away,
it is incumbent on us to rekindle diplomatic efforts to
find a way out of this explosive dead end. I would like
to draw attention once more to the existence in the
Security Council’s arsenal of a powerful tool: sending
missions to the region. In the current circumstances,
the Russian proposal to send a Security Council
mission to the Middle East is especially timely, since
its goal is to bring the parties back to the negotiating
table. I would also emphasize separately that the
mission’s task is not to blame anyone but to listen to
the legitimate concerns of each side and attempt to find
some common ground. We are grateful for the support
voiced today for this initiative.
It is the Russian Federation’s consistent belief
that a complete, fair and lasting settlement in the
Middle East is possible only with the inclusion of all
settlement tracks: Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese.

all Lebanese. It is important that this process take place
within constitutional parameters. We expect the
country’s new Government to remain firmly committed
to Lebanon’s international obligations, and we urge
both the Lebanese and Israeli sides to continue to work
to implement the positions articulated in resolution
1701 (2006).
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements, of which we have taken careful note.
The debate today has really been an extension of
the Council’s continuing attention to Palestine and
related issues, and my remarks will basically focus on
that.
The situation in the Middle East continues to be
grim, with no sign of movement in peace talks. The
expectation that the Quartet would meet on 15 April
and come up with a statement that would enable
Palestinians and Israelis to resume talks has again not
materialized. The lack of progress in even holding talks
is also contributing to an increase in violence.
And yet it is imperative that the hopes raised for a
Palestinian State during the past two years not be lost.
The State-building efforts of the Palestinian Authority
have received commendations from various quarters,
including financial institutions such as the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The
April 2011 report of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process is the
latest to endorse the achievements of the Palestinian
Authority.

Turning to events in Syria, we support the
maintenance of law and order and the achievement of
stability, internal consensus and social peace in that
country in order to prevent unfavourable developments
and casualties. That, as we see it, is the aim of the
efforts of President Al-Assad to institute domestic
reforms, including the lifting of the state of emergency.
In that respect, we deem unacceptable any external
interference in Syrian affairs or those of other States in
the region.

The report makes it amply clear that the progress
made in the areas of the rule of law and human rights,
livelihoods and productive sectors, education and
culture, health, social protection, infrastructure and
water are now sufficient for a functioning Government
of a State. The Palestinian Authority has therefore
shown its determination to persist with Prime Minister
Fayyad’s plan for achieving statehood. As we approach
September 2011, these developments on the
governance front should inject a sense of urgency into
international efforts to resume peace talks.

We are hoping for a speedy conclusion to the
process of forming a Government in Lebanon on the
basis of a consensus that will incorporate the views of

The main hindrance to a resumption of peace
talks is lack of mutual trust. Statements on the

11-30692

27

S/PV.6520

existence of Israel emanating from time to time from
various sections of Palestinian society serve only to
aggravate that lack of mutual trust. The perception that
such statements, and the continuing rocket attacks from
the Gaza Strip on Israel, increase Israel’s vulnerability
must be seen in this context. The recent spate of
violence, including retaliation on Gaza after an attack
on a school bus in southern Israel, clearly shows the
divisions that exist. Such events deserve our strongest
condemnation; we also condemn the killing of an
abducted Italian national in Gaza last week.
While we commend the achievements in the
territories administered by the Palestinian Authority, it
is equally important to note the reason for the
deplorable situation in Gaza, where even essentials are
difficult to come by. The blockade of Gaza is adversely
affecting its population, which barely has access to
essential commodities. Gaza’s access to such
commodities is imperative, since the situation is also
driving militant elements to vent their frustration
through violence. Given the situation, humanitarian
assistance to Gaza and its delivery should not be
allowed to exacerbate the precarious security situation.
It would be prudent to use established channels for
delivering humanitarian assistance. At the same time,
those channels must improve the efficacy of their
delivery systems and look for stronger and more
effective mechanisms for delivering humanitarian
assistance.
We concur with the sense of the international
community that freezing settlement activity in the
Palestinian territories could enable the peace talks to
resume. Lack of unity among Palestinian factions is
another major issue. We note the recent initiatives
aimed at promoting intra-Palestinian unity and hope
they will result in a meaningful rapprochement among
various Palestinian groups.
Equally important are other issues enmeshed in
the conflict relating to Arab lands that remain under
Israeli occupation. Progress in the Lebanese and Syrian
tracks is core to achieving a comprehensive and
durable peace in the region. In a region witnessing
protest movements all around, a continuing impasse in
the peace talks could have a destabilizing effect on a
much larger area. If the peace talks do not recommence
quickly, India fears that unilateral steps taken by the
parties would only increase the distance between them
and further complicate the situation. We therefore call

28

on the Quartet members to intensify their collective
and individual efforts to break the stalemate.
India has a long-standing tradition of solidarity
with the Palestinian people. India has supported the
Palestinian people’s struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital living within secure and
recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, as endorsed in the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet Road Map and relevant Security Council
resolutions.
India has been contributing to the capacity- and
institution-building of the Palestinian people with its
material and technical assistance programmes. India
has also extended assistance through the India, Brazil
and South Africa forum. India is also contributing
$1 million to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
continuing our solidarity with the Palestinian people in
their pursuit of legitimate goals and their quest for
development based on dignity and self-reliance.
In conclusion, let me quote from a letter our first
Prime Minister, Pandit Jawarharlal Nehru, wrote on
11 July 1947 to Albert Einstein.
“I do not myself see how this problem can
be resolved by violence and conflict on one side
or the other. Even if such violence and conflict
achieve certain ends for the moment, they must
necessarily be temporary. I do earnestly hope that
some kind of agreement might be arrived at
between the Arabs and the Jews. I do not think
even an outside power can impose its will for
long or enforce some new arrangements against
the will of the parties concerned.”
These words were relevant more than 60 years
ago. They are even more relevant now. Agreement
must be reached between the parties through direct
negotiations for it to endure. To that end, we hope that
the parties will restart talks without further delay. Our
expectation is that the talks would lead to a final and
comprehensive resolution of the Middle East conflict,
in which several generations in the region have been
mired. We all owe it to future generations that they do
not remain mired in this conflict. We therefore reiterate
our call to both sides to show a spirit of flexibility,
compromise and political will to reach that end.

11-30692

S/PV.6520

Mr. Onanga Ndiaye (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to begin by conveying its
gratitude to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his very informative briefing.
We also extend our gratitude to the Permanent Observer
of Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their contributions.
Today’s debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, takes place at a
critical moment when popular movements shaking the
region are leading to unpredictable results. The stream
of events referred to by some as an Arab spring will
require profound political, social, cultural and economic
change throughout the
region. Given these
developments, new approaches must be considered
taking into account this new momentum of
transformation in this important part of the world, which
has been affected for numerous decades by countless
crises and conflicts. The fate of the peace process will
be inextricably linked to the results of the protest
demonstrations taking place throughout the region.
The September 2010 suspension of direct
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians due to a
lack of agreement on stalemated issues has damaged the
peace process. The continued settlement activities in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, recent escalations of
violence by both sides and the announced launching of
new humanitarian flotillas to Gaza next month are, my
delegation believes, detrimental to the international
community’s diplomatic efforts aimed at returning both
parties to the negotiation table. Gabon remains
concerned by the political stalemate. It is important that
negotiations between the parties resume as quickly as
possible under legitimate conditions conducive to
enabling the international community’s assistance in
resolving the differences.
With respect to the vital issue of providing
humanitarian assistance to Gaza, my country reiterates
its call for the lifting of the blockade against Gaza in
order to facilitate access for the civilian population to
emergency assistance and economic development,
which are so necessary to their survival and well-being.
My country considers it absolutely necessary that
resolution 1860 (2009) be fully implemented in all its
aspects to guarantee the right to access and freedom of
movement in Gaza. Gabon calls upon all countries
providing humanitarian assistance to Gaza to utilize
existing
channels
in
order
to
avoid
any

11-30692

misunderstanding and thus to contribute to Israel’s
security and that of the population of Gaza.
Direct negotiations must resume based upon clear
parameters that are equally mindful of Israel’s security
needs. In that regard, Gabon supports all recent
diplomatic initiatives aimed at relaunching this
process, and renews its call for the creation of a viable
Palestinian State living peacefully side by side with
Israel within secure and internationally recognized
borders.
My delegation also welcomes the conclusions of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee and expresses its full
support for the United Nations following actions
undertaken with the Palestinian authorities pursuant to
the positive developments in the six areas necessary for
the creation of a Palestinian State and, of course, for
strengthening its State institutions.
On the political situation in Lebanon, Gabon is
dismayed to note the impasse in negotiations to form a
new Government. We encourage the new Prime
Minister to leave no stone unturned in order to achieve
consensus on this very important issue. Failure could
risk serving as a pretext for the emergence of a new
crisis that will carry the seeds of renewed violence,
source of both instability and conflict. Similarly, my
delegation believes that the effective implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) by both parties continues to
be the sine qua non condition to guarantee a settlement
of all the outstanding issues.
Given the positive progress seen at the diplomatic
and economic levels of the process to build the
Palestinian State, Gabon reiterates its support for the
Quartet’s efforts and urges it to convene a meeting as
quickly as possible, during which this progress could
be appropriately considered. Such a meeting would
positively encourage both parties to return to the
negotiation table and achieve a political solution before
September.
In conclusion, my country believes that the
overall situation in the Middle East is a source of
renewed hope in the region. It is the responsibility of
the international community to take into account the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the region, who
want to seize this historic opportunity to take control of
their own destinies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Colombia.

29

S/PV.6520

My delegation thanks Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his detailed
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. This is the moment to reiterate
that the search for a peaceful and fair settlement to the
Israeli-Palestinian situation requires a resolution on all
core issues of the dispute, including security,
strengthening Palestinian institutions, the definition of
borders and settlements in the occupied territories. We
therefore welcome what has been expressed by the
Quartet — that, if the Palestinian Authority continues its
institution-building process, it will be in a position to
establish a State in the near future.
On the other hand, we regret that powerful
existing tensions continue to cause civilian casualties,
affecting the general population. We call on the parties
to exercise restraint and do their utmost to bring to
justice those responsible for those acts of
destabilization.
My delegation urges all parties to fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law and to
take all necessary measures to protect civilians,
especially children, from direct and indirect violence.
My delegation calls for the resumption of talks
between the parties on the basis of mutual respect,
recognition of the identity and rights of each people
and the fulfilment of obligations under existing
agreements recognized by both parties.
Colombia advocates a comprehensive solution to
the unstable situation in the region and the cessation of
the threat or use of force and of terrorism. Given the
upheaval in the region, my country approaches this issue
comprehensively and with a commitment to the lofty
goals of international peace and security, as we have
demonstrated on the many occasions when we have
fulfilled our responsibilities within various United
Nations bodies. We therefore support the Organization’s
efforts aimed at achieving real progress towards
Palestinian unity and peace in the region. We must also
take advantage of this renewed momentum and the
winds of change blowing in the region, so as to provide
an effective solution to this long-standing situation.
I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Prince Zeid Ra´ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): The stalemate in direct negotiations
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides undermines
heartfelt and honest international efforts to achieve
progress in the peace process. Peace and settlement
policy do not go together. Settlement activity must be
stopped in order to enable us to resume direct
negotiations leading to the creation of two States, a
Palestinian State and an Israeli State, based on the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital
of the Palestinian State — two States living side by
side in accordance with international resolutions and
international terms of reference, especially resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, as well as the
important Arab Peace Initiative.
The Palestinian Authority is deploying every
possible means to fulfil its commitments under the
Oslo Accord and the Road Map. However, we see no
genuine palpable will or commitment on Israel’s part to
achieve a political settlement. That stands to
undermine what has been achieved to date by the
Palestinian Authority in its ambitious plans to build the
institutions of a future State. Israel’s intransigence in
its wish to prevent Palestine from becoming a full
Member of the United Nations in the coming session
was referred to by President Obama in his address to
the General Assembly (see A/65/PV.11). No one can
accept the Palestinian people remaining without a
State. Peace and security for both peoples, Palestinians
and Israelis, is necessary, but Israel’s obstinate policy
hampers peace and leads to further escalation of the
situation in the region.
In conclusion, my delegation calls on the Quartet
and the Security Council to act quickly to persuade
Israel to immediately put an end to its settlement
policy, to resume direct negotiations and to find a
comprehensive, peaceful, just and lasting solution,
because the question of Palestine is an international
question, not a regional one, and resolving it will
benefit all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Jordan.

30

11-30692
