S/PV.9126

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9126th meeting

Wednesday, 7 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière/Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Hackman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-58239 (E)
*2258239*

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

07/09/2022

access to reliable running water, increasing the risk of
communicable disease.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Italy,
Latvia, Poland, Slovakia and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.

All those numbers and facts, although shocking,
cannot convey the full scale of the tragedy. But in
the face of the international community’s inability to
stop this senseless war, we must continue to record its
horrific consequences as faithfully and as accurately
as possible. It is our responsibility and, indeed, the
very least we can do in order to help prevent the war
from escalating further and to deter other potential
violent conflicts.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Ms. Ilze Brands Kehris,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights; and
Ms. Oleksandra Drik, Coordinator for international
cooperation, Center for Civil Liberties.

The United Nations continues to mobilize in order to
address the massive impact of the war on civilians. The
United Nations Development Programme has launched
an assessment of the consequences of the war on living
conditions, health, access to education, livelihoods,
food security, social status, as well as overall levels of
poverty and human development. Results are expected
to be available in December.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

As humanitarian needs rapidly rise, the
Organization’s response has scaled up and now reaches
12.7 million people with various forms of assistance.
Over 560 humanitarian organizations — more than
60 per cent of them national non-governmental
organizations — are now operating countrywide. That
fully complements the incredible work that thousands of
Ukrainian volunteers are carrying out in their country.

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: As we are painfully aware, the war in
Ukraine continues to rage. Since I briefed the Security
Council on 24 August (see S/PV.9115), because of the
fighting at least 104 civilians, including 10 children,
have died, and at least 253 civilians, including 25
children, have been injured, according to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. That brings the total number to 13,917 civilian
casualties: 5,718 killed, including 372 children, and
8,199 injured, including 635 children. Those are only
verified figures, and the actual numbers are likely
significantly higher.
The war has also continued to drive large-scale
displacement. More 6.9 million people are internally
displaced, an increase of 330,000 since my latest
briefing. Most of the newly displaced come from
eastern and southern Ukraine. The current number
of Ukrainian refugees recorded across Europe has
surpassed 7 million, up from 6.7 million just two
weeks ago. Ukrainian women, who constitute half of
those refugees, continue to face significantly increased
security risks, including sexual and gender-based
violence, trafficking, exploitation and abuse. Thousands
of people in the conflict-affected areas of the Donetsk
region and, most acutely, in the city of Mariupol, lack
2/27

The United Nations is actively seeking to ensure
that protection and assistance are available in all areas
of Ukraine. We remain extremely concerned about the
lack of access to Ukrainians living in areas that are
currently not under the control of the Government of
Ukraine. Our humanitarian response includes only
1 million people in those areas, despite the confirmed
enormous humanitarian needs.
The Secretary-General has spoken at length about
the impact of the war around the world, especially on
shortages of food and fertilizer. As we have stressed
before, the effects on countries already severely hit
by climate change, drought or instability have been
extremely worrisome. Somalia, for example, a country
that before February sourced at least 90 per cent of
its wheat from Russia and Ukraine, is on the brink of
famine. The United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs warns that there are concrete
indications that famine will occur later this year in
the southern Bay region of the country. Thousands are
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9126

dying in a historic drought made worse by the effects of
the war in Ukraine.

enabling preparations for the mission. We count on
their continued support.

We are grateful that the Black Sea Grain Initiative
continues to enable food exports from Ukraine. Since
1 August, 100 ships have left Ukrainian ports carrying
over 2,300,000 metric tons of grain across three
continents, including 30 per cent to low and lowermiddle income countries. The World Food Programme
has thus far chartered three vessels to transport wheat
from Ukraine in support of its humanitarian operations.
Thanks in part to the Black Sea Grain Initiative, world
food commodity prices are decreasing, the Food and
Agriculture Organization reports, although they
remain elevated.

At my most recent briefing, I stressed that we
were concerned by the treatment of prisoners of war
by both sides. I want to reiterate that the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine must
have unimpeded access to all individuals detained in
relation to the ongoing war. That includes access to
places of internment of Ukrainian prisoners of war and
civilian detainees in the Russian Federation. Both sides
to the conflict must fully abide with their obligations
under international law. I welcome the parties’
continued engagement to agree on prisoner exchanges.
Just last Friday, 14 prisoners were exchanged in the
Donetsk region.

But to ensure that food reaches all in need, Russian
fertilizers and food products must reach foreign
markets. The United Nations continues its efforts to
facilitate access to those products, which are not under
international sanctions, to world markets.
The Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant remains
a concern. The Council heard briefings yesterday
(see S/PV.9124) from the Secretary-General and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) regarding the dangers of continued
military activity at the plant. As the Secretary-General
said yesterday, we welcome the IAEA mission as a first
step to de-escalate the situation at Zaporizhzhya.
The
IAEA
mission
report
contains
recommendations to further de-escalate the situation
at the plant, including a proposal to create a nuclear
safety and security protection zone in Zaporizhzhya to
ensure the safety of the operating staff and maintain
the physical integrity of the plant. As an immediate
step, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s urgent call for
a complete cessation of military activity in and around
the plant. Demilitarization is the only answer to ensure
the safety of the facility.
The fact-finding mission to Olenivka is set to deploy
in the coming days in order to look into the incident on
29 July that led to the death of 53 Ukrainian prisoners
of war. Between 75 and 130 more were injured. The
head of the mission, retired Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, is accompanied by
an experienced team of senior officials and experts.
The mission must be able to conduct its work without
any interference and have safe, secure and unfettered
access to people, places and evidence. I want to thank
Ukraine and Russia for their constructive approach in

The persistent allegations of forced displacement,
deportation and so-called filtration camps run by
the Russian Federation and affiliated local forces are
extremely disturbing. Such reports must be investigated
with the cooperation of the competent authorities.
Assistant Secretary-General Brands Kehris will
provide more information on that issue.
We have repeatedly discussed in the Chamber
how the war in Ukraine is devastating that country,
while also endangering regional and global stability.
As members heard from the Secretary-General
yesterday (see S/PV.9124), just last week, the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) could
not produce a substantive outcome after consensus was
blocked because of issues related to the war. The NPT
failure is only the latest example of how the conflict
has affected international relations and cooperation.
The longer it continues, the greater the risks it poses to
international peace and security.
We need a peace in Ukraine that is founded on
respect for the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. All wars are tragic, but none more so
than wars of choice.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Brands Kehris.
Ms. Brands Kehris: The armed attack by the
Russian Federation against Ukraine, which began
on 24 February 2022, has resulted in the mass
forced displacement of civilians in Ukraine. Some

22-582393/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

7 million people are internally displaced in Ukraine,
and millions more have sought refuge outside of the
country. Intense hostilities, including the large-scale
destruction of critical civilian infrastructure and
housing, has forced many people to flee their homes.
Human rights violations in territory occupied by the
Russian Federation or controlled by affiliated armed
groups have also caused people to flee.
Such conditions have led to a situation in which
those fleeing danger often felt compelled to evacuate in
whichever direction was possible, irrespective of their
preferences. Our Office has documented a significant
number of cases of civilians who were displaced to
the Russian Federation, including about a dozen cases
where members of the Russian armed forces and
affiliated armed groups ordered civilians in Mariupol
to leave their homes or shelters and took them either
to territory in Ukraine under their control or to the
Russian Federation.
Once displaced in the territory of the Russian
Federation, in the cases documented by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), civilians have had freedom of movement.
Many Ukrainians have chosen to either travel onward to
other countries or to return to Ukraine. However, those
who chose to return to Ukraine were not provided with
financial resources or other support to do so. For those
who have been taken to remote regions of the Russian
Federation, the costs of return may be particularly
prohibitive. OHCHR notes that, in situations where
persons have been ordered by the occupying Power to
evacuate for their own safety or for imperative military
reasons, those who wish to return must be brought back
to their homes as soon as hostilities have ceased.
There have been credible allegations of forced
transfers of unaccompanied children to Russian
occupied territory, or to the Russian Federation itself.
We are concerned that the Russian authorities have
adopted a simplified procedure to grant Russian
citizenship to children without parental care and
that those children would be eligible for adoption
by Russian families. Under article 50 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, the Russian Federation is
prohibited from changing the personal status of those
children, including their nationality. Moreover, we are
particularly concerned that the announced plans of the
Russian authorities to allow the movement of children
from Ukraine to families in the Russian Federation do
not appear to include steps for family reunification or
4/27

07/09/2022

to ensure respect in other ways for the principle of the
best interests of the child.
Our Office has verified that Russian armed
forces and affiliated armed groups subject civilians
to so-called filtration, a system of security checks
and personal data collection. Individuals subjected
to filtration include those leaving areas of ongoing
or recent hostilities and those residing in, or moving
through, territory controlled by Russian armed forces
and affiliated armed groups. Although security checks
are not prohibited under international humanitarian
law, we are concerned that such checks — and
detentions that may follow — take place outside any
legal framework and do not respect the principles of
necessity and proportionality.
According to credible reports received by OHCHR,
the practice has resulted in numerous human rights
violations, including of the rights to liberty, security
of person and privacy. In cases that our Office has
documented, during filtration, Russian armed forces
and affiliated armed groups have subjected persons
to body searches, sometimes involving forced nudity,
and detailed interrogations about the personal
background, family ties, political views and allegiances
of the individual concerned. They examined personal
belongings, including mobile devices, and gathered
personal identity data, pictures and fingerprints. In
some cases, those awaiting filtration spent nights in
vehicles or in unequipped and overcrowded premises,
sometimes without adequate access to food, water
or sanitation. We are particularly concerned that
women and girls are at risk of sexual abuse during
filtration procedures.
OHCHR has documented that men and women
perceived as having ties with Ukrainian armed forces
or State institutions, or as having pro-Ukrainian
or anti-Russian views, were subjected to arbitrary
detention, torture, ill-treatment and enforced
disappearance. They were transferred to penal
colonies, including the now infamous penal colony near
Olenivka, and pre-trial detention centres, where they
were interrogated and sometimes tortured to extract a
so-called confession of their active cooperation with
the Government of Ukraine. Some detainees were
released after one or two months, while others remain
detained as of today, with little or no information for
their families about their whereabouts and fate.
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Our Office has been seeking access to individuals
detained after failing to pass filtration and to those
who reportedly passed filtration but were nevertheless
detained and sent to a centre for evacuees in Bezimenne,
in the Donetsk region, close to the border with the
Russian Federation. OHCHR has not been granted
access to those individuals and is concerned that they
may be subjected to torture or ill-treatment while being
held incommunicado.
Forced displacement entails great risks for
civilians. It not only gravely impacts their lives,
dignity and health, but also negatively affects their
economic and social rights. Since 24 February, we
have documented a significant deterioration in access
to adequate housing, social security and livelihood
opportunities for displaced persons, in particular for
people and groups in vulnerable situations, including
persons with disabilities, Roma people and older
persons. Many of them are staying for prolonged
periods of time in degrading conditions in ill-equipped
short-term shelters.
We also have concerns that the deterioration of the
economic situation, mass displacement and destruction
of social ties have heightened risks of sexual violence
and trafficking, especially for women and girls, who
make up the vast majority of refugees.
OHCHR is closely monitoring the situation in
Ukraine and the broader region, paying particular
attention to groups in vulnerable situations and at
higher risks of human rights violations, including
trafficking. Risks of trafficking can also arise at a
later phase when people have exhausted their savings
or when States reduce the scope of their protection or
social assistance. Receiving States should put in place
systematic protection and security measures, such as
gender-based violence risk mitigation with elements
of prevention, reporting and services for survivors
of violence, including trafficking and other forms
of exploitation.
We urge the Russian Federation to grant unimpeded
and confidential access to our Office and other
independent international monitors to all places of
detention under their control, notably to places where
people who underwent filtration are being detained.
The Russian Federation is also called upon to provide
representatives of international human rights and
humanitarian organizations with unhindered, timely
and safe access to persons from conflict-affected areas

S/PV.9126

of Ukraine who are now in the Russian Federation or in
areas of Ukraine occupied by the Russian Federation.
Lastly, we urge the international community
to continue supporting the citizens and residents of
Ukraine who have had to flee their homes.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Brands Kehris for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Drik.
Ms. Drik: During the six months of Russia’s
full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Center for Civil
Liberties, together with the partners from the Tribunal
for Putin initiative, which is a coalition of Ukrainian
human rights non-governmental organizations, has
documented more than 17,000 potential international
crimes committed by the Russian army in Ukraine. As
of the end of August, the initiative’s database contains
information pertaining to around 30 different types
of crimes, including direct attacks on and damage to
civilian objects; deaths and injuries caused by shelling;
the use of weapons causing superfluous injury; damage
to buildings dedicated to religion, education, art and
science; the forced disappearance of persons; pillaging
of an occupied town or place; murder; the wilful killing
of civilians; illegal detention; and depriving civilians
of their liberty.
That last crime often takes place during socalled filtration, which includes unlawful practices
that Russia has been implementing in the occupied
territories of Ukraine over the past eight years, as the
monitoring activities of the Center for Civil Liberties
have revealed. Basically, Russia has expanded its
experience and practices into the other temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine with its full-scale
invasion in February. Just to give members a taste of
what that process looks like for Ukrainians these days,
I would like to recount some of the stories of the people
who passed through filtration and were brave enough
to share their stories. Some of their names have been
changed for security reasons.
Mr. Yakov testified that he was interrogated by
Russian military intelligence officers and Russiancontrolled forces in occupied Donetsk. When they
found out that his wife was donating to the Ukrainian
army, they called her a fascist and Nazi and attempted
to take away their child for what they call re-education,
as they often do with the children of parents whom
Russia detains in the occupied territories. The

22-582395/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

desperate parents decided that they would rather
kill themselves than give away their child. However,
the Russians got interested in Yakov’s professional
skills. They continued his interrogation by asking him
questions about the defenders of Mariupol and the Azov
battalion. When Mr. Yakov had nothing to say, because
he did not belong to the Ukrainian military, they began
beating him and repeatedly hit him in the groin. They
then connected electrical contacts to his neck. When
Mr. Yakov recovered after the electric shocks, he
started coughing. He realized that all his dental fillings
had fallen out during his torture.
While lying on the floor, he noticed browncoloured stains. It was blood, but it was not his. It was
the blood of those who had been there before him. Then
Russians grabbed him and pointed to a nearby log to
which handcuffs were attached. It was also covered in
blood and white shards that looked like bone fragments.
He was saved only by the arrival of Russian military
officers who wanted him to work for them in Mariupol.
However, Mr. Yakov asked if he could take his family
to Russia on a pretext of his child’s need for medical
care. Subsequently, the entire family managed to escape
to Europe.
Another story involves a 21-year-old student from
Mariupol, Taras Tselenchenko, who uses his real
name because he no longer has anything to lose. His
father was shot by Russian soldiers. His home city was
destroyed, and, after hiding in a basement for weeks, he
and his 80-year-old grandmother, who had cancer, were
taken to go through the filtration process twice — first
in Donetsk and then at the Russian border. There he
was fingerprinted, photographed, interrogated and
psychologically pressured through interrogation by
a former member of the Ukrainian military, along
with a Russian wearing civilian clothes and holding a
baseball bat in his hands. He was also asked to give up
his Ukrainian passport, but he refused and kept it. Four
days later, as soon as he could, he left Russia and made
his way through Georgia and Türkiye to Germany.
Another story is that of a 17-year-old musician
named Marya Vychenko, whose entire family went
through a similar humiliating procedure at a filtration
camp in Mangush. The only difference was that she
was also sexually harassed during her interrogation but
was spared violence because the Russian soldiers did
not find her pretty enough. “Maybe the next one will
be prettier”, they said to her. Meanwhile, her father had
to go through all the steps of the humiliating procedure
6/27

07/09/2022

only because he had erased the data on his phone before
the filtration, which the Russians did not like. Those
who do not pass filtration can be detained in filtration
camps for months. From there they may be sent to
detention centres or prisons in the occupied territories
or Russia. We can imagine what goes on in them from
the testimonies of survivors such as 16-year-old Vadym
Buriak, who was detained while attempting to leave
Melitopol and kept for three months. He had to live
in a prison cell without even a working toilet. Almost
daily, he would hear and see the torture of Ukrainian
prisoners of war and then be forced to clean up the
blood in the torture rooms.
And that is the case when people are able to get
out at all, while many have ended up like Ivan Kozlov,
from Kherson. He was detained during the filtration
in Crimea, according to information available to us,
and has been kept in detention centres in Sevastopol
and Simferopol since April. During all that time, his
relatives have had no opportunity to speak to him,
learn about his condition or contact him in any way.
Some civilian hostages are tortured so that they will
admit that they are linked to the Ukrainian military,
as illustrated by the testimony provided by a survivor
named Aleksei Dubrovskiy, who was taken hostage
on 25 March in the Zaporizhzhya region and held in a
number of different locations, including the Melitopol
airport, a shed, a police station in Melitopol and a
detention centre in Kursk, in Russia. He and other
hostages were hit and kicked, tortured with electric
shocks and forced to crawl on the floor, and given no
medical assistance of any kind. As he testified, some of
the torture was aimed at forcing civilians to admit that
they were linked to the Ukrainian army, as if Russia
needed to prepare those hostages as part of an exchange
fund. It is not rare to hear in the testimonies of those
who have passed filtration that it appears that those
who failed to pass the filtration were killed. As recently
published satellite images reveal, there are mass graves
close to some of the filtration camps, which could mean
that some of the detainees may have been killed or
tortured to death.
All the people who go through the so-called
filtration procedures find themselves in the position
of being civilian hostages, humiliated and kept in
inhumane conditions, with no access to basic sanitary
needs, food, water and medical care while they are
tortured and witness the torture of others. They have
no legal status because according to international law
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

they cannot be held in Russia at all. But that does not
even include all the civilian hostages that Russians and
Russian-controlled groups in the occupied territories
have illegally detained. Many are being kidnapped and
taken from their homes. They just disappear from the
occupied territories until we find out that they are being
detained in one of many detention centres somewhere
in the occupied territories or in Russia or Belarus.
And those are not just rare individual cases. The
Center for Civil Liberties alone — just one human
rights organization — has already received information
about at least 600 such cases, often from relatives of the
Ukrainians who are being detained. It is a systematic,
planned and organized activity. Moreover, based on the
information that the Center for Civil Liberties collected
over the past eight years, the filtration practices did
not start with the full-scale invasion of Ukraine in
February. Rather, Russia has been conducting them in
the occupied territories since its first military invasion
in Ukraine in 2014. It later scaled that experience to
all of the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine.
It is currently estimated that tens of thousands of
Ukrainians — as many as 100,000 — are being kept in
filtration camps or detention centres in areas occupied
by Russia or in Russia itself. That has developed into an
organized and branched system of facilities, which has
been extensively covered in a recent report by Conflict
Observatory that coincides in many instances with the
data we possess.
Basically, Russia has established a zone of complete
lawlessness in the occupied territories, and by holding
fake referendums and declaring those territories
independent, the Government is attempting to shift
the responsibility away from itself for the monstrous
atrocities that are being committed there. The centres
I have visited have never been independent. They are
occupied by Russia, which as the occupying Power
is fully responsible for adhering to the provisions of
international law in those territories. Instead, Russia’s
army, under Russia’s political and military leadership,
is ignoring international law or twisting it completely
for the purposes of its propaganda. Basically it is doing
whatever it wants. Ukraine is not even the first country
that Russia has invaded in the past 30 years, but Russia
has always got away with it.
That is why Russia must be stopped and its war
criminals brought to justice. Otherwise those atrocities
will continue, hundreds of thousands of innocent
civilians will continue to suffer and Russia will

S/PV.9126

continue to do whatever it wants and invade countries
whenever it wants. If it is not stopped, who knows
which country it will come to liberate next? That
is why we are urging the Council to create effective
mechanisms for monitoring Russia’s compliance with
the norms of international law in order to ensure that
it stops its illegal detention of Ukrainian citizens who
have not passed so-called filtration; ends its practices
of torture, physical violence, threats and humiliation;
provides complete and comprehensive information
on the location and state of health of detainees at the
request of relatives and official representatives of the
State of Ukraine; and provides legal protection in the
event of official allegations against those persons,
including access to lawyers, international monitors and,
where applicable, sponsor countries. Most importantly,
the Council must promote the establishment of the
accountability mechanisms that are needed to bring
Russia and Russian war criminals to justice.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Drik
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ms. Brands
Kehris and Ms. Drik for their briefings, which were
insightful and helpful but also very troubling.
(spoke in English)
One might think that there is almost no meaningful
aspect of Russia’s war of choice in Ukraine that we
in the Council have not discussed in the course of the
past six months. But today’s topic is one. Since the
beginning of the aggression, strong concerns have
been raised, including by some of us — and for good
reason — about the alleged deportations, interrogations
and detentions of Ukrainian civilians by Russian and
Russian-affiliated forces, all of them policies and
actions that run counter to international humanitarian
law. Our concerns are no longer allegations. They
are facts that have been carefully and painstakingly
confirmed by international institutions, independent
agencies, human rights groups and professional news
media, based on accurate information from interviews
with people who have been deported and interrogated, as
well as additional and concordant resources, including
intelligence reports, verified social-media postings
and satellite images. Everything confirms it, and the
conclusion is beyond doubt and staggering. Russia is

22-582397/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

altering the demographic make-up of Ukraine. To put it
in other terms, that is social engineering.
Despite the appeals and requests, no independent
bodies have been allowed to inspect the filtration camps,
which in our view are an archipelago of unlawfulness,
dehumanizing processes and black holes of human
rights abuses where Ukrainians face torture and loyalty
tests. Those who have passed through the camps
have reported humiliation, verbal abuse and physical
torture ranging from strip searches to electric shocks
and staged mock executions, about which Ms. Drik
provided spine-chilling details.
According to a report recently published by Human
Rights Watch, Russian and Russian-affiliated officials
have forcibly transferred Ukrainian civilians in areas
of Ukraine occupied temporarily by Russia or to the
Russian Federation, including very remote areas.
Ms. Brands Kehris has just confirmed that forced
transfers of adults and children have taken place.
During the so-called filtration process, biometric
data, including fingerprints and facial images, as well
as personal belongings, have been collected. People
have been interrogated both about their relations to
military armed forces and their political views. Any
sign that links anyone to the Ukraine Government is
an indictment with dire consequences. The report notes
that individuals who failed the filtration process have
been detained and the fate of some is unknown. There
are serious grounds for concern that their lives are at
risk — if they are still alive.
Moreover, in July an expert mission established by
the Moscow Mechanism of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to investigate
alleged violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law committed by
Russian forces in Ukraine since 24 February identified
the establishment and use of so-called filtration centres.
Furthermore, based on analysis of satellite images, Yale
University’s Humanitarian Research Lab has identified
21 sites in Donetsk oblast alone affiliated with
filtration operations. Those are not mere checkpoints
but makeshift prisons, another phase of Russia’s brutal
war in Ukraine.
Anyone who has studied a bit of history cannot
fail to notice that filtration camps are rooted in Soviet
and Russian history, from the Second World War to
the Chechen wars of the 1990s. The world-renowned
Russian investigative reporter Anna Politkovskaya
8/27

07/09/2022

gathered testimony from thousands of Chechen
civilians detained in similar centres, revealing brutal
interrogation methods, torture and human rights
violations. Despite being decades apart, the policies
and aims remain the same: to identify civilians they
believe can assimilate into Russian culture and rule and
to punish or remove those who will not. The situation
is black and white. If people pay allegiance to the
occupier, they are free; if not, they will be detained and
may disappear. That is what is happening to countless
Ukrainian civilians. Credible estimates indicate that
some 1.5 million people have been processed through
those filtration camps. As of June, the OSCE put
that figure even higher — as many as 1.7 million
Ukrainians — and it has not stopped since. But the main
question concerns those who remain unaccounted for.
A terrifying dark spot in that bleak picture is the
situation of children. Human rights advocates believe
that Russians have separated Ukrainian children
from their parents at the filtration camps and placed
Ukrainian orphans with Russian families. When they
do not kill children — and hundreds have already been
killed — they simply uproot them and deport them to
Russia. Imagine for a second the indescribable distress
of Tatiana Tolstokorova, who recognized Nastya, her
missing three-year-old granddaughter, being welcomed
by adoptive adults in Russia, in a video posted on
14 July on VKontakte, the equivalent of Facebook in
Russia. That seems to have become the nightmare of
tens of thousands of Ukrainian mothers. It is reported
that Russian adults in Russia who take in Ukrainian
orphans receive a stipend that is four times higher than
the minimum wage.
International law is clear. The forcible transfer of
civilians is prohibited under international humanitarian
law, the laws of the war and the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and it can be prosecuted as a war crime
and a crime against humanity. The Russian Federation
is a State party to all those instruments, and it violates
them, just as it does everything else, at will. We call on
international organizations and independent agencies
and encourage Ukrainian authorities to collect all
the documentation available that could be used in the
accountability process. The violations of international
law will not remain unpunished, and the crimes
committed in Ukraine will haunt those responsible
until the day they die.
There is a lot that has come into the open about
the unlawful policies of Russia in Ukraine, but what
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

we know may be only the tip of the iceberg. There is
certainly significantly more that we do not know, and
that is the bigger story and the bigger worry. That
is why, if Russia has nothing to hide, as it claims, it
should enable immediate and unrestricted access for
United Nations bodies — first and foremost the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, but other international humanitarian actors as
well — to the so-called filtration centres and to the
forced deportation and relocation areas in Russia where
Ukrainian civilians are being filtered, interrogated,
humiliated, denied their rights and unlawfully detained.
Will Russia do that?
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Assistant Secretary-General Brands Kehris for
their briefings. And I thank Ms. Drik so much for
offering a stark and credible view of the situation from
a civil-society perspective.
I want us to imagine, for a moment, that we are
parents in Mariupol. You and your partner are young
and healthy. You have a 10-year-old son and a two-yearold daughter. You are happy. You are not particularly
political, but you love your life in Ukraine. And
suddenly, Russia invades. Russian forces bomb your
schools and hospitals. They destroy your peaceful city.
Still, you do your best to keep your family safe. You
huddle in shelters. You try to survive. One day, you and
your family are trying to scrounge up some food and
you are stopped on the street by Russian forces. You
are escorted against your will to a centre to undergo
filtration. You are terrified about what happens next,
because your grandmother told you stories of her friends
and neighbours disappearing in the Soviet Union and
even what Russia did to its own citizens during the war
in Chechnya.
You are separated from your partner and your
children. Your personal biometric information is
recorded. Your Ukrainian driver’s licence and passport
are confiscated. Your cell phone is searched for
perceived anti-Russian messages. You are stripped of
your clothes. You are interrogated. You are beaten.
You hear gunfire and screams from rooms next door.
Others deemed more threatening are being tortured and
killed. Because you are of fighting age, you are asked
to fight for Russia. When you refuse, you are given a
Russian passport and sent deep into Russia against your
will, far away from your family and with no means to

S/PV.9126

communicate with anyone you know or love. You have
been filtered.
That is the picture that many credible reports
from diverse sources present of the so-called filtration
operations that Russia has set up in Ukraine. We
now have eyewitness testimony from victims and
increasingly detailed reporting from groups such as
Human Rights Watch, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Yale School of
Public Health’s Humanitarian Research Lab. And
you have heard two of our briefers today share that
information. Even Russia’s State-managed TASS news
agency has reported on the many Ukrainians who have
been relocated to Russia.
At those filtration locations, Russian authorities
or proxies search, interrogate, coerce and reportedly
sometimes torture subjects. But those horrors are not
limited to the centres that have been set up. Filtration
may also occur at checkpoints, routine traffic stops or on
the street. In an interview conducted by Human Rights
Watch, a man from Mariupol said that he and dozens of
Mariupol residents were forced to stay in a schoolhouse
under filthy conditions, and that was even before they
were taken to undergo filtration. Many got sick. He
said, “We felt like hostages.” Those operations aim to
identify individuals whom Russia deems insufficiently
compliant or compatible with its control. And there is
mounting and credible evidence that those considered
threatening to Russian control because of perceived
pro-Ukrainian leanings are disappeared or further
detained. One eyewitness said that she overheard
a Russian soldier say “I shot at least 10 people” who
had not passed filtration. Estimates from a variety of
sources, including the Russian Government, indicate
that the Russian authorities have interrogated, detained
and forcibly deported between 900,000 and 1.6 million
Ukrainian citizens from their homes to Russia, often to
isolated regions in the Far East.
I want to be clear. The United States has
information that officials from Russia’s presidential
Administration are overseeing and coordinating those
filtration operations. And we are further aware that
they are providing lists of Ukrainians to be targeted
for filtration and receiving reports on the scope and
the progress of operations. Filtered — the word does
not begin to convey the horror and the depravity of
those premeditated policies. Just look at how Russia
is treating Ukrainian children. Estimates indicate that
thousands of children have been subject to filtration,

22-582399/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

some separated from their families and taken from
orphanages before being put up for adoption in Russia.
The United States has information that in July alone,
more than 1,800 children were transferred from
Russian-controlled areas of Ukraine to Russia. Of
course, I need not remind the Security Council that the
forcible transfer or deportation of protected persons
from occupied territories to the territory of the occupier
is a grave breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention on
the protection of civilians and constitutes a war crime.
We should take a moment to consider the fate of
those who do not pass filtration. The evidence is growing
every day that thousands of Ukrainians deemed a threat
owing to their potential affiliation with the Ukrainian
army, territorial defence forces, media, Government or
civil-society groups are reportedly being detained or
simply disappearing.
Why are they doing that? Why are they confiscating
Ukrainian identity documents? Why are they forcing
Ukrainians to fill out Russian passport applications?
Why are they intimidating locals and deporting anyone
deemed threatening? Why are they systematically
cataloguing Ukrainians moving through the system?
Why is Russia appointing officials in occupied areas,
imposing its education curriculum in schools and
trying to get Ukrainian citizens to apply for Russian
passports? Why are Russian forces and proxies doing
their best to erase the living memory of Ukraine?
The reason is simple: to prepare for an attempted
annexation. The goal is to change sentiments by force.
To provide a fraudulent veneer of legitimacy for the
Russian occupation and eventual, purported annexation
of even more Ukrainian territory. That effort to fabricate
facts on the ground is a predicate for sham referendums.
It is part of the Russian playbook for Ukraine that we
have been warning Council members about since the
very beginning of the war. Those referendums will
attempt to create a false semblance of legality and
public support so that Russia believes that it can annex
Kherson, Zaporizhzhya and other regions of Ukraine.
Of course we will never recognize any efforts by
Russia to change Ukraine’s borders by force. We must
hold the perpetrators of these atrocities to account.
We must respond as an international community that
still respects the Charter of the United Nations. We
know what Russia will say about all of it. It will deny,
deny and deny, but there is a simple way to know if
any of it is true. Let the United Nations in. Give the
independent observers access. Give non-governmental
10/27

07/09/2022

organizations access. Allow humanitarian access. Let
the world see what is going on.
As Security Council members, we are here to
promote international peace and security and uphold
the Charter. At a minimum, I hope that each of us here
acknowledges that as we heard today from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, all persons being subjected to filtration need
access to United Nations and humanitarian agencies
as soon as possible so that we can verify their wellbeing. Until Russia provides that access, we will have
to rely on the evidence we have accumulated and the
brave testimony of survivors. The picture they paint,
alongside the mounting reports, is chilling.
There will come a day when we are gathered in
the Council to condemn the Russian Federation’s
attempts to annex more of Ukraine’s territory. I ask that
members remember what they have heard here today.
No one — I repeat no one — will be able to say that we
were not warned.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join the previous two speakers in thanking UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kehris and Ms. Oleksandra Drik for
their briefings.
As we have discussed, today we meet to address
the emerging evidence of further potential Russian
violations and abuses of international law. We are
deeply concerned about reports by the United Nations,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and civil-society organizations that Russia is
systematically detaining, processing and deporting
Ukrainian men, women and children, with chilling
echoes of European history.
As we have heard, while passing through filtration,
civilians reportedly face interrogation, body searches,
stripping, invasive data collection, ill treatment and
torture. Those who are deemed most threatening are
reportedly held indefinitely in detention centres,
while others, including unaccompanied children, are
forcibly deported to Russia. Some simply disappear.
We therefore call on the Russian Federation to allow
the United Nations and other relevant international
organizations immediate, full and unhindered access
to those held in filtration camps and detention centres
and for reports to be fully investigated to ensure that
those responsible can be held to account. We are also
concerned that Russia may be using forced deportations
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and displacement in an attempt to forcibly change the
demographic make-up of parts of Ukraine. What does
that tell us about Russia’s war?
First, it tells us about its methods and its disregard for
the rules that we agreed and observe here at the United
Nations — the collective rules that bind us together.
Russia acts as if the Charter of the United Nations
and international humanitarian law do not apply to it.
Secondly, it confirms that this is not just an attempt
to destroy Ukraine’s democracy, but also Ukrainian
identity and culture. Its alleged de-Nazification is
a cover for de-Ukrainianization and annexation.
Finally, it confirms what has been abundantly clear
over the past six months. Russia’s army is not being
welcomed as it enters Ukrainian territory. This is a war
of conquest, occupation and oppression, and a war to
eliminate Ukraine.
We therefore call yet again on the Russian Federation
to fully observe its obligations under international law
and to put an end to its illegal invasion of Ukraine.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The unresolved Ukrainian crisis and the deteriorating
humanitarian situation have inflicted a heavy toll on
ordinary people. It is worrying that the conflict shows
no sign of ending even as a long winter approaches.
Ukraine and its neighbours are facing additional
challenges on an enormous scale. We must therefore
step up our actions, make a greater effort to bring about
peace and do our utmost to prevent further deterioration
of the humanitarian situation.
As a matter of principle, under no circumstances
should civilians and civilian infrastructure be targeted
in conflict. The protection of civilians must come
first. The parties concerned should strictly abide by
international humanitarian law, protect the legitimate
rights and interests of refugees and displaced persons,
especially women and children, support the work of
international humanitarian agencies, facilitate the
evacuation of personnel and provide cooperation for aid
operations. China commends Ukraine’s neighbouring
countries for providing shelter, humanitarian
assistance and social services to millions of refugees.
The international community should continue to lend
a helping hand to Ukraine and its neighbours, mitigate
the pressure on relief capacity, bring hope to more
people in need and create the necessary conditions for
their voluntary return.

S/PV.9126

The health and well-being of hundreds of millions
of people in Ukraine and the entire region depend on
the safety and security of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, and accidents must be avoided. We call
on the parties concerned to earnestly implement the
seven pillars of nuclear safety and security proposed
by Director General Grossi of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), and refrain from taking
any action that could endanger nuclear safety and
security. We welcome the IAEA’s on-site inspection
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant last week
and commend the continued on-site presence of the
Agency’s experts. We encourage the Agency to maintain
communication with all parties on the relevant issues.
Ukraine’s humanitarian situation has always been
dear to our heart. With that in mind, China has proposed
a six-point initiative for preventing a large-scale
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine, as well as a cooperation
initiative on global food security. We encourage
Russia and Ukraine to maintain communication and
cooperation on humanitarian issues and support the
United Nations and international humanitarian agencies
in providing assistance to Ukraine and neighbouring
countries on the basis of neutrality, impartiality and
non-politicization.
We have also been calling for and promoting the
return of Ukrainian and Russian food products and
fertilizers to the international market. The Chinese
Government has provided three batches of humanitarian
supplies to Ukraine, a concrete action that brought
much-needed aid to Ukrainians caught in the conflict.
We hope that those supplies, including infant formula,
quilts and waterproof tarps, will help more people
survive the looming winter.
History has proven time and again that diplomatic
efforts, negotiation and communication are the only
viable way to resolve conflicts and end crises. China
once again calls on all the parties concerned to
remain engaged, explore the possibility of a political
settlement and create conditions for an early cessation
of hostilities and the restoration of peace and stability.
All sides should abandon their political self-interest
and refrain from escalating tensions, creating division
or provoking confrontation and should make concrete
efforts to resolve the Ukrainian crisis.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on this

22-5823911/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

07/09/2022

important topic. Let me also thank the briefers for
their presentations.

community and partner countries in order to mitigate
the economic hardships resulting from this conflict.

We are today witnessing the debilitating impact
of conflicts on humanitarian situations across global
landscapes, be it in Afghanistan, Yemen, Mali, the
Sudan or Ukraine. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/381) paints a distressing picture of civilian
suffering: more than 11,000 civilian casualties in
various conflicts in 2021, with over 45 per cent of those
in our neighbourhood in Afghanistan alone. More than
140 million people are reeling under conflict-induced
hunger; 84 million have been forcibly displaced, with
women and children forming the large majority of
internally displaced persons.

The impact of the Ukraine conflict is not limited to
Europe alone. In particular, the conflict is exacerbating
concerns over food, fertilizer and fuel security,
particularly in developing countries. It is necessary
for all of us to adequately appreciate the importance
of equity, affordability and accessibility. India has
been approached for the supply of wheat and sugar by
many countries, and we are responding positively. In
the past three months alone, India exported more than
1.8 million tons of wheat to countries in need, including
Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan and Yemen.

It is a matter of concern that parties to armed
conflicts seem to view the civilian population and
infrastructure as legitimate targets. Vulnerable groups,
including women, children and minorities, as well
as indispensable civilian infrastructure, hospitals
and irreplaceable cultural heritage, have been among
the various collateral casualties of attacks in recent
armed conflicts.
The Security Council will recall that, since the
commencement of the conflict in Ukraine, India has
consistently called for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and an end to violence. Going forward, we
continue to emphasize dialogue and diplomacy as the
only way forward.
It is regrettable that the situation in Ukraine
has not shown any significant improvement since
the Council last discussed the conflict in Ukraine
and its humanitarian consequences (see S/PV.9115).
The security situation remains serious, as do the
humanitarian consequences. Reports of civilian killings
in Bucha were deeply disturbing.
We very much hope that the international
community will continue to respond positively to the
call for humanitarian assistance. We support calls
urging for guarantees of safe passage in order to
deliver essential humanitarian and medical supplies.
India recently dispatched its twelfth consignment of
humanitarian aid to Ukraine. That humanitarian aid
and assistance is in keeping with the human-centred
approach of the Government of India, a central tenet
of our national beliefs and values that perceives the
whole world as one family. Let me assure the Council
that India will continue to work with the international
12/27

Allow me to once again reiterate the importance of
the United Nations guiding principles for humanitarian
assistance — humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. Those measures should never
be politicized.
We continue to emphasize to all Member States
that the global order must be anchored in international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and respect for
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Assistant Secretary-General Ilze Brands Kehris and
Ms. Oleksandra Drik for their briefings.
Two weeks ago, the Security Council met to
discuss the situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.9115) after
six months of conflict. The report Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo presented to us on that occasion
already presented a bleak scenario — tens of thousands
of unconfirmed deaths and millions of refugees
and internally displaced persons. The humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate, and continued
hostilities during winter could have dire consequences,
disproportionately affecting vulnerable groups, women
and children.
There are signs of an intensification of hostilities in
various parts of Ukrainian territory, such as the Kherson
region, where fighting has intensified. That worrisome
trend ignores the risks for heavily populated areas and
for the integrity of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. Even more disheartening is the fact that there are
no signs of any engagement in peace negotiations.
In recent weeks, we have heard that the two
sides are preparing for a long-term conflict, with
the mobilization of additional troops and resources.
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

That decision will have grave impacts on the society
and the economy of both sides, with unforeseeable
consequences for the next generations and rippling
effects for the world at large.
We have in mind the words of the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates at the
meeting held on 24 August: “[t]here is value in
the Council’s meetings on Ukraine when they are
complemented by action” (S/PV.9115, p. 17). Action in
this case should mean opening the path to a negotiated
solution that ends the suffering of millions of people
and eliminates the risks to food and energy security in
other countries, especially in the developing world.
Brazil strongly condemns the use of force to
resolve disputes between States. We reiterate our call
for the immediate cessation of hostilities. We defend
the territorial integrity of all States and respect for the
security concerns of all parties.
Isolating any of the parties and closing the door
to dialogue will not bring about a solution to the
conflict. The grain and fertilizer agreements concluded
in Istanbul in July and the arrival of the inspectors
of the International Atomic Energy Agency at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant last week show
that realistic and pragmatic negotiations and mutual
concessions are the best way to achieve peace.
Respect for international law and for the Charter
of the United Nations must guide the actions of States
and the practice of the Council. We urge the parties
to refrain from escalating the conflict and to cease
hostilities. We add our voice to that of other Council
members in favour of a political solution and call on the
leaders of both countries to prioritize the well-being of
their populations.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and
Ms. Ilze Brands Kehris, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, for their briefings. I also thank the
civil-society representative, Ms. Oleksandra Drik, for
her contribution to the Council’s discussions.
Since the war in Ukraine began in February
this year, and in a period of only six months, at least
14 million people are estimated to have been forcibly
displaced from their normal places of abode. Close to
8 million people have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries, while some 7 million more have been

S/PV.9126

internally displaced. Although some Ukrainians have
crossed back into Ukrainian territory, the numbers pale
in comparison to those who every day are compelled
to leave their homes. The situation, which has been
infamously described as the world’s largest and fastestevolving displacement crisis since the Second World
War, is alarming and calls for urgent and concerted
international action to help end the war that has become
the driving force behind the mass displacement of
persons from Ukraine.
Ghana is concerned about the fact that women and
children are the worst affected by the war and account
for the greatest proportion of displaced persons.
Naturally, many of those women are pregnant, have
children or are suffering from some form of disability
or vulnerability. The Council has also been informed
in previous briefings about human rights abuses,
including conflict-related sexual violence suffered
by the displaced women and children of Ukraine. We
are disheartened by the realization that many of the
displaced will never be able to return to their homes
and the lives they once lived owing to the extensive
damage and destruction done to a number of cities and
residential facilities across Ukraine.
Despite the grim outlook, we note with appreciation
the essential support mechanisms and humanitarian
assistance being offered by the United Nations and its
affiliated humanitarian agencies, as well as civil-society
organizations. We also commend those neighbours
of Ukraine that have continued to take in millions of
people and provide them with the assistance they need,
notwithstanding their own internal circumstances and
challenges. Those countries must be granted additional
support where possible in order to enhance their
response capacity and ensure that adequate protection
and assistance are extended to those who now find
themselves to be refugees. We recommend that the
humanitarian assistance for the displaced should
include counselling and psychosocial services to help
those who have been traumatized by their experience of
the war. Children must also be protected, and their best
interests must be prioritized at all times.
Ghana condemns all acts of human rights abuses
against civilians, including the reported cases of
filtration processes and other acts that may amount
to war crimes. Filtration operations are inhumane and
constitute violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. In that regard, we call for
thorough, impartial and independent investigations

22-5823913/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of such reports and allegations of abuses to establish
the facts and ensure accountability on the part of the
perpetrators, as well as justice for the victims. Attacks
on civilian-populated areas and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure are unjust and unacceptable and
must cease. We call on the warring sides to comply with
their obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
I want to emphasize that a cessation of hostilities
is crucial to ending the displacement and other
humanitarian crises in Ukraine. The war must end
now. We reiterate our call to the Russian Federation
to immediately and unconditionally withdraw its
forces from the internationally recognized borders of
Ukraine. Ghana maintains the view that there can be no
military solution to the war. Unless the warring sides
turn their attention and resources from the battlefield to
the negotiation table and to diplomatic approaches, the
various crises brought about by the war will continue to
evolve and further threaten global peace and security.
In reaffirming Ghana’s unwavering support for the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine and its people, I want to reiterate
our principled position by which we do not recognize
any unilateral annexation of territory through the threat
or use of force by any State against another.
Finally, we urge members of the Council to prioritize
the interests of the ordinary people of Ukraine as we
work towards a speedy and comprehensive solution that
can secure peace and stability in Ukraine.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me first thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Brands Kehris and the civil-society
representative, Ms. Drik, for their briefings.
There can be no doubt about the significant and
tragic humanitarian consequences of Russia’s war
against Ukraine. Russia’s illegal invasion violates
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the legal norms of the world order. Russia
must withdraw its troops and the war must stop.
The numbers of civilian casualties are alarming and
unacceptable. As we have heard, more than 7 million
people have crossed the border as they flee Russia’s
gruelling war, seeking protection in neighbouring
countries and others. Roughly the same number are
internally displaced in Ukraine. Behind those numbers
are real people — families, children and persons with
disabilities. They all need protection, health services
14/27

07/09/2022

and education. The restoration of family links is vital,
and we must prevent and combat human trafficking
and other abuses of those in dire need of protection and
assistance. All the parties have an obligation to protect
civilians and to safeguard and ensure their human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
Russia’s warfare in urban and populated areas,
as well as the use of heavy explosive weapons, is
destroying homes, schools and hospitals. It is important
that we support Ukraine’s reconstruction efforts so that
the many millions of forcibly displaced people can one
day return to their homes in Ukraine. Humanitarian
and development actors must be engaged in that
important work.
We are deeply worried about the reports of the
forcible transfer of civilians to Russia and territory
occupied by Russia, as well as of filtration facilities
run by Russia. We are alarmed by reports that civilians
appear to be arbitrarily deprived of their liberty at
such facilities. There is a growing body of independent
information indicating serious human rights violations
and abuses against civilian detainees and prisoners of
war at those sites. The reports emphasize the importance
of all parties engaging in identifying and recovering
missing persons. Appropriate humanitarian actors must
be given unhindered access to all places of detention
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
We welcome the update today from Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo on the fact-finding mission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to the incident
of 29 July at the detention facility near the village of
Olenivka. The mission must be allowed to conduct its
important work.
We also want to recall that all measures aimed at
altering the demographic composition of an occupied
territory are prohibited according to international
humanitarian law and may constitute war crimes. We
reiterate our demand that civilians must be protected
and international humanitarian law and international
human rights law fully respected and implemented.
Civilians who have been forcibly transferred and who
wish to return must be allowed to do so. Humanitarian
actors must be assured access to the many people
in need, and they must be protected against attack.
Norway condemns the recent attacks on the base of the
Ukrainian Red Cross Society in Sloviansk.
Russia’s war on Ukraine is also having global
consequences, with surging fuel and energy prices and
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9126

increasing food insecurity. We commend the SecretaryGeneral for his tireless efforts to promote dialogue and
negotiations between the parties. The most effective
way to ease the devastating humanitarian effects of
this war is to stop it. Russia chose to start this war, and
Russia can also choose to end it.

migrants were held in inhuman conditions and deprived
of their right to legal representation and a fair trial.
At the same time, the United States authorities often
separated families by sending children and parents to
different detention centres. More than 2,500 such cases
have been documented.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We took note of the information provided
by Rosemary DiCarlo and Ilze Brands Kehris. We
also listened to yet more fabrications delivered by
Oleksandra Drik, a well-known propagandist and
former adviser to the Ukrainian Minister of Defence.

In perhaps the darkest stain on the United States’
heavily tarnished human rights reputation, prisoners
have been held illegally at Guantánamo Bay without
trial for many years. To this day, no one has been held
accountable for the torture and ill-treatment of prisoners
in secret Central Intelligence Agency prisons, which
were operating in the 2000s in European countries
as well. Just out of curiosity, I would once again like
to ask my American counterpart, or my colleagues
from the United States delegation, if the United States
allowed United Nations human rights organizations in.
For example, did representatives of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) visit the prisoners at Guantánamo Bay?

Today’s meeting, which was convened at the request
of the United States and Albania, has every chance
of becoming a new milestone in the disinformation
campaign unleashed by Ukraine and its Western
sponsors against our country. We understand the
West’s tactics, which consist in waging a hybrid war
on Russia in Ukraine until the last Ukrainian falls. The
aim is to use every possible means to smear the Russian
Federation and its special military operation. We are also
familiar with the Western propagandists’ dirty tricks.
We need only recall the obviously staged events and
provocations in Bucha, Kramatorsk, Kremenchuk and
Mariupol that continue to be refuted by new evidence
that the West is doing everything it can to conceal from
the general public. Now we are being accused of some
brutal kind of filtration measures that we are allegedly
implementing with regard to Ukrainian citizens.
Although our American colleague has already left the
meeting, I have a question for her that I imagine can be
passed on to her. What is the title of the horror film that
she recounted to us today? We have not seen it. Was it
produced by Ukraine’s ministry of propaganda? When
will it be released?
Turning to so-called filtration, first of all, it is
unclear what this is about, since the term has no clear
definition under international humanitarian law. If we
are talking about identifying soldiers from nationalist
battalions or the Armed Forces of Ukraine who have
participated in crimes against civilians among the
Ukrainian citizens who want to leave for Russia, that
is a normal practice for any army anywhere in the
world. It is our American colleagues who requested this
meeting who can tell us better than anyone about these
so-called filtration measures. Take, for example, the
programme launched by the previous Administration to
expel to Mexico tens of thousands of displaced persons
who had applied for asylum in the United States. The

Against that background, the attempts by those who
initiated this discussion on a pretext of human rights
to convince an uninformed public of the existence
of ghastly camps in which Ukrainian civilians are
tortured and forced or deceived into moving to Russia
are particularly cynical. Anyone promoting such
insinuations is either simply ignorant of the facts or
lacking common sense. Basic international statistics
disprove it. As is well known, it is the Russian
Federation that has taken in the largest numbers of
Ukrainian refugees. More than 3.7 million, including
600,000 children, have entered Russia from Ukraine
and the Donetsk and Luhansk people’s republics.
If we subtract the number of citizens of the Donetsk
and Luhansk people’s republics who hold Russian
passports, the number of Ukrainian citizens who have
left for Russia, based on the estimates of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
is more than 2.4 million. And they are not being held
in prisons like Guantánamo. They are living freely and
voluntarily in Russia. No one is preventing them from
moving or leaving the country. Even the representative
of OHCHR confirmed that today.
Does anyone seriously believe that such huge
numbers of people could be forced to move and keep
silent? Many of them are writing about their impressions
and opinions on social media, giving interviews and
expressing their gratitude to our country. Their postings
make it clear that people are fleeing Ukraine out of fear

22-5823915/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

for their lives from a criminal regime that would not
allow them to evacuate and used them as human shields.
On the territory of 85 constituent entities of
the Russian Federation there are more than 1,500
temporary settlement centres able to accommodate
more than 95,000 people. Rail transport has been
provided to move refugees to temporary residences,
with 38 trains designated for the purpose. A telephone
hotline processes more than 250 queries from citizens
every day. Refugees and displaced persons are being
provided with financial, legal, psychological and
medical assistance. We pay special attention to children,
who are given every opportunity to continue their
schooling. Unfortunately, that was far from the case
for many children in the Donetsk and Luhansk people’s
republics, who were unable to return joyfully to school
on 1 September. Because of the daily shelling of towns
there by the Armed Forces of Ukraine, the authorities
decided that for the time being a number of schools will
continue to operate remotely.
With regard to the privacy of children, which
Ms. Brands Kehris mentioned earlier, we are struck
by the fact that in discussing the issue, United Nations
officials have repeatedly tried to ignore the fact that
the Ukrainian website Myrotvorets, or Peacemaker, has
been publishing the personal data of minors as well as
adults and threatening them with reprisals. We have
already informed the United Nations, and UNICEF
in particular, that this extremist resource’s database
includes more than 340 children, including a 13-yearold girl named Faina Savenkova, from Luhansk, whom
no UNICEF representative has met with yet, despite the
assurances and promises made.
It goes without saying that displaced persons are
registered at the border with Russia, after which those in
need are helped to reach the temporary accommodation
centres. We would like to point out to those who are
trying to create confusion through terminology that
Ukrainians and residents of the Donetsk and Luhansk
people’s republics arriving in Russia go through a
registration process, not so-called filtration. As far as
we can tell, there are similar procedures for Ukrainian
refugees in Poland and other European Union countries,
but they can tell us about that themselves.
Just how far from reality are our Western colleagues’
fantasies about the forcible removal of Ukrainians to
Russian territory is evident from the situation on the
ground. Even the Western media cannot ignore the fact
16/27

07/09/2022

that a huge number of Ukrainian citizens are attempting
in any way they can to leave Ukraine for the territories
that Russia has liberated. There is now a long line at the
checkpoint in Zaporizhzhya, through which as many
as 700 people return home every day after getting
objective information from their friends and loved ones
about the peaceful life in their hometowns and villages.
In particular, the experts from the International Atomic
Energy Agency could see that as they went through the
line on their way to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant and had an opportunity to talk to ordinary people.
That is a clear sign that a great many Ukrainians already
prefer life with Russia and do not trust the corrupt and
criminal Kyiv regime.
As long as we are talking about violent actions
against civilians, the efforts of the Kyiv authorities
come to mind. Since the beginning of August Ukraine
has been conducting a so-called mandatory evacuation
of the population from the areas of the Donetsk people’s
republic that remain under its control and a number of
other oblasts in the country. People not only do not
have a right to choose where to be evacuated to, they
frequently have no right to choose to remain in their
homes, even when they are not in danger. Anyone who
decides not to leave is threatened with punishment
for cooperating with Russia. Ukraine’s warped laws
on so-called collaborationism enable the prosecution
of people simply for receiving food from the Russian
authorities — or, for example, of teachers who decide
to continue teaching in a school in a liberated area.
Do the human rights defenders in the West and at the
United Nations not want to pay attention to those socalled wartime laws and the way the Kyiv regime is
applying them?
Something else outside their field of vision are the
terrorist attacks committed by Kyiv saboteurs against
representatives of the local authorities in the liberated
territories — the people responsible for ensuring the
functioning of cities and public services for the benefit of
the civilian population. The other day, Artyom Bardin,
the commandant of the Berdyansk administration,
died when his car was blown up. On 24 August, Ivan
Sushko, head of the temporary civil administration of
Mikhailovka in Zaporizhzhya oblast, was killed. His
daughter, whom he was taking to kindergarten the
moment of the explosion, survived by a happy accident.
That is apparently how Kyiv is waging the partisan war
it promised us from the very beginning of the special
military operation. And given the real feelings of the
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

residents of the liberated territories, the Zelenskyy
regime simply has no choice left but to resort to tactics
of murder and intimidation.
Finally, the claims by our Western former partners
about the cruel filtration procedures that Ukrainians
are allegedly being subjected to on their way to Russia
completely collapse when one considers, for example,
the free movement of the Ukrainian agents who were
involved in the murder of the young Russian journalist
Daria Dugina. Let me briefly remind everyone of the
basic facts. Almost a month before the crime took
place, on 23 July, Natalia Vovk, also known as Shaban,
a Ukrainian citizen who is wanted for that vile murder
and act of terror, quietly entered Russian territory in
her car with her 12-year-old daughter, Sofia Shaban.
As can be seen from the published video footage, she
was held at the border for a few minutes. Where then
were the filtration measures and interrogations that
Russia is allegedly applying to all Ukrainians entering
our country? In Moscow, Natalia Vovk drove around
comfortably in her car, rented an apartment and a space
in a parking garage and on 20 August organized the
terrorist attack that killed Dugina. After committing
that despicable crime, she and her daughter immediately
set off for the Estonian border and once again crossed
without any filtration procedures. Similarly, her
accomplice Bogdan Tsyganenko, also a Ukrainian
citizen, crossed from Estonia into Russia and back
again with no problems.
I would like to ask our Western colleagues a
question. How could those Ukrainian criminals cross
the Russian border twice without incident if our socalled police State, as many of those here say, has built a
network of filtration camps for Ukrainian citizens? And
how does the mass voluntary relocation of Ukrainians
to Russia fit with the accusations that they are being
forcibly deported? Is it not possible that our Western
colleagues have once again simply become entangled
in their own lies?
It is unfortunate that the smear campaign aimed
at our country has now extended to human rights
organizations that claim to be objective. One such
recent report, which was cited widely today, contains
unfounded accusations against us. The narrative of
mass filtration measures is based on interviews with
a few dozen people, many of whom never went to
Russia at all, and others who said that they had done
so voluntarily. Given the huge number of Ukrainian
refugees, why did the authors limit themselves to those

S/PV.9126

disjointed and selective testimonies while refusing to
ask the hundreds of thousands who have fled the conflict
for Russia how they have been living all these months
and years under shelling from the Armed Forces of
Ukraine and what procedures they went through when
they crossed the border? Basically, how impartial can
human rights defenders be when they are working only
with one side of the conflict, which among other things
has established total censorship on its territory?
The references today to the Human Rights Watch
report should mislead no one. We saw perfectly well
what went on with Amnesty International, which was
hounded for trying to show the real picture rather than
the fictional one of the Ukrainian armed forces’ use
of civilian objects for military purposes. The fact is
that our Western colleagues do not need the truth even
from human rights defenders. They need them only
to whitewash the rotten Zelenskyy regime and smear
Russia’s image.
We are not opposed to discussing what is happening
in Ukraine. The special military operation has brought
to light so many facts about the criminal activities of
Kyiv and its Western associates that we could continue
to discuss them almost every day. But we believe in
talking about real problems, not imaginary ones. And
since we have wasted our time today discussing the latest
speculations and fantasies, we propose that tomorrow
we discuss the real threats to international peace and
security that are being posed by foreign Governments’
supplies of weapons and military equipment to
Ukraine. We would like Izumi Nakamitsu, UnderSecretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, as well as
civil-society representatives, to brief the Council, and
we will send the corresponding request to the French
presidency right away.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Brands Kehris for their updates on the situation
in Ukraine. I also thank Ms. Drik for her insights.
We must always go beyond enforcing international
law in the conduct of war by appreciating that the greater
evil is war itself. That is because war inevitably leads
to the suffering of civilians. One of the most frequent
harms is forced displacement and its domino-like effect
on food insecurity, the destruction of livelihoods, the
outbreak of disease, sexual abuse, the denial of schooling
for children and forced labour, to name but a few. The
war in Ukraine has generated the fastest and largest

22-5823917/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

mass displacement since the Second World War, with
6.9 million internally displaced and 7 million refugees.
Last month alone, more than 330,000 people, mostly
from eastern and southern Ukraine, where the violence
has been raging, were displaced. We commiserate
especially with the most vulnerable Ukrainians, who
have been forced to flee their homes in response to a
war that is against the most basic laws of international
conduct, including the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The claim that some of the forcibly displaced are
being subjected to filtration processes is serious and
alarming. We call for an independent investigation
into those allegations to establish facts on which the
Security Council can take appropriate action. In that
regard, the relevant United Nations agencies should
be granted access to those who have been forcibly
displaced, particularly those who are in or have been in
the alleged filtration camps. Most critical is the urgent
need to prevent new waves of forced displacement,
which would certainly worsen the humanitarian
situation. More should be done to provide humanitarian
assistance and ensure the safety and protection of
civilians from war-related violations, including forced
displacement, particularly in the besieged cities in the
east and south of Ukraine.
Even as we discuss the plight and fate of those
forcibly displaced by the conflict in Ukraine, we would
like to recall the International Day for People of African
Descent, which took place on 31 August. On that day we
underscored the need to combat the multiple forms of
discrimination and violations against people of African
descent. We vividly recall the different treatment that
Africans and people of African descent received when,
like millions of others, they sought to escape Ukraine
after the war broke out. What transpired then should
still move every State to review its laws and practices,
address racial discrimination and uphold its duty to
treat all migrants, refugees and asylum seekers with the
dignity they deserve.
Kenya reiterates once again that although
multilateralism — as anchored in the United Nations,
including this body — is dealing with grave challenges,
it remains our hope and bulwark against war. We
therefore continue to call for a cessation of the conflict
in Ukraine and for a resort to diplomacy. That is the
only viable avenue for resolving this conflict, which
continues to pose a grave threat to international peace
and security.
18/27

07/09/2022

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Assistant Secretary-General Brands Kehris and
Ms. Drik for the information they have shared with us.
As we all know, the escalation of the armed
conflict in Ukraine has led to a large number of civilian
casualties and the destruction of basic infrastructure,
with serious consequences. It has forced millions to
flee their homes in search of protection and assistance,
and many of them, as refugees, have crossed borders
into neighbouring countries, while others are displaced
inside Ukraine. The numbers may fluctuate, but the
reality on the ground is that millions of people have
been unable to return to their places of origin. The
massive displacement of people has created a series
of challenges for their host countries, whose solidarity
we are grateful for because it has made it possible to
provide care for millions of people.
Mexico calls on all the parties to respect international
human rights law, refugee law and internally displaced
persons law, as well as international humanitarian law,
and in particular the four Geneva Conventions of 1949
and the Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions
adopted in 1977. It is important to remember that
according to international humanitarian law, the parties
to an international armed conflict may not deport or
forcibly transfer the civilian population of an occupied
territory. That is part of the Fourth Geneva Convention
and customary international law, and violations of it
constitute war crimes. What Ukraine is experiencing
is an ever-evolving crisis, so that understanding new
needs and mitigating threats to vulnerable groups are
a challenge and a priority. Multiple United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations have warned
about the risks faced by some groups in particular, and
I would like to briefly discuss three such groups.
First, with regard to women, a few months ago
we heard from UN-Women about the public health
risks that women are dealing with in the region (see
S/PV.9064). Special Representative Patten has already
warned about how the hostilities are disrupting
services for victims of sexual violence and has stressed
the importance of addressing the threat posed by
trafficking humans for purposes of sexual exploitation
and prostitution. For that reason, we strongly believe
that humanitarian responses and strategies must have a
clear gender perspective.
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Secondly, with regard to children, both the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and UNICEF have been unequivocal
in noting the importance of ensuring the immediate
identification, registration, protection and proper care
of unaccompanied or separated minors and of avoiding
adoptions during or immediately after an emergency.
Thirdly, with regard to older people and persons
with disabilities, the 2.7 million with disabilities
in Ukraine have very limited access to emergency
information, shelters, health services and support
networks. They face serious difficulties in accessing
services that allow them to address urgent conditions
or pre-existing illnesses that are not being cared for.
Mexico calls for taking all necessary measures to
ensure that any displaced civilians have shelter, food
and health services.
In the light of the information that the Security
Council has heard today about so-called filtration
processes, we believe it is crucial that the United
Nations have unrestricted access to those sites so
that it can objectively and rigorously add to the
relevant information.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that the only
way to resolve the deplorable situation on the ground
cannot be through concessions such as we have had so
far. The only way is through an immediate cessation
of hostilities. To that end, it is urgent to advance along
a diplomatic track with greater commitment from the
international community.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General
Brands Kehris for their very concerning briefings and
Oleksandra Drik for her testimony.
Ireland continues to be disturbed by the continued
shelling of areas containing civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Ukraine. The first six months of war
have already seen more than 12 million Ukrainians
forced from their homes, creating a displacement crisis
of enormous proportions. Those are not static numbers
based on those of the first weeks of the war. The number
of internally displaced persons rose by 330,000 just this
past month. Nor are they mere statistics. We are talking
about children, the elderly, the infirm and those with
disabilities — vulnerable people caught up in a situation
beyond their control, seeking shelter and safety, just
as we would do. That makes the destruction of the
infrastructure they depend on all the more abhorrent.

S/PV.9126

On 24 August, a missile attack near a train station in
Chaplyne killed at least 25 people, including children,
leading to yet more lives lost in an illegal war. Members
of the Council have recalled many times in the past six
months that the parties to a conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law, including the obligation
to distinguish between civilians and combatants. We
condemn indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks.
There are no excuses and no exceptions.
That is why we once again call on Russia to comply
with all its obligations. There must be full, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to civilians, including
those who choose to remain in Ukraine or are unable to
leave. They are not combatants and must be protected.
Those who seek to leave or are forced to leave must be
allowed to do so safely and for destinations of their own
choosing — I repeat, of their own choosing.
We are appalled at the evidence of horrific
violations occurring in Ukraine. The United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
have documented cases of enforced deportations,
arbitrary detentions, abductions, torture and summary
executions. There is evidence of the enforced deportation
of Ukrainians, including children, to areas of Ukraine
occupied by Russia or to the Russian Federation, and
of the worrying use of so-called filtration centres as
part of the process. Those violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law may constitute
international crimes, including war crimes. It is
critical that the United Nations be granted access to all
filtration centres.
We know that displacement and conflict increase
the scourge of sexual and gender-based violence.
Indeed, the Council has already heard horrendous
reports of sexual violence perpetrated by Russian
soldiers against women and girls, men and boys.
But let us be clear — rape is not a given in war, but
rather a deliberate act that may constitute a war crime
and has lasting effects on victims and survivors and
their communities. There must be no impunity for
such crimes.
We are also very concerned about reports of the
mistreatment of prisoners of war. All prisoners of
war must be treated humanely in all circumstances,
in accordance with the Third Geneva Convention.
Allegations or incidents of mistreatment must be
properly investigated and the perpetrators held

22-5823919/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

accountable for violations. The International Committee
of the Red Cross must be given access to all prisoners
of war.
Finally, we are deeply disturbed by the disrespect
for international humanitarian law in this war and we are
resolved to ensure accountability for any international
crimes taking place in Ukraine. We cannot and will not
accept impunity for such crimes, wherever they occur.
Once again, we call on Russia to end its aggression,
comply with its obligations under international law
and withdraw unconditionally from the entirety of the
territory of Ukraine.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I too
would like to thank our briefers, Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General
Brands Kehris, for their sobering updates. I have also
taken note of the briefing by Ms. Drik.
Along with many other households in New York
and around the world, many of us have been consumed
this week with preparing for the start of the school year.
That should be a joyful and exciting time for families,
and particularly for schoolchildren, which makes it very
difficult to imagine amid the conflict we are discussing
today or any other ongoing conflict around the world
that is on the Security Council’s agenda. The images of
Ukrainian children back in their classrooms have been
profoundly moving for the resilience they show, as the
war has not spared some 2,300 educational institutions
and has entirely destroyed 300, according to United
Nations reports. Like all wars, the war in Ukraine has
disproportionately affected women and children. At
this particular time of the year, we recall UNICEF’s
estimates that more than 2 million children have fled
their country and many others have been internally
displaced. Some may be able to attend virtual classes
in Ukraine, but most will be in need of schools or daycare facilities in their new homes. At the same time,
even those lucky enough to have a school to go to
are grappling with the social anxieties of integration
and trauma. Ms. Brands Kehris’s briefing on the
protection of children is an issue that the Ukrainian and
Russian authorities should investigate and rectify with
urgency. It is an area where communication between
the two parties is much needed and expected by the
international community.
If ever there was a clear-cut illustration of the
need for a gender-responsive humanitarian approach,
this is it. The Security Council should insist on tailor20/27

07/09/2022

made solutions by donors and humanitarian actors that
specifically address the needs of Ukraine’s women
and children. In the face of those difficult challenges,
we commend the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, as well as other United
Nations agencies and humanitarian partners, for their
swift response to the needs of displaced people, as
well as the host countries. As the conflict goes on,
their generous protection and service delivery for those
seeking refuge, including an education, becomes ever
more vital. At the same time, we once again underline
that such protection must be provided without prejudice
or discrimination.
People fleeing war are at their most vulnerable.
In such conditions, it is key that they retain dignity
and agency. Those seeking safety must be allowed
safe and voluntary passage, and when circumstances
permit, any return home should similarly be
voluntary, safe, dignified and durable. We reiterate
that all the parties must scrupulously abide by their
obligations under international law, including those
aspects of international humanitarian law that
address displacement. Since the start of the conflict,
guaranteeing the safety of those fleeing has proved to be
a particular challenge, with recent fighting intensifying
in the areas surrounding Kherson, Kharkiv and Dnipro.
Routes to safety must be secured and the humanitarian
actors supporting evacuations protected. Meanwhile,
there are reports of the destruction of water, electricity
and gas infrastructure, which once again leaves people
in particularly vulnerable situations without access
to life-sustaining services as winter approaches. We
reiterate our call for the protection of civilians and
for ensuring that no civilian objects, including those
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population,
are targeted. As the conflict drags on, the need to
find a way to halt the suffering and stop the violence
only deepens. We must redouble our efforts to help to
mitigate the effects of the conflict and move towards
further confidence-building measures. There is no
other path forward.
In the past month we have welcomed the resumption
of agricultural exports from Ukraine as a result of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, but it will be vital to ensure
that grain continue to reach those most in need, not just
those able to pay. At the same time, we also hope to
see swift progress in getting Russian fertilizer out to
global markets. That is crucial for next year’s harvest
and to avoid any further deterioration in the current
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9126

food crisis. It will not only contribute to addressing
the real needs of millions around the world, but it may
also create momentum for other tangible agreements to
address the conflict.

affected by this inhumane treatment. On such a serious
matter, independent and impartial investigations
must be conducted in order to establish the facts and
determine responsibility.

We continue to gather here and listen to descriptions
of the mounting costs of the war, and as with all wars,
the human costs will only worsen with every day that
passes. However, what is needed now is ideas and the
political will to make them a reality. We saw that six
weeks ago in a small way in Istanbul and we must see
it again. A cessation of hostilities would be the right
place to start.

Protecting civilians from the horrors of war is one
of the primary purposes of the Council when it has
failed in its principal mission — ensuring the peace
and security of peoples. All the mechanisms available
to the multilateral system must be activated so as to
not compound the horror of war with inhumanity. My
country will be tireless in the search for peace and
will stand by those who propose alternatives to the
deafening language of bombs, guns and artillery fire.
I urge the parties to cooperate with the United Nations
and its specialized agencies to ensure the protection of
civilians — in Ukraine and beyond.

Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant
Secretary-General Brands Kehris and Ms. Drik for
their respective briefings on the situation in Ukraine.
The war in Ukraine continues to cause major
displacement as people flee the war, with large-scale
humanitarian consequences. Despite considerable
international mobilization, the humanitarian cost of the
war continues to rise with increasingly heavy fighting.
Despite the fact that some have returned, the numbers of
people fleeing the war since the beginning of hostilities
have now reached more than 7 million, including
women, children, older persons and vulnerable people.
We have said it at every Council meeting, and we will
say it again today with the same resolve. Civilians
are paying too high a price, despite the fact that
their protection is guaranteed by international legal
instruments, including the Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols. The parties to the conflict
must abide by them.
Six months after the start of the war, as
international public opinion awaits specific proposals
from the Council to put an end to the conflict, it is clear
that the parties remain antagonistic and continue to
trade invective. We must properly plan for a diplomatic
outcome to this deadly war.
We have received with some alarm the allegations
of the existence of filtration camps and of the use of files
on both civilians and prisoners of war, together with illtreatment, the use of forced labour and cases of torture.
These are particularly serious allegations, which, if
true, would be inconceivable and unacceptable. A state
of war does not mean state of lawlessness, and human
distress cannot be an object of speculation, blackmail
or exchange. It is particularly horrifying to know that
children, in the hundreds of thousands, would also be

Humanitarians must have unhindered access to
locations and people in need of relief. We also urge the
warring parties to engage in good faith in negotiations
to end the war and achieve peaceful coexistence. In that
regard, I welcome the ongoing negotiations between the
parties for the exchange of prisoners and the agreement
that allowed the export of grain from Ukrainian ports.
In our view, those are glimmers of hope that call
for others.
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s appeal to all
parties to put an end to the hostilities and to silence the
guns. That is the only way to avoid further increasing
the humanitarian toll of this war.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Brands Kehris and
Ms. Drik for their briefings.
The war of aggression that Russia has been
waging for almost seven months, in violation of all
the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, has unbearable consequences for
civilian populations. When Russia decided to attack
Ukraine, it knew the cost of its actions on the ground
and the devastation it would bring about. While the
consequences of this unlawful and unjustified war are
being felt around the world, the Ukrainian people are
paying the highest price. I would like to express once
again our total solidarity with the Ukrainian people and
commend their courage in defence of their country.

22-5823921/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

France is very concerned about reports of the forced
transfer of Ukrainian civilians to areas occupied by
Russia or to Russia itself. Those acts were documented
by various independent bodies. Reports also document
Ukrainian civilians, including children, being forcibly
transferred to Russian-occupied areas or to Russia when
they were merely seeking to flee hostilities. Russian
authorities have also subjected Ukrainian civilians
to deplorable detention conditions and to “filtration”
processes. We must shine a light on those extremely
serious acts, which, if proven, could constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
Since the beginning of the war of aggression
launched by Russia, we have not ceased to receive
testimony of serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights. I will say it
again — the crimes committed in Ukraine are being
thoroughly documented, evidence is being collected
and forensic analyses are being carried out, so that they
can be examined by the courts. Nothing will remain
hidden. The perpetrators will be held accountable.
The work of the International Criminal Court and
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine, created by the Human Rights Council, is
indispensable to this effort of documentation, analysis
and the fight against impunity. We support their
work and the efforts made by the Ukrainian courts
in the framework of the investigations they have
opened. France, alongside its partners, will remain
fully mobilized.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of terrorist Russia in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo, Assistant Secretary-General Ilze
Brands Kehris and human rights expert Oleksandra Drik
for their substantive and truthful presentations. The
horrific facts presented to us on the human suffering
inflicted by the Russian occupiers proves again that
the only way end this war is to hold the aggressor
accountable for its criminal actions — criminal,
indeed, due to both the immense record of crimes in
the occupied territories of Ukraine and the criminal
22/27

07/09/2022

background of many Russian soldiers recruited recently
for the war against Ukraine.
The story of the Russian murderer Neparatov is
one of many that highlights the level of degradation of
Russia’s armed forces. Back in 2013, Neparatov was a
leader of a gang, sentenced to 25 years in prison for
killing five people and committing armed assaults.
The murderer joined the Russian occupation forces in
Donbas, was killed a short time thereafter and then
awarded with a Russian high military decoration.
No moral constraints, the readiness to kill and to
terrorize civilians — those are the personnel welcomed
now by Russian military recruiters. That is the face of
the Russian army.
Today, almost 200 days since the invasion started,
we are more than confident in Ukraine’s victory, despite
the fact that the enemy is still on our land, and we still
have a long way to go to liberate the entire territory. We
have no doubt that it will happen. In fact, it is already
happening. In recent days, Ukrainian forces liberated
territories and settlements in the Kherson, Kharkiv and
Donetsk regions.
The Russian occupation forces consider terrorizing
local populations to be an important part of their
attempts to prepare the ground for fake referendums.
But broad active and passive resistance in the occupied
territories, the disdain of the local population towards
the occupiers, the small number of collaborators and,
first and foremost, the intensive actions by the Armed
Forces of Ukraine have already forced Russia to abandon
its plans to hold such referendums in September, as
earlier planned by Moscow. We have no doubt that they
will fail with any new deadline as well.
As a part of its aggression, Russia continues
its forcible deportation of Ukrainian citizens to its
territory. Our people are being transferred to isolated
and depressed regions of Siberia and the Far East.
The scale of the crime is outrageous. According to
available data, nearly 2.5 million Ukrainians, including
approximately 38,000 children, have been transferred
from the southern and eastern regions of Ukraine. By
blocking evacuation routes to mainland Ukraine, Russia
simply leaves the population of the occupied areas with
no choice but to go either into Russian territory or
occupied Crimea. Russia is indeed the main recipient
of forcibly deported Ukrainians.
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

As part of the forced evacuation and deportation
process, Russia detains refugees in so-called filtration
camps, extra-legal facilities that have been widely used
by Russia to terrorize the civilian population on a pretext
of identifying dangerous persons. In reality, those
whom the occupiers suspect of disloyalty — because
of their political views or potential affiliation with the
Ukrainian army, Government, media or civil-society
groups — disappear after so-called filtration into the
grey areas of occupied Donetsk and Luhansk. Families
are separated and children are grabbed and taken away
from their parents. According to the report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, some of those people were later held at
a tragically notorious site in Olenivka, where Russia
killed 53 Ukrainian prisoners of war, and in Donetsk.
Many detainees were reportedly tortured, and some
were summarily executed. So-called filtration camps
have been also set up in the cities of Makiivka, Snizhne,
Torez, Shakhtarsk, Khartsysk, Novoazovsk, Berdyansk
and in the villages of Nikolske, Bezimenne and
Yuryivka. According to the Ministry for Reintegration
of the Temporarily Occupied Territories of Ukraine,
only about 16,000 deported citizens have been able to
return to Ukraine. According to their accounts, most
of those transferred to Russia have neither means nor
travel documents, so that tens of thousands of those
who want to return home are literally trapped in Russia.
In most of our countries, this is the time to go
back to school. Regrettably, the school year in Ukraine
has started against a backdrop of rocket and artillery
bombings by Russia, with education facilities a regular
target. Since the beginning of the invasion, Russian
forces have damaged 2,177 educational institutions,
leaving 284 of them totally destroyed. Due to the
security threats, only 56 per cent of educational
institutions are prepared to provide in-person learning
for their students. A primary concern is Russia’s
attempts to expand its practices of militarization and
the Russification of education to the territories it has
occupied since February, with a focus on erasing
Ukrainian ethnic identity. According to available data,
approximately 200,000 children of school age remain
in the occupied territories. School principals and staff
there are subject to pressure and intimidation aimed
at forcing them to follow Russian school programmes.
Needless to say, the curriculum that Russia is trying
to impose in the occupied territories of Ukraine does
not provide for the study of Ukrainian language
and literature or the history of Ukraine. Since most

S/PV.9126

Ukrainian teachers in the occupied territories refuse to
collaborate, the Russian occupiers are trying to replace
local staff with people from Russia.
Children from the occupied territories are being
transferred to Russia and illegally given up for adoption.
The forcible transfer of children from one group to
another with intent to destroy, whether in whole or in
part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group is
a violation of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. On 23 August,
the Krasnodar City Department for Family and
Childhood Affairs in the Russian Federation publicly
reported that more than 1,000 Ukrainian children from
Mariupol had been illegally transferred to outsiders
in the Tyumen, Irkutsk, Kemerovo and Altai regions.
More than 300 children are currently being held in
specialized institutions in the Krasnodar region. We
reiterate that all Ukrainian children who have been
illegally displaced to the territory of Russia must be
returned to their parents or legal guardians. Until that
happens, that crime demands a powerful response from
the international community.
In the face of an existential threat to the Ukrainian
State and people, we have continued to contribute to
averting the global food crisis and fulfilling in good faith
our obligations under the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
More than 90 ships have left Ukrainian ports so far,
and overall we have exported more than 2 million tons
of our foodstuffs by sea from Ukrainian ports. But as
long as Russia is able to continue its aggression against
Ukraine on land and sea, the global security threat and
food crisis situations will remain fragile.
Such modern-day evil must be fully disarmed if we
are to prevent a repetition of violence and bloodshed.
That is a key lesson from the Second World War, which
began 83 years ago on 1 September 1939. People believed
that it would be possible to avoid any repetition of those
terrible crimes and such a cruel war, but a similar
morning dawned again for millions of Ukrainians on
24 February 2022. Once again an aggressor is trying
to seize territories in Europe through mass murder and
terror by exploiting the ideology of hatred. But one
thing did not happen again. There were no pacts with
the aggressor. From the very beginning of the war, we
have received real help from true friends all over the
world. Russia’s capacity to wage a war has been limited
by sanctions packages, and we urge the international
community to further expand that practice, which is
literally saving the lives of Ukrainians. As President

22-5823923/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Zelenskyy said on the occasion of the anniversary of
the Second World War, we will do everything we can
to ensure that Ukrainians and other nations throughout
the world live freely. We will do everything we can to
ensure that the morning of 1 September, the morning
of 22 June and the morning of 24 February are never
repeated again. We will do everything in our power to
ensure that hatred finally loses.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I too would like to thank the
briefers, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant
Secretary-General Brands Kehris and Ms. Drik, for
their alarming but very effective descriptions of one of
the darkest sides of this war.
As we have reiterated multiple times, the Russian
aggression against Ukraine is a blatant violation of
international law. However, the filtration system for
Ukrainian civilians that we have heard about today is
a violation of jus in bello more profound than anything
we have witnessed in Europe since the Second World
War. It was precisely to prevent such horrors that the
international community gathered in Geneva in 1949 to
adopt the four Conventions we all know. It is therefore
crucial to reiterate once again that the forcible transfer
of civilians from an occupied territory to the occupying
Power’s territory is prohibited, regardless of motive. In
addition to that already grave breach of international
humanitarian law, which could be prosecuted as a war
crime and a crime against humanity by the International
Criminal Court, credible sources have also raised
awareness of potentially cruel, inhumane and degrading
treatment, including illegal biometric data collection,
torture, arbitrary detentions and forced disappearances.
All such acts fail to respect the most basic human rights,
despite attempts to spread disinformation.
Those crimes are not only a violation of the
international legal framework, but they are also an
offence to the shared values and principles on which
the United Nations is built. The seriousness of the
situation requires two swift and crucial actions in order
to end the unacceptable and inhumane conditions in
which thousands of innocent Ukrainian citizens find
themselves as we speak.
First, we call on Russia to grant unfettered
access to the relevant United Nations agencies and
international non-governmental organizations, such as
the International Committee of the Red Cross, to freely
24/27

07/09/2022

and safely visit its temporary placement centres with
direct and complete access to civilians there, in line
with the Geneva Conventions.
Secondly, we call on Russia to ensure the immediate
return of all forcibly transferred Ukrainian citizens,
particularly women and children, to their territories
of origin and their full freedom of movement to third
Countries. In that regard, Italy believes that the effective
evacuation mechanism established in Mariupol, thanks
to the coordination efforts of the United Nations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, is a
clear example of how international humanitarian law
cannot be allowed to merely depend on the voluntary
compliance of armed and non-armed groups and that it
should be replicated to end the heinous filtration system.
Let me conclude by pointing out that we must also
ensure that those crimes will not happen again. From
that perspective, Italy highlights the urgent need to
guarantee accountability for the perpetrators of such
severe breaches of international humanitarian law,
reaffirms its full support for the work of independent,
international and domestic investigative forums so as
to avoid any form of impunity and supports the further
strengthening of the existing compliance mechanisms,
particularly the International Criminal Court.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this briefing to discuss yet another disturbing
aspect of the war in Ukraine. I also thank the briefers
for their insightful remarks and alarming information.
It is a tragic, yet verifiable, fact that every conflict
brings terrible suffering to civilians. After the Second
World War, we know that all too well in Poland.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is no exception.
Deliberate attacks against the civilian population have
forced millions of Ukrainians to seek shelter outside
their home country. Evidence has emerged that, in their
attempts to flee the territories occupied by Russia,
they have been faced with yet another dire choice,
which the representative of Ukraine just mentioned, or
what is in fact no choice at all — to leave Ukraine for
Russia or not to leave at all. As already indicated by
the Ukrainian Administration and further confirmed
by the recent report of Human Rights Watch, the forced
transfer of civilians from the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions and the from the overrun city of Mariupol to
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the Russian Federation has been conducted by Russian
and Russian-affiliated troops and officials.
We express our grave concern about the deportation
of civilians to Russia. We are also deeply worried by
the establishment of the so-called filtration centres for
people evacuated from the besieged and temporarily
occupied territories. The accounts of those who were
subjected to forced transfers and filtration processes
are horrifying. Such practices bring to mind Stalinist
methods. Their systematic character leads us to
assume that they might have been premeditated. The
practice constitutes another attempt by the Kremlin to
eliminate the Ukrainian people physically and destroy
their distinct identity. And they will never succeed in
doing that.
Information about Ukrainian children who have
been transferred to Russia is particularly disturbing.
Such actions constitute a violation of both the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. The protection of the most vulnerable and
defenceless victims of war remains Poland’s priority,
and we call on the international community to hold
the perpetrators accountable and protect Ukrainian
children’s right to their identity, including their
nationality, without unlawful interference.
The forced transfers are yet another element on the
long list of serious violations by the Russian Federation
of the laws of war that amount to war crimes — and even
crimes against humanity. It is all the more deplorable
that the Russian Federation is presenting the
Ukrainians entering its territory — voluntarily or
not — as refugees and migrants, whereas they are,
in fact, victims of Russia’s violations of international
law. For those reasons, accountability for violations of
international law, including international human rights
law, committed in Ukraine by the Russian Federation
should remain our priority.
Poland has consistently called for bringing
the perpetrators of those atrocities to justice. We
continuously support the work of the fact-finding,
investigative
and
accountability
mechanisms
mandated by the relevant international organizations
to investigate those violations. We have supported
the establishment of the dedicated Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine. We
were also part of the broad group of participating States
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in

S/PV.9126

Europe (OSCE) that twice invoked the OSCE Moscow
Mechanism to investigate violations of international
law and international human rights law resulting from
the Russian Federation’s aggression.
Poland once again strongly urges the Russian
Federation to stop its war of choice and fully withdraw
all its forces from the territory of Ukraine. We call on
Russia to respect international law and international
humanitarian law, in particular to stop the practice
of illegal forced transfers and allow all civilians
transferred out of Ukraine to leave in the direction that
they want.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): Despite the many calls
by the international community, the Russian Federation
continues to pursue its unjustified and unprovoked
aggression against Ukraine, in blatant violation of
international law. We are concerned about Russia’s
intention to stage fraudulent referendums with the
aim of illegally annexing the occupied territories of
Ukraine. Those anticipated steps follow the same tactic
that the Russian Federation used in 2014 with regard
to Crimea. Slovakia does not and will not recognize
such an illegal annexation violating the fundamental
principles of international law. We take this opportunity
to reiterate once again that the aggressor accountable
for the situation is evident, and we call for an immediate
cessation of Russian military activities in Ukraine and
the unconditional withdrawal of all Russian troops
from the entire territory of Ukraine.
We are concerned about numerous reports that,
since the beginning of this senseless war of choice,
the Russian Federation’s officials, as well as officials
affiliated with the Russian Federation, have been
forcibly transferring Ukrainian civilians to areas of
the occupied territories of Ukraine and to the Russian
Federation. That action is not only deplorable and
immoral, but it may also constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
According to those reports, during the process of
filtration, citizens of Ukraine are subject to compulsory
security screening, which includes collecting
civilians’ biometric data, conducting body searches
and questioning them about their political views.
The process, which violates multiple human rights, is
moreover conducted in inhumane conditions. There
is also serious information that individuals failing

22-5823925/27

S/PV.9126

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

07/09/2022

the filtration process have been detained and that the
whereabouts and fate of some of the detained remain
unknown. In that regard, there are serious grounds
for concern that those individuals are at particular
risk of torture and the deprivation of life. We call on
the Russian Federation to cease all such activities
immediately and allow all forcibly transferred civilians
who want to return to Ukraine to do so.

passportization and conscription into the Russian
armed forces of the citizens of Ukraine who live in the
temporarily occupied territories. We strongly condemn
deportation of Ukrainian civilians to Russia, the forcible
transfer of children, the illegal adoption of Ukrainian
children and abduction of civilians, including mayors
and other democratically elected representatives, as
well as journalists and activists.

Last but not least, we deplore once again the
propaganda and false narrative that we heard today
from the representative of the Russian Federation under
the pretext of humanity.

According to various credible Government,
non-governmental and international organization
reports, Russia has forcibly transferred over 1.7 million
Ukrainians to Russia, including over 240,000 children.
Russia’s forces have set up almost 20 so-called filtration
camps or centres in the temporarily controlled territory
of Ukraine. Ukrainians, who have endured those camps
have reported treatment ranging from humiliation
to verbal abuse and physical torture, including strip
searches, confiscation and searches of their electronic
devises, the use of electric shocks and even staged
mock executions of detainees. Such vulnerable groups
as women, children, orphans and older persons have
suffered the most.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I speak on behalf of
the three Baltic States — Estonia, Lithuania and my
own country, Latvia. We welcome the convening of
this meeting on the forcible transfer and deportation
of civilians in Ukraine. We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo, Assistant Secretary-General Brands
Kehris and Ms. Drik for their thorough briefings.
For almost 200 days, Russia, aided by Belarus,
has continued this brutal war of aggression, in blatant
violation of international law, by violating Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and terrorizing
and committing atrocities against civilians. We have
repeatedly underlined that Russia started this war
and that only Russia can end it — by completely and
unconditionally withdrawing its troops from Ukraine’s
internationally recognized territory, as well as by
implementing with immediate effect the provisional
measures ordered by the International Court of Justice
and complying with General Assembly resolutions
ES-11/1 and ES-11/2, adopted on 2 and 24 March,
respectively.
According to the latest report of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR), more than 5,718 civilian deaths
have been documented in Ukraine, underlining the
fact that OHCHR believes that the actual statistics are
considerably higher. Moreover, the number of dead and
injured civilians is growing every day, as new crimes
against civilians are discovered and new attacks on
civilians are executed regularly by the Russian military.
We call on Russia to immediately stop violating
international humanitarian law and the human rights of
the people of Ukraine. We strongly condemn the forced
26/27

There is clear and undeniable evidence that
Russia is deporting Ukrainian civilians. Even Russia
itself has admitted to forcibly transferring Ukrainian
civilians. In May, a Russian official acknowledged1
that “1,426,979 people, of which 238,329 are children,”
had been “evacuated from dangerous areas of the
republics of Donbas in Ukraine to the territory of the
Russian Federation.”
We would like to recall that the former United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights told
the Human Rights Council that her office is looking
into allegations that children in orphanages had been
taken to Russia. We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Brands Kehris for her detailed briefing today. We call
on international human rights organizations to continue
documenting cases of the forcible transfer of Ukrainian
citizens and to provide regular and public reports about
their findings. Similar to the fact-finding mission
regarding the massacre of Ukrainian prisoners of war
in Olenivka, we call on the United Nations to establish
a fact-finding mission to document the deportation of
Ukrainian citizens.
We must make no mistake: Russia’s war against
the civilian population of Ukraine is not a coincidence
or collateral damage. It is a deliberate and consistent
approach throughout Russia’s continued aggression
22-58239

07/09/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

aimed at breaking the resistance and spirit of Ukrainian
people. Unable to defeat Ukraine on the battlefield,
Russia’s military seeks to achieve its aims by terrorizing
Ukraine’s civilian population.
It is high time for the international community to
demonstrate that the norms aimed at the protection of
civilians are not empty statements that can be trampled
by dictators and bullies, but instead ironclad obligations

S/PV.9126

that we are collectively determined to uphold. We
must ensure accountability at all levels for atrocities
committed against Ukraine and its people, including
deportations. It is of the utmost importance to continue
to provide all the necessary support in that regard.
Justice must prevail. The perpetrators must be — and
will be — held accountable.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

22-5823927/27
