67

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

San Marino
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northem
Ireland
United States of America

C. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION 11, PARAGRAPH 4 (e)

Argentina
Barbados
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala

Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

D. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION 11, PARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic
Czechoslovak.ia
Hungary

2845 (XXVI).

Poland
Romanía
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

Public administration and
development

The General Assembly,
Taking into account its previous resolutions on the
role of public administration in economic and social
development, particularly resolutions 723 (VIII) of
23 October 1953, 1024 (XI) of 21 December 1956,
1256 (XIII) of 14 November 1958, 1530 (XV) of
15 December 1960, 1710 (XVI) of 19 December
1961 and 2561 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1199 (XLII) of 24 May 1967 and 1567 (L) of
6 May 1971,
Emphasizing the importance of improving public
administration in order to speed up the economic and
social development of the developing countries and to
achieve the aims and objectives of the Second United
Nations Development Decade,
Considering, therefare, that the measures needed
to increase the capability and efficiency of public
administration in the developing countries are indispensable far the farmulation and implementation of
economic and social development plans and programmes,
Recognizing the importance far developing countries of the establishment and entry into service of
regional centres of administration far development,
the purpose of which is to co-operate with Governments in increasing their administrative capability far
the implementation of their cconomic and social development programmes,
Noting the existence of the African Training and
Research Centre in Administration far Development
and the farthcoming entry into service of the Asian
Centre of Development Administration, the Centre of
the Arab Organization far Administrative Sciences
and the Latin American Centre of Administration for
Development,

Recognizing the prompt and effective co-operation
given by the United Nations Development Programme
far the establishment and operation of the regional
centres in Asia and Africa,
l. Draws the attention of Member States to the
importance of measures to increase administrative
capability far economic and social development, the
desirability of making such measures an integral part
of development plans at all levels, as appropriate, and
the need far such measures to be adequate to enable
Governments, individually and collectively, to achieve
the aims of the Second United Nations Development
Decade;
2. Takes note of the report of the Second Meeting
of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public
Administration; 44
3. Endorses the objectives of the regional centres
of administration for development to increase the
administrative capability and efficiency of the developing countries in arder to speed up the process of
economic and social development;
4. Invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to provide the
technical and financia! co-operation necessary far
the establishment and operation of the Latin American
Centre of Administration far Development and the
Centre of the Arab Organization far Administrative
Sciences in the same way in which it supparted the
regional centres in Africa and Asia, and further invites
it to continue to provide the necessary assistance to
the regional centres in Africa and Asia.
2026th plenary meeting,
20 December I 971.
2846 (XXVI). Question of the creation of an
intergovernmental sea service

The General Assembly,
Having given preliminary consideration to the question of the creation of an intergovernmental sea service,
1. Decides to refer this question far further consideration to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits
of National Jurisdiction at its session to be held in
July and August 1972;
2. Requests the Committee to report on this question to the General Assembly through the Economic
and Social Council.
2026th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2847 (XXVI). Enlargement of the Economic and
Social Council

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that an enlargement of the Economic
and Social Council will provide broad representation
of the United Nations membership as a whole and
make the Council a more effective organ far carrying
out its functions under Chapters IX and X of the
Charter of the United Nations,
44 Public Administration in the Second United Nations Development Decade (United Nations publication, Sales No.:
E.71.II.H.3).
