A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/135
27 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.2)]
52/135. Situation of human rights in Cambodia
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights1 and the International Covenants on Human Rights,2
Recalling the Agreement on a Comprehensive Political Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict, signed
in Paris on 23 October 1991,3 including part III thereof, relating to human rights,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1997/49 of 11 April 1997,4 and recalling
General Assembly resolution 51/98 of 12 December 1996 and previous relevant resolutions, including

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

A/46/608-S/23177, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-sixth Year, Supplement for
October, November and December 1991, document S/23177.

4

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
98-77035

/...

A/RES/52/135
Page 2

Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/6 of 19 February 1993,5 in which the Commission
recommended the appointment of a special representative for human rights in Cambodia, and the
subsequent appointment by the Secretary-General of a special representative,
Recognizing that the tragic history of Cambodia requires special measures to assure the promotion
and protection of the human rights of all people in Cambodia and the non-return to the policies and
practices of the past, as stipulated in the Agreement signed in Paris on 23 October 1991,
Desiring that the United Nations respond positively to assist efforts to investigate Cambodia’s tragic
history, including responsibility for past international crimes, such as acts of genocide and crimes against
humanity,
Welcoming the continuing role of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
promotion and protection of human rights in Cambodia,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, through his Special Representative for human rights in
Cambodia, in collaboration with the office in Cambodia of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, to assist the Government of Cambodia in ensuring the protection of the human rights of
all people in Cambodia, to ensure adequate resources for the enhanced functioning of the operational
presence in Cambodia of the Office of the High Commissioner and to enable the Special Representative
to continue to fulfil his tasks expeditiously;
2. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in Cambodia,6
in particular the section concerning the role of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in assisting the Government and the people of Cambodia in the promotion and protection
of human rights, and encourages the Government of Cambodia to continue to cooperate with the Office;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Representative on the situation of
human rights in Cambodia,7 in particular his concerns for a legislative framework for the forthcoming
national elections and his concerns about the problem of impunity, the independence of the judiciary and
the establishment of the rule of law, the use of torture, the administration of prisons and the ill-treatment
of prisoners and child prostitution and trafficking;
4. Notes with concern the lack of response by the Government of Cambodia to several of the
recommendations contained in the previous reports of the Special Representative, and urges that it respond
as soon as possible;
5. Expresses grave concern about numerous instances of violations of human rights, including
extrajudicial executions, torture, including rape, illegal arrest and detention, as detailed in the reports of
the Special Representative and his predecessor, and calls upon the Government of Cambodia to prosecute,

5

Ibid., 1993, Supplement No. 3 (E/1993/23), chap. II, sect. A.

6

A/52/489.

7

E/CN.4/1997/85.
/...

A/RES/52/135
Page 3

in accordance with due process of the law and international standards relating to human rights, all those
who have perpetrated human rights violations;
6. Also expresses grave concern about the serious violations of human rights committed during the
armed violence of early July 1997 and in its aftermath, as reported by the Special Representative and by
the office in Cambodia of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in its memorandum
on summary executions, torture and missing persons, and urges the Government of Cambodia as a high
priority to investigate thoroughly and impartially and to bring to justice those responsible for such serious
crimes;
7. Notes that the perpetrators of the violence in Phnom Penh, on 30 March 1997, against a peaceful
and lawful opposition rally exercising its democratic rights which resulted in numerous deaths and injuries
have not been identified and brought to justice, and urges the Government of Cambodia to take action;
8. Notes with serious concern the comments of the Special Representative concerning corrupt
practices within the judicial system and in the prison administration, and strongly urges the Government
of Cambodia to address the problem of corrupt practices and to increase its efforts to create a functioning
and impartial system of justice, including convening the Supreme Council of Magistracy, to institute a
system to guarantee the essential sustenance of prisoners and to continue its efforts to improve the physical
environment of prisons;
9. Stresses that addressing the continuing problem of impunity, as detailed by the Special
Representative, including the repeal of article 51 of the law on civil servants of 1994 and bringing to
justice those responsible for human rights violations, together with ensuring security of persons and rights
of association, assembly and expression, is a matter of critical and urgent priority and essential to the
creation of an atmosphere conducive to the holding of free, fair and credible elections;
10. Notes that national elections are scheduled to be held in May 1998, and strongly urges the
Government of Cambodia to promote and uphold the effective functioning of multi-party democracy,
including the right to form political parties, to stand for election, to take part freely in a representative
Government, as well as the right to freedom of expression and the right to information, in accordance with
the principles set out in paragraphs 2 and 4 of annex 5 to the Agreement signed in Paris on 23 October
1991;
11. Expresses support for the Secretary-General’s efforts in Cambodia, including the role of United
Nations offices in monitoring the return of political leaders currently outside the country and their
unfettered resumption of political activity, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider any
request from the Government of Cambodia for assistance with the holding of the elections, including
coordination and monitoring;
12. Welcomes the proposed measures outlined by the Government of Cambodia in its comments8
on the report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session9 to ensure that the
forthcoming national elections are free and fair and the assurances given by the Cambodian leaders to the

8

A/51/453/Add.1.

9

A/51/453.
/...

A/RES/52/135
Page 4

Secretary-General stating their commitment to holding elections and to guaranteeing the security and safety
of all returning political leaders, as well as their full resumption of political activities, and expresses the
hope that this will facilitate the return of political leaders from abroad;
13. Emphasizes the need for the legislative framework for the elections, in accordance with
established international standards, to be agreed upon and adopted by the National Assembly, for the
security forces to remain neutral during the election campaign, for free and equal access to the electronic
and print media, for the individual vote to be confidential, for full cooperation to be given to local and
international observers and for all parties to act in a constructive manner and to accept the outcome of the
elections;
14. Strongly encourages the Government of Cambodia to establish an independent body to supervise
the holding of the elections, to ensure that the elections are free, fair and credible and to ensure that the
Constitutional Council will be convened in order to resolve election disputes;
15. Endorses the comments of the Special Representative that the most serious human rights
violations in Cambodia in recent history have been committed by the Khmer Rouge and that their crimes,
including the taking and killing of hostages, have continued to the present, and notes with concern that
no Khmer Rouge leader has been brought to account for his crimes;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to examine the request by the Cambodian authorities for
assistance in responding to past serious violations of Cambodian and international law, including the
possibility of the appointment, by the Secretary-General, of a group of experts to evaluate the existing
evidence and propose further measures, as a means of bringing about national reconciliation, strengthening
democracy and addressing the issue of individual accountability;
17. Urges the Government of Cambodia to take concrete action to combat child prostitution and
trafficking and, in this connection, to work with the office in Cambodia of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Children’s Fund and non-governmental organizations
to develop an action plan;
18. Welcomes the signature in May 1997 of a memorandum of understanding between the
International Labour Organization and the Government of Cambodia to formalize areas of cooperation in
the field of child labour;
19. Encourages the Government of Cambodia to include Cambodian non-governmental organizations
active in the field of human rights in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Cambodia, and recommends
that their skills be drawn upon to assist in ensuring that forthcoming elections are free, fair and credible;
20. Also encourages the Government of Cambodia to request the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide advice and technical assistance with respect to the creation
of an independent national institution for the promotion and protection of human rights, and looks forward
to the establishment of such an institution;
21. Notes with appreciation the use by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Trust Fund for
a Human Rights Education Programme in Cambodia to finance the programme of activities of the office
in Cambodia of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as defined in resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights, and invites Governments, intergovernmental
/...

A/RES/52/135
Page 5

and non-governmental organizations, foundations and individuals to consider contributing funds to the
Trust Fund;
22. Expresses grave concern about the devastating consequences and destabilizing effects of the use
of anti-personnel landmines on Cambodian society, encourages the Government of Cambodia to continue
its support and efforts for the removal of these mines, and urges the Government of Cambodia to give
priority to banning all anti-personnel landmines;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session on the
role of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in assisting the
Government and the people of Cambodia in the promotion and protection of human rights and on the
recommendations made by the Special Representative on matters within his mandate;
24. Decides to continue its consideration of the situation of human rights in Cambodia at its
fifty-third session.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
