8

General Auemhly~venth Senion

and non-member States by the Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funes.
191 st plenary meeting,
6 November 1952.

6i5 (VII). Treatment of people of lndiau origin
in the Union of South Af riea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44 (I). 265 (III), 395 (V)
and S11 (VI) relating to the treatment of people of
Indian origin in the Union of South Africa,
Noting that the Government pf the Union of South
Africa has expressed its inability 3 to accept General
Assembly resolution 511 (VI) in respect of the resumption of negotiations with the Governments of India and Pakistan,
Noting further that the Govemment of the Union
of South Africa has continued to enforce the Group
Areas Act in contravention of the terms of General
Assembly resolutions S11 (VI) and 395 ( V),
1. Establishes a United Nations Good Offices Commission consisting of three members to be nominated
by the President of the General Assembly, with a view
to arranging and assisting in negotiations between the
Government of the Union of South Africa and the
Governments of India and Pakistan in order that a
satisfactory solution of the question in aecor<lance with
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights may be
achieved;
2. Requests the Good Offices Commission to report to the General Assembly at its ejghth session ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
members of the Commission with the necessary staff
and facilities ;
4. Calls upon the Government of the Union of
South Africa fo suspend the implementation or enforcement of the provisions of the Group Areas Act.
pending the conclusion of the negotiations r~fe1·red
to in paragraph 1 above ;
5. Decides to include the item ir the provisional
agenda of the ~hth session of the General Assembly.
401st pie.nary .meeting,
5 Decem6':.r 1952.
The President of the Gttreral Asumbly, at the 411th rl.:ria"''
meeting on 21 December 1952, announced that he had ap,oi,,ted tht following .Members to srr.•e on tlie United Natio11s
Good Offices Commission: CuBA, SYRIA and YucosLAVIA.

616 (VII). The question of race eonftict in South
Africa reaulting from the polieies of a-,,artheid of the Govemment of the Union of
• South Africa
A
The General Assembly,
/laving . taken note of the communication 4 dated
12 September 1952, addressed to the Secretary-Gen• See document A/2218, para. 3.
4

See document A/2183.

eral of the United Nations by the delegations of
Afghanistan, Burma, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Lebanon, Pakistan, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
Syn~ a~d Yemen, regarding the question of race
conflict m South Africa resulting from the policies of
apartheid of the Government of the Union of South
Africa,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations is to achieve international co-operation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling that the General Assembly decl,;i:red in its
resolution 103 (I) of 19 November 1946 that it is in
the higher interests of humanity to put an end to
religious and so-called racial persecution, and called
upon all governments tq conform both to the letter
and to the spirit of the Charter and to take the most
prompt and energetic steps to that end,
Considering that the General Assembly has held.
in its resolutions .395 ( V) of 2 December 1950 and
511 (VI) of 12 January 1952, that a polity of "racial
segregation" (apartheid) is necessarily based on doctrines of racial discrimination,
1. Establishes a Commission, consisting of three
members, to study the racial situation in the Union of
South Africa in the light of the Purposes and Principles of the Charter, with due regard to the provision
of Article 2, paragraph 7, as well as the provisic;ms of
Article 1, paragraphs 2 and 3, Article 13, paragraph
1 b, Article SS c, and Article 56 of the Charter, and
the resolutions o_f the United Nations on racial persecution and discrimination, and to report its conclusions
to the General Assembly at its eighth session;
2. Invites the Government of the Union of South
Africa to extend its full co-operation to the Commission;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Commission with the necessary staff and fadlities;
4. Decides to retain the question on the provisional
agenda of the eighth session of the General Assembly.
401st plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.
At its 411th meeting on 21 December 1952, the General
Assembly decided, on the proposal of the President, that the
Commission, established under paragraph 1 of the abO'Ue resolutio11, should be compoud of tlie following persons: Mr.
Ralrh Bunche, M,., Hernan Santa CrUII and Mr. Jaime Torres
Bodct.

B
The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the communication• dated 12
September 1952, addressed to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations by the delegations of Afghanistan,
Burma, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Syria and
Yemen, regarding the question of race conflict in South
Africa resulting from the policies of apartheid of the
Government of the Union of South Africa,
I Ibid.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Ad Hoe Political Committee

Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations is to achieve international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all. without distinction as
to rare, sex, language or reli~ion,
Recalling that the General Asseml,ly declared in its
resolution ·103 (I) of 19 November 1946 that it is in
the higher interests of humanity to put an end to religious and so-called racial persecution, and called upon
all governments to conform both to the letter and to
the spirit of the Charter and to take the most prompt
and energetic steps to that end,
1. Declares that in a multi-rac-ial society harmony
and respect for human rights and freedoms and the
peaceful development of a unified commnnity are best
assmed when patterns of legislation and practice are
directed towards ensuring equality before the law of all
persons regardless of race, creed or colour, and when
economic, social, cultural and political participation of
all racial groups is on a basis of equality;
2. ✓lffinns that governmental policies of Member
States which are not directed towards these goals, but
which are designed to perpetuate or increase discrimination. are inconsistent with the pledges of the Memb""rs under Article 56 of the Charter;
3. Solemnly calls upon all l\Iember States to bring
their policies into conformity with their obligation
under the Charter to promote the observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
401st plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.

617 (VII). Eritrea: report of the United Nations
Commissioner in Eritrea

The Oeneral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 390 A (V) of 2 December
1950, providing that Eritrea be constituted an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian Crown,
JI aving noted the adoption and ratification of the
Eritrean Constitution and the ratification of the Federal Act embodying the provisions contained in paragraphs 1-7 inclusive of that resolution,
Having noted that the conditions laid down in paragraph 13 of resolution 390 A (V) of 2 December 1950
have been fulfilled, and that on 11 September 1952 the
Federation of Eritrea with Ethiopia was proclaimed,
Noting further the final report 6 of the United Nations Commissioner in Eritrea of 17 October 1952 and
the report 7 of the Administering Authority of 27
October 1952,
Noting with appreciation the part played by the
United Nations Commissioner .and the former Administering Authority in Eritrea in preparing Eritrea
to take its place in the Federation,
6
See Official Records oi the General Assembly, Sruenth
Session, SuPPlement No. 15.
7 See document A/2233.

9

Noting also with satisfaction the contributio!1 made
by Ethiopia to the establishment of the Federation and
Ethiopia's expression of determination scrupulously to
execute the provisions of the Federal Act,
1. Welcomes the establishment of the . Federation
of Eritrea with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the
Ethiopian Crown ;
2. Congratulates the people and governmental att"t
tborities of the Federation for their effective and loyal
fulfilment of resolution 390 A (V) of the General
Assembly of 2 December 1950.
404th plenary meeting,
17 December 1952.

618 (VII). Repatriation of Greek children

The General Assembly,
Vie-wing with grave concern the report 8 of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
League of Red Cross Societies and the report 9 of the
Secretary-General and the Standing Committee on the
Repatriation of Greek Children,
1. Thanks the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the League of Red Cross Societies, the Standing
CoIIl!ffiittee on the Repatriation of Greek Children and
the Secretary-General for their efforts to give effect to
General Assembly resolutions 193 C (III), 288 B
(IV), 382 C (V) and 517 (VI);
2. Recalls that the States. harbouring Greek children have not opposed the successive recommendations
of the General Assembly for the solution of the problem of repatriating these children;
• 3. Expresses· deep regret that, except for Yu~oslavia, none of the harbouring States has complied with
these recommendations ;
4. Condemns ~he failure of the harbouring States
other than Yugoslavia to co-operate in effo'rts to enable the Greek children to return to their homes ;
5. Decides to discontinue the Standing Committee
on the Repatriation of Greek Children, and agrees to
the suspension of the work of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League of Red Cross
Societies-with the exception of the activities referred
to in paragraph 7 below-until such time as conditions
making practical action by the Red Cross possible and
useful are established ;
6. Notes with satisfaction that further groups of
Greek children have been repatriated from Yugoslavia;
7. Requests the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the League of Red Cross Societies to continue their work in Yugoslavia until all children have
been repatriated.

404th plenary m,eting,
17 December 1952.
• See documents A/'l1.36 and Add. 1.
• See document A/2241.
.
