dence and to promote public debate on Bermuda's futurc
status;
8. Reajfirms thc importancc of thc necd to fo_stcr
national unity anda national ident11y and takcs note ot thc
steps taken by the local authoritics in that regard. such as
the establishment of an institution with a view to preventing discrimination among thc pcoplc or thc Tcrritory on
racial, rcligious. social or polit1cal groumb;
9. Reaffirms its strong conrictiun that the administcring Power must cnsure that military bases and installations
do not hindcr the peoplc of thc Territory from cxercising
their right to self-determination ami indcpcndcnce in conformity with the purposcs and principies of the Charter
and urges the administering Powcr to takc ali neccssary
measures to comply fully with the n:levant resolutions of
the United Nations relating to military bases and installations in colonial and Non-Self-Cioverning Territories;
10. Urges once again the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial (iovernment, to continue to
take ali effective measures to guarantce thc right of the
peoplc of Bermuda to own and d1sposc of thcir natural
resources and to estabhsh ami maintain cont1ol or thcir
future developmcnt:
11. Strongly urges the administcring Powcr. in consultation with the Government of Bermuda, to make every
effort to diversify thc econorny of Bermuda, including
increased efforts to prornote agriculturc and fisherics and
thc manufacturing sector for thc benetit of the pcoplc of
the Territory;
12. VVelcomes the role bcing playcd in the Territory by
the Unitcd Nations Dcvcloprnent Programme in providing assistance in thc ficlds of agriculture. forestry and tisheries and urges thc speciali1cd agencies and ali other
organizations of the I J nited Nat1ons systcm to continue to
pay special attcntion to thc development nccds of Bermuda;
13. Reiterares ils cal/ upon the administering Powcr, 111
co-operation with thc local authorities. to continuc to
expedite the process of "bcrrnudianizalion" in the Tcrntory and, in that conncction, urges that particular attcnlion
be paid to greater localization of thc publtc servicc:
14. Calls upon thc Govcrnrncnt of the ll nitcd Kingdom of Great Hritain and Northcrn lreland to rcccivc a
visiting mission in the Tcrritory at an appropnate time:
15. Requcs/s the Special ( ·ommittcc to continue thc
examination of this question at its next session. including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to Bermuda at
an appropriatc time ami in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thn,·on to thc Cirneral Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
SMh p/cnarr meeting
7
/)eccmhcr 1983

38/44.

Question of thc British Virgin lslands

The General Asscmh/1,
Hal'ing cnnsidercd thc question of thc British Virgin

Islands,
Having cxamincd the relevant chapters of thc report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with rcgard to the
lmplemcntation of thc Declaration on thc Granting of
Independencc to Colonial Countries and Pcoples, 12
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Decernbcr
1960, containing the Declaration on thc Ciranting of Inde12 /bid .. chaps. 111 and XX
13 ihíd., Thírtr-/irst S1•11w11, .\11¡>¡•/c,11< m \,
chap. XX V 111. anncx. para I ó:'

_, i i ·\ '· 1 ." ! K,·1·. 1), wl IV.

pendence to Colonial ( ·ountries and Peoples. and ali othe1
resolutions and dccisions ofthc l lnitcd Nations rclating to
the British Virgin lslands.
J'ak1ng in/o 11ccoum thc statement of thc reprcscntati\'e
of thc administering l'owcr rclating to the Territ01"}. 1" in
which he said that his (iovernment would fully rcspcct tlw
,\ ishcs of the pcople or the British Virgin lslands in dctnmining thc future pohtical status of the Territory,
( ·011scious of thc nced to cnsurc thc full and spccd 1
irnplcmentation of the Declaration in rcspect of thc Tcrn•
tory,
!Voflng 11·ith 11pprcc1aIion the continued active participa
tion of thc administering Power in thc work of the Spcc1al
Committee in rcgard to thc British Virgin lslands. thercb 1
cnabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful
cxamination of the situation in the Territory, with a view
to accelerating the process of decolonization for thc purposc of thc full irnplcmentation of thc Dcclaration.
Rcaftirming the rcsponsibility of thc adrninislc'nng
Power for the cconomic and social dcvclopmcnl ni' thc
Tcrritory.
lúk111g note ofthc fact that thc econorny ofthe Terntor1
has continued to grow during the period undcr 1-c, iew.
particularly in the llt'ids of real estate and construction
industries. tourism and banking,
.-1 w11rc of thc special circumstanccs of the gcographiGII
locat1on and cconorn ic conditions of the Territor1 and
bcaring in mind thc nccessity of divcrsifying and strl'ngth
cning further its economy as a matter of priority in ordn
to prornote cconomic stability.
Rccu!líng the recommendation of the llnitcd Nation~
visiting mission dispatched to thc British Virgin lslands in
1976 11 that thc administering Powcr should facilitate thc
participation of the Territory as an associate rnernbn in
vanous organizations within thc United Nations system a,
part of the overall strategy of accelerating thc dccoloni1ation process, and the continuing assistance providcd by thc
l lnited Nations Developmcnt Programmc in thc den·lopmcnt of thc Territory_
H111dfú/ that llnitcd Nations visiting missions prnvilk
an etlectivc means of ascertaining the situation 111 thc
small Tcrritories and cxpressing its satisfaction at the wtllingncss of thc administcring Power to receive visiting rnissions in thc Tcrritorics under its administration.
1. . lpprol'cs thc chapter of the report of the Spccial
Comrnittee on the Situation with regard to thc lmplementation ofthe Declaration on thc Granting of lndependencc
to ( 'olonial Countrics and Pcoples relating to thc British
Virgin lslands: 14
2. Rca/firms the inalienable right of thc pcople of thc
British Virgin lsland~ to sclf-dctermination and indcpendcncl' in conformity w1th thl' Dcdaration on thc Ciranting
of lndcpendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. contained in General As~cmbly resolution 1514 (XV):
3. Reiterares thc l'iew that such factors as tcrri tonal
s1ze. geographical location. size of population and limikd
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation ofthe Declaration contained in General Assernbly rcsolution 1514 (X V). which fully applics to the Briti~h
Virgin lslands;
4. Reilerates that 1t is the responsibility ofthe administering Power to create such conditions in the Tcrritory as
will cnablc the peoplc of the British Virgin lslands to cxercise freely and without interference their inalienable right
to self-dctermination and indcpendence in accordancc

(;eneral Assembl} - 1 hirty-dghth Session

226

with General Assembly rcsolution 1514 (XV), as wcll as ali
other relevant rcsolutions of thc Asscmbly;
5. Reacffirms that it i~ ultimatcly for thr peoplc of tlw
British Virgin lslands thcmsclvcs to determine their futurc
political status in accordanrc with the rclcvant provision,
of the Charter of thc United Nations and the Declaration
and reaffirms thc importancc of fostcring an awarencss
among the people of thc Territory of thc possibilities open
to them in the exercise of their right to sclf-determination:
6. Ca/Is upan thc administcring Powcr. in consultation
with the frecly elected authorities of thr territorial Government, to take ali necessary stcps to ensure the full and
speedy attainmcnt of thc objcctivcs of dccoloni1ation set
out in thc Charter and thc Dcclaration and ali other rclevant resolutions of thc Unitcd Nations;
7. Notes the continuing commitmcnt of thc territorial
Govemment to the goal of cconomic divcrsifi.cation, particularly in the arcas of agriculturc, fishcrics and small
industries and rcitcratcs its call upon thc administcring
Power, in consultation with the local authoritics, to intcnsify its efforts in this rcgard:
S. Urges thc admimstcring Powcr, in co-operation with
thc territorial Government, to safcguard the inalü-nable
right of thc pcoplc of thc Territory to thc enJoymcnt of
thcir natural resourccs by taking cffectivc mcasurcs to
cnsurc thcir right to own and disposc of thosc resourccs
and to cstablish and maintain control of thcir futurc dcvclopmcnt;
9. Urges thc speciali:ted agencies and othcr organi:tations of thc United Nations systcm, as wcll as regional
institutions such as the Caribbcan Dcvelopmcnt Bank. to
take measures to acceleratc progress in thc social and cconomic life of the British Virgin !stands;
IO. Notes with satisfaction thc request of the llritish
Virgin Islands, through the administering Power, for associate membership in the Economic Commission for Latin
America and, in that connection, rC'quests the administC'ring Power to facilitate thc participation of the Territory in
various organizations within thc Unitcd Nations system in
an appropriate capacity;
11. Considers that thc possibility of scnding a lurthcr
visiting mission to thc British Virgin lslands at an appropriate time should be kept under rcview:
12. Requests the Spccial Committec to continuc thc
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the British
Virgin Islands at an appropriatc time and in consultation
with the administering Power. and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssion.
86th p/cnar_¡' meeting
7 Deccmbcr 1983

38/45.

Question of the Cayman Islands

The General .4sscmhly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands,
Having examined thc relevan! chapters of the report or

the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to thc
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting or
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 1'
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on thr Granting of Indcpendence to Colonial Countrics and Peoplcs, and all other
resolutions and decisions ofthe Unite-d Nations rclating to
the Cayman Islands,
15 /bid., chap, 111. V and X XI

Fakinl{ i1110 anmmt the statemrnt or thc rcpresentativc
of thc administenng Power relating to the- Territory, 111 in
which he said that his liovernment would fülly rcspcct thc
wishes ofthc pcoplc ofthe Cayman Islands in dctcrmining
thc futurc constitutional status of the Territory,
C'onscious of thc nced to cnsurc thr full and spced~
implcmcntation of thc Dcclaration in rcspcct of thc Tcrritnry,
l\/oting that. in thc pcriod undcr rcvicw, thc cconomy of
the Territory has continucd to sustain sound rates of
growth. cspccially in thc tourist, international tinancc and
real estate industncs.
.\Jind_fi¡/ that Llnitcd Nations visiting missions providc
Jll cffectivc mcans of asccrtaining the situation in thc
~mall Tcrritorics and cxpressing its satisfaction at the willingness ofthe administering Power to receive visiting missions in the Temtories under its administration.
.·hrnrc of the spccial circumstances of thc geographical
location and economic conditions of the Tcrritory and
bcaring in mind the necessity of diversifying and strcngthcning further thc cconomy as a mattcr of priority in order
10 promotc cconnmic stahility.
1. -lppmvcs the chapter of thc report of the Special
Committce on thc Situation with regard to thc Implemcntation of the Dcclaration on the Granting of Independencc
to Colonial Countries and Pcoples rclating to thc Cayman
!stands; 10
2. Reaftirms thl' inalienable right of the people of thc
( ·ayman Islands to sclf-determination and independencc
in conformity with thc Declaration on the Granting of
lndependencc to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs, co11taine-d in General Asscmbly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reitera/es thc view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limitcd
natural resourccs should in no way delay the spccdy implcmcntation of thc process of self-determination in accordance with the Dcclaration contained in General Assembly
rcsolution 1514 (XV), which fully applics to thc Cayman
!stands:
4. Note~ with appreciation thc participation of thc
administering Powcr in the work ofthe Special Committec
in regard to thc Cayman Islands, thereby enabling it to
conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of
the situation in the Territory, with a view to accelerating
the process of dC'colonization for the purposc of the full
implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reitera/es that it is the responsibility ofthe admimstering Power to creatc such conditions in thc Cayman
lslands as will enable the people of thc Tcrritory to excrcisC' freely and w1thou1 intcrfercncc their inalienable right
10 sclf-detcrmmation and independencc in accordancc
with General Assemhly resolution 1514 (X V), as wcll as ali
nther relevant rl'solutions of the Asscmbly:
6. Reafhrms that it is ultimately for the pcople of thc
( ·ayman Islands themselves to determine their future
political status in accordance with the relevan! provisions
of the Chartcr of the llnited Nations and thc Declaration
and rcaffirms thc importance of fostering an awarencss
among the peoplc of the Territory of the possibilities open
to them in the excrcise of their right to sclf-dctermination;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power for the cconomic and social development of thc
Tcrritory and urges it, in co-operation with thc territorial
Government, to render continuing support, to the fullest
cxtent possible, to the development of programmes of economic diversification which will bcndi.t the pcople of thc
Tl'rritory·
16 11>,d. chap

XX,
