United Nations

A/RES/57/267

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 90 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/57/535)]

57/267. United Nations University
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the United Nations University,
including resolution 55/206 of 20 December 2000,
Having considered the report of the Council of the United Nations University 1
and the report of the Secretary-General, 2
Bearing in mind the importance of the intellectual contributions made by the
University for the United Nations system, which tackles various global issues,
Expressing its deep appreciation for the voluntary contributions made by
Governments and other public and private entities in support of the University,
1.
Notes with satisfaction the implementation of the “Strategic Plan, 2000:
Advancing Knowledge for Human Security and Development”, which lays out
broad programmatic orientations with special focus on the priority concerns of the
United Nations and the need to bring together theory and practice in a global
perspective, and requests the United Nations University to continue to attach
importance to the priority agendas of the United Nations system;
2.
Takes note with appreciation of the steps taken by the Council and the
Rector of the University to promote the work and visibility of the University and to
enhance and diversify its interaction with and contributions to the work of the
United Nations, and encourages them to continue such efforts;
3.
Compliments the University on its success to date towards creating a
critical mass of viable research and training centres and programmes around the
world, focused in particular on meeting the urgent needs and concerns of developing
countries;
4.
Welcomes the increasing importance being attached by the University to
capacity development, particularly in developing countries;
5.
Takes note with satisfaction of the broadening participation in the joint
initiative by the University and the United Nations Office at Geneva to convene a
_______________
1
2

02 55690

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/57/31).
A/57/589.

A/RES/57/267

yearly research and policy dialogue that is thematically focused and involves the
United Nations system and other entities engaged in policy research and analysis;
6.
Welcomes the increasing number of offers for new collaborative
arrangements with the University, which contributes to broadening and enhancing
academic networking, as a sign of its success and enhanced profile;
7.
Encourages the University to implement the Secretary-General’s
suggestion on innovative measures to improve interaction and communication
between the University and other United Nations entities;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to encourage other bodies of the United
Nations system to utilize more fully the capacity of the University for mobilizing a
worldwide network of applied policy researchers to assist the Organization, through
research and capacity development, in resolving the pressing global problems of the
day;
9.
Emphasizes the continuing need to ensure efficiency and costeffectiveness in conducting the activities of the University;
10. Invites the international community to make voluntary contributions to
the University, including its research and training centres and programmes, in
particular to its Endowment Fund, as a means of consolidating the distinctive
identity of the University in the United Nations system and the international
scientific community;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session an
item entitled “United Nations University”.
78th plenary meeting
20 December 2002

2
