S/PV.8953

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8953rd meeting

Tuesday, 25 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Støre/Ms. Juul/Ms. Syed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Boubeya
Mr. Bawumia
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
War in cities: protection of civilians in urban settings
Letter dated 10 January 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/23)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2022/54) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

22-23887 (E)
*2223887*

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.

The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
War in cities: protection of civilians in
urban settings
Letter dated 10 January 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Norway
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/23)
The President: In accordance with rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Ecuador, Egypt,
Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Morocco, Pakistan,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine
and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross; and Ms. Radhya Al-Mutawakel, Chairperson
and co-founder of the Mwatana Organization for
Human Rights.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in that regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/23, which contains the text of
a letter dated 10 January 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Norway to the United Nations
2/32

25/01/2022

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
Norway and its Prime Minister for organizing today’s
public debate, and I am pleased that Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, is able to join us.
Today more than 50 million people are affected
by urban conflicts. They face dangers that are unique
to this context. When hostilities take place in cities,
civilians are at a much higher risk of being killed
or injured. In some cases, they may be mistaken for
combatants. In others, civilian harm is often entirely
predictable, but the parties to the conflict do not take
steps to avoid or reduce it. When explosive weapons are
used in populated areas, approximately 90 per cent of
those killed or injured are civilians.
(spoke in English)
The use of explosive weapons in urban areas,
particularly those with wide-area effects, carries a
high risk of indiscriminate impact. Civilians can suffer
devastating harm both in the immediate aftermath and
in the long term. Many victims face lifelong disabilities
and grave psychological trauma. Water, electricity and
sanitation infrastructure are often damaged. Healthcare services are severely disrupted.
To mention some examples: scores of schools and
health-care facilities were damaged during fighting in
Gaza last year. Nearly 800,000 people were left without
access to piped water, increasing the risk of diseases
and further hampering health care. In Afghanistan,
an explosive attack outside a Kabul high school last
May killed 90 students, mainly girls, and left another
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

240 people injured. Beyond the immediate pain and
suffering, the indirect effects of damage to schools range
from disruption to education to increased likelihood of
early marriage and recruitment into armed groups. And
a 2020 study in Yemen showed that the use of heavy
explosive weapons in populated areas disrupted every
resource and system in the country. From Afghanistan
to Libya, Syria, Yemen and beyond, the risk of harm
to civilians rises when combatants move among
them and put military facilities and equipment near
civilian infrastructure.
Conflict in urban areas goes far beyond its
immediate impact on civilians. It also puts people at
risk of sieges and blockades, which have had a horrific
impact on civilians, up to and including starvation.
Urban warfare forces millions of people from their
homes, contributing to record numbers of refugees
and internally displaced people. Four years after the
destruction of 80 per cent of housing in Mosul, Iraq, an
estimated 300,000 people were still displaced.
Warfare in cities creates millions of tons of debris
that poses risks to both the environment and to people’s
health. Unexploded ordnance makes it too dangerous for
people to return home. And mass destruction in urban
areas sets development back by decades, undermining
progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals.
The frightening human cost of waging war in cities
is not inevitable; it is a choice. I would like to outline
some of the measures that prevent and mitigate its
horrific impact.
First, all parties must fully respect international
humanitarian law. Recent years have seen increasing
concern over compliance with these laws. Attacks
against
civilians
or
civilian
infrastructure,
indiscriminate attacks and the use of civilians as a
human shield are prohibited. Parties to conflict must
take steps to minimize incidental civilian harm.
Respect for these rules is all the more critical when
armed conflict is waged in urban areas.
Moreover, accountability for serious violations
is essential. States Members of the United Nations
must demonstrate the political will to investigate and
prosecute alleged war crimes to the maximum extent
whenever they occur. We owe that to the victims and
their loved ones — and it is also crucial because it
serves as a powerful deterrent.

S/PV. 8953

Secondly, parties to conflict have options. They
should adapt their choice of weapons and tactics when
they wage war in cities, recognizing that they cannot
fight in populated areas the way they would in open
battlefields. Even when explosive weapons are used
in compliance with the laws of war, they can cause
devastating harm to civilians. The facts on the ground
underline the need for warring parties to avoid the
use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in
populated areas.
I urge States to follow good practices to reduce
the humanitarian impact of such weapons. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has
published a compilation of military policy and practices
in this regard. And I welcome efforts towards a political
declaration to address the harm arising from their use.
I urge all Member States to commit themselves to
avoiding the use of wide-area explosive weapons in
populated areas.
Thirdly, effective protection of civilians in urban
warfare requires additional good policies and practices
that go beyond that commitment. Parties to conflict
should track and learn from allegations of harm to
civilians and their homes, markets and infrastructure,
in order to gauge the impact of their operations and find
ways to minimize harm. Such analysis can also inform
a more responsible approach to arms sales.
Recording casualties can help clarify the fate
of missing people, inform ways to minimize civilian
harm and help to ensure accountability, recovery and
reconciliation. Those involved in conflict should ensure
their armed forces are trained to follow these and other
good policies and practices. And all States should
develop national policy frameworks for the protection
of civilians that build upon these policies and practices.
Finally, I urge all Member States to use their
influence over their partners and allies to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law and the adoption of
good practices. The Security Council has a vital role to
play in this regard. I count on all Council members to
acknowledge the challenges of urban warfare, to call
for specific protective measures and to use all the tools
at their disposal to end tragic and preventable harm to
civilians. And, of course, the best solution would be not
to have urban warfare at all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

22-238873/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I now give the floor to Mr. Maurer.
Mr. Maurer: Why are we discussing this issue
today? It is for three critical reasons.
First, we have mounting evidence of the
unacceptable harm to civilians of warfare in urban
areas and because repeated calls for action have not
translated into major improvements.
Secondly, the urbanization of conflict and attacks
on interconnected infrastructure is having massively
negative impacts on populations in urban areas.
Thirdly,
the
application
of
international
humanitarian law and other normative systems to
reduce the impact of war in urban areas is objectively
complex and needs more sophisticated guidance in
order to increase compliance.
The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and the wider Red Cross and Red Crescent
movement are on the front line of the humanitarian
response to urban warfare. We take our protection
responsibility seriously and spare no efforts to support
State and non-State armed groups in taking the right
decisions. However, the responsibility to comply with
international humanitarian law lies with the parties to
armed conflict. States must redouble efforts to spare
threatened populations from the effects of urban
warfare. The humanitarian impacts are not inevitable,
as the Secretary-General indicated today.
Today I have four recommendations for the
Security Council.
First, all parties to armed conflict and those that
support them must work for improved compliance
with international humanitarian law that is adapted
to the major trends in warfare today. As the concept
note to this meeting (S/2022/23, annex)correctly
highlights, urban fighting makes the implementation of
international humanitarian law more demanding than
in open territory because of the proximity of military
objectives to protected persons and objects.
That is why respect for international humanitarian
law is critical in urban environments. The massive impact
of urban warfare calls for good faith interpretation and
implementation of the rules governing the conduct
of hostilities, notably distinction, proportionality
and precaution.
The ICRC is particularly concerned about the
extensive use of heavy explosive weapons in urban and
4/32

25/01/2022

other populated areas, which is a particular cause of
civilian harm in today’s armed conflicts. This week,
the ICRC will issue a major report on heavy explosive
weapons in populated areas in over a decade of analysis
of devastating consequences. It is clear that the use of
heavy explosive weapons in populated areas should
be avoided and preventive mitigating measures taken.
Our report provides practices and recommendations
to political authorities and armed forces on a range of
such measures. It concretizes the concept of avoidance
and can serve as a tool to inform ongoing negotiations
on a political declaration on explosive weapons in
populated areas.
Efforts to protect civilians must also consider
that parties to armed conflict rarely act alone. A
multiplication of actors provide direct support to
belligerents in conflicts, leading to a diffusion of
responsibility that can put civilians, the wounded and
detainees at risk. The ICRC continues to urge Member
States to act more decisively to improve their own action
and leverage their special relationship with allies and
partners in order to enhance respect for international
humanitarian law. That includes, for instance, making
the export of explosive weapons with a wide-impact
area conditional on recipients putting in place limits on
the use of such weapons in populated areas.
Secondly, there is an urgent need to adopt and
implement measures to protect essential services such
as electricity, health, education, water and sanitation.
When essential services are damaged in conflict, the
impacts are severe and cumulative. Diseases spread,
hospitals struggle to provide care, schools go dark.
Given the enormous suffering of civilians, serious
questions are raised as to how parties to conflict are
interpreting and applying their obligations to ensure
the continuity of essential services in urban conflicts.
Investment in preventive measures to ensure continuity
of essential services provides an additional safeguard
for the public health of communities.
That is particularly significant now as we confront
the double vulnerability of conflict and the pandemic.
The ICRC urges States to fully and swiftly implement
the landmark resolution 2573 (2021), which recognizes
the importance of protecting critical infrastructure,
service provider personnel and consumables. That
means that a different approach must underpin
sanctions policies. Members of the Council must ensure
that sanctions allow humanitarian actors to prevent
the implosion of basic social service systems, and we
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

remind them that in warfare — and even more so in
urban fighting — States must facilitate and not hinder
the work of neutral and impartial humanitarian actors.
Thirdly, there is a need to intensify efforts to
mitigate hunger and food insecurity and prevent
famine in protracted urban conflicts. Urban warfare
creates food insecurity by disrupting the supply
chains and markets that urban dwellers depend on to
survive. This cannot be addressed through short-term
relief alone. It requires early and anticipatory action.
Parties to conflict can help prevent food insecurity by
respecting international humanitarian law — notably
the rules protecting civilian structures, such as markets,
warehouses, shops and water installations, and other
objects indispensable to the survival of populations
from attack.
Finally, much more must be done to prevent internal
displacement and to enhance protection and assistance
for internally displaced people during urban warfare.
Ensuring respect for international humanitarian law
can help prevent a large number of people from being
displaced and enhance protection. All possible measures
must be taken in order to provide displaced people with
shelter, hygiene, health, safety and nutrition, as well as
to ensure that family members are not separated.
Wars are changing at a fast pace. We are struggling
to keep up with our efforts to prevent and respond to
their humanitarian impacts. This is experienced most
severely by people trapped in urban warfare. We can
and must do more for the sake of generations present
and future.
I ask that Council members refer to my full written
statement, which contains a few additional ideas for
their consideration.
The President: I thank Mr. Maurer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Mutawakel, who will
be joining us from Sana’a with audio only.
Ms. Al-Mutawakel: I thank the members of
the Security Council for allowing voices from civil
society to reach the Council. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their briefings.
I delivered a briefing to this Council before, on
30 May 2017 (see S/PV.7954), during a special session
on Yemen. Since that briefing, the combatants in Yemen
have claimed thousands of civilian lives, destroyed more

S/PV. 8953

civilian facilities and infrastructure and squandered
many opportunities to stop the bloodshed.
I am speaking to the Council from my office in
Yemen, where the reckless blood-shedding is still
going on. In less than a month, Mwatana Organization
for Human Rights documented seven air strikes by the
Saudi/Emirati-led coalition on civilians and civilian
objects, which killed at least 107 civilians and injured
at least 106 others. The bloodiest air strike was on a
detention centre in Saada where at least 82 detainees
were killed and at least 163 others injured, including
those injured due to live munitions fired by Ansar
Allah Houthis.
Moreover, in the same period, Mwatana documented
10 incidents of ground attacks, mine explosions and
drone use committed by Ansar Allah Houthis, killing
at least nine civilians and injuring at least 10 others.
Civilians continue to suffer, and all warring
parties — the Iranian-backed Ansar Allah Houthi
armed group, the Saudi and the United Arab
Emirates-led coalition, the internationally recognized
Yemeni Government, the United Arab Emiratesbacked Southern Transitional Council and the joint
forces — have committed violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Many civilians in Yemen have been made victims
by the use of various explosive weapons in populated
areas — from weapons, such as indiscriminate
projectiles, mines and ballistic missiles to smart
weapons, such as laser-guided bombs and drones. All
aspects of life have been devastated, including homes,
schools, hospitals, wedding and funeral halls, farms,
factories and cultural property. Each of those notable
structures has meaning in the lives of Yemenis.
Since the outbreak of the conflict in Yemen in
2014, the Mwatana Organization for Human Rights
has documented at least 800 air strikes, more than
700 ground attacks and more than 300 incidents of
mine explosions. The Mwatana Organization has also
documented explosions caused by explosive objects
and the use of drones and ballistic missiles. More than
3,000 civilians have been killed in those attacks and
more than 4,000 civilians wounded. Civilian objects
have been damaged and destroyed.
In the report, entitled The Starvation Makers,
Mwatana documents how warring parties have used
explosive weapons, such as air strikes and mines, as

22-238875/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

a tool to starve civilians. In a large number of those
attacks, Mwatana identifies no military target. In others,
the documented civilian harm is beyond any apparent
military benefit. Those attacks happened because the
parties to the conflict confidently relied on impunity.
I have personally visited, as dozens of the Mwatana
team have also, different parts of Yemen, where we
saw the scattered remains of innocent men, women and
children who did not know why they were killed. We
saw how whole families slept peacefully at night, and,
when the day came, the number of survivors was zero.
We observed poor villages that never knew any modern
technology — no smart phones or computers — but were
targeted by the latest bombs and projectiles dropped by
the latest aircraft manufactured in the richest and most
urbanized countries; neither were the same villages
spared from the most primitive weapons.
We also saw that the main Yemeni cities with the
largest populations are suffering from the war. The
cities have been at the centre of military operations
and targeted over and over again. Despite all the grief
that Yemeni women and men have experienced, the
Security Council and the international community
continue to have the ability to make positive change.
Besides pushing for sustainable peace, there are a
number of decisions that can be made that would better
protect civilians.
Those decisions include putting pressure on the
warring parties to stop the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas; ending arms sales, especially
to countries that have a track record of violating
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as arms-exporting countries have a
responsibility to bear, and it is unreasonable to turn a
blind eye to their role; striving for a new declaration on
preventing the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas, especially those that cause mass impact and
incur heavy costs for civilians; and strengthening
accountability for international crimes rather than
upholding impunity.
It is not sufficient to name and shame the warring
parties and their behaviour. The Council should at
long last refer Yemen’s situation to the International
Criminal Court. It is shameful that we have seen States
standing in the way of international accountability
efforts, including by disgracefully ending the mandate
of the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen in October
2021 at the Human Rights Council.
6/32

25/01/2022

There is still time to correct course. States should
support the establishment of an independent and
impartial mechanism through the General Assembly to
investigate violations and abuses of international law
committed in Yemen to publicly report, collect and
preserve evidence and prepare files for future criminal
prosecutions. I believe that if there had been real efforts
to secure accountability since the beginning of the war
in Yemen, the warring parties would not have dared to
destroy the country with their explosive weapons and
Yemen would not have become the worst humanitarian
crisis today.
The President: I thank Ms. Al-Mutawakel for her
briefing and for delivering it by telephone.
I am now pleased to address the Council in my
national capacity as Prime Minister of Norway.
Let me begin by expressing my gratitude to the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the Chairperson
of the Mwatana Organization for Human Rights for
making the effort to attend this meeting and for sharing
their comprehensive and compelling statements with us.
What do we hear and what do we see from those
statements and our observations? We see cities reduced
to rubble, people displaced from their homes, mass
violations of human rights and lives being destroyed.
Generations have grown up with the harrowing images
of the Second World War. Indeed, that was the backdrop
for the establishment of the Security Council itself.
Tragically, such images are still all too common. From
Aleppo to Mosul, from Mogadishu to Donetsk and from
Sana’a to Gaza, the list is long.
This was the reality in the past and is even more
so in the present. Armed conflicts in urban areas have
devastating consequences for civilians, who account
for the vast majority of casualties. Many civilians,
especially children and vulnerable people, have
nowhere to go, but they cannot stay where they are
either. Essential civilian infrastructure is destroyed.
Development gains are reversed and, as a consequence,
poverty, social division and gender inequality are
fuelled. Basic services like health care, education,
food systems, water and electricity are disrupted, and
often not restored for years, if ever. Any significant
investment in reconstruction remains elusive as
conflicts rage on. Humanitarian actors trying to fill the
gap are denied access. All too often, this amounts to an
impossible task.
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The places where children live, learn and play are
destroyed. They live in fear, often separated from their
families, many without hope for the future, creating a
huge mental and physical toll. That affects generations.
It damages prospects for conflict resolution, peace,
reconciliation and sustainable development.
I therefore say to the members of the Security
Council — the supreme custodian of world peace and
security and the meaning and reading of the Charter
of the United Nations — that warfare in urban areas,
particularly in protracted conflicts, causes civilian
deaths and human suffering beyond what is acceptable.
Civilians must be protected, whether or not the
individual military attack is considered legal. That
is not just a question of complying with International
Humanitarian Law.
On behalf of Norway, having given priority to this
during our term in the Security Council, I would like to
make seven proposals — seven actions that we believe
that we could and should take.
First, the effective protection of civilians and
civilian objects must be made a strategic priority
in the planning and conduct of military operations
in urban areas. We must prevent severe, cumulative
and protracted harm to civilians wherever possible.
Military personnel must be made aware of the rights
and obligations under international humanitarian law.
Member States must develop, implement and maintain
policy and operational procedures that take that into
account. In my country, Norway, we have developed an
extended-reality tool that will allow military officers
to experience armed conflict from a civilian’s point of
view, as part of preparations.
Second, all parties to armed conflict, as the
President of the ICRC said earlier, should fully comply
with international humanitarian law. There must be
accountability for violations. Breaches must be reported
and punished. The principles of precaution, distinction
and proportionality should be properly applied to the
risks to civilians in urban contexts.
Third, the choice of weapons and methods of
warfare must be adapted to the urban context. The use
of weapons designed for the open battlefield, including
heavy explosive weapons, should be minimized in
urban areas. So-called precision weapons may target
buildings, but they cannot distinguish between civilians
and the military.

S/PV. 8953

Fourth, parties to conflict and the international
community at large must ensure that civilians continue
to have access to essential services like health care,
food systems, education, water and electricity during
and not least after military conflict.
Fifth, every effort must be made to prevent
displacement, account for the missing and
reunite families.
Sixth, we need to support humanitarian and
development actors in adapting to the needs and
vulnerabilities of the population in urban areas. We
need inclusive engagement with affected communities.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of women
is key.
Seventh, we must ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian and health workers, be they from United
Nations agencies, the ICRC or other regional or local
organizations. We urge parties to conflict to fulfil their
obligations to ensure safe, rapid and unimpeded access
to civilians in need.
That is the purpose of bringing this critical theme
to the Council’s agenda. We must do more at every
stage of the conflict cycle. The Secretary-General’s
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) sets out a good path
forward. The best way to protect civilians is to bring
conflicts to an end — that is obvious. As conflicts
continue, they inflict cumulative harm on the civilian
population and, in particular, on those who are most
vulnerable, namely, children. That undermines the
prospects for peace and security. Ensuring the protection
of civilians will also lead to a more sustainable peace
after conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I call on the Vice-President of the Republic
of Ghana.
Mr. Bawumia (Ghana): I thank the Norwegian
presidency of the Council for the month of January
2022 and His Excellency Mr. Jonas Gahr Støre, Prime
Minister of Norway, for convening this high-level open
debate on the topic of war in cities and the protection
of civilians in urban settings. I convey to you, Sir, and
to the Council President Nana Addo Dankwa AkufoAddo’s best wishes for a successful debate.
I also join other speakers in thanking the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, and the other briefers

22-238877/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for their useful insights on the topic of this high-level
open debate.
The asymmetrical nature of the prevailing wars
in cities and the consequent embedding of combatants
within the interconnected resources and infrastructure
of urban areas pose immense challenges to the
protection of civilian populations. Advancements in
science and technology have led to the development
of compact and more sophisticated weapons systems
that are able to deliver greater damage to targets and
their surroundings.
The humanitarian consequences of the increase
in urbanized conflicts on civilian populations are
therefore serious and require the careful consideration
of existing frameworks for the management of urban
wars. We therefore welcome the focus that this debate
brings to the topic.
Wars by nature exact untold suffering, death and
destruction. However, when wars are fought in cities,
their impact on populations is even worse. They lead to
higher incidents of mortality; the destruction of critical
life-supporting infrastructure, such as hospitals;
greater numbers of internally displaced persons; and a
higher incidence of criminal and sexual exploitation,
particularly once such wars are prolonged. That creates
further vulnerabilities that are exploited by violent
extremist groups to radicalize young people.
Data from 2018 from the United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs shows that
the world is becoming increasingly urbanized, with
55 per cent of the world’s population living in urban
areas and a rise to 68 per cent expected by 2050. Asia
and Africa, where most stabilization efforts are taking
place, are expected to be the fastest-growing areas of
urbanization. The outbreak of conflicts would therefore
have telling effects in view of the population densities
of those two continents.
We have already seen, in recent years, evidence
of the horrific effects of urban conflicts in places like
Syria, Iraq and Yemen, but also much earlier on the
African continent in countries such as Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Côte d’Ivoire, where civil wars that took
place had an adverse impact in the city context.
The rise of terror and violent extremist groups and
organizations — such as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab and Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham — has revealed the huge threat posed to
8/32

25/01/2022

civilian lives. Such groups do not fight in accordance
with the rules of law of war. They scapegoat civilians in
their crusades and consider them cannon fodder.
The roles played by civilians in such wars also
demonstrate the conflicting, nuanced and complex
nature of modern warfare. The Geneva Conventions
and their Protocols Additional, which are at the core
of international humanitarian law, as well as resolution
2175 (2014), provide for the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Indeed, although attempts have been
made to bind non-State actors and armed groups to
the rules of war, much of the conflict we experience
globally and on the continent of Africa continues to
involve civilian combatants and often results in the
scapegoating of civilian populations, which have been
used as human shields by warring sides or have become
victims of heinous crimes.
The devastating impact of urban wars on civilian
populations means that more investments need to be
made in devising the necessary coping mechanisms
and adaptation tools to tackle the issue. I would
therefore highlight the following points for the
Council’s consideration.
First, we need to enhance global norms and
standards on civilian protection in urban conflicts
by prioritizing the integration of civilian protection
in the planning and conduct of military operations.
The Council can play a useful role by encouraging
national authorities to embrace useful initiatives for the
re-education and retraining of combatants on the new
landscape of war and to acknowledge the redefinition
of who the enemy is in a calibration of the acceptable
tactics employed in contemporary warfare to assure the
safety of civilian populations.
Secondly, the bane of any global norm lies in
the lack of effective enforcement. We must therefore
develop strong accountability frameworks that place the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts at the heart of
national and international justice systems. That requires
States to recommit to international humanitarian law
in their conduct of warfare and to a zero-tolerance
approach towards the impunity of non-State actors.
Thirdly, while a general and complete cessation of
all urban wars is an ideal aspiration, the reality of war
requires that we focus on assessing and developing the
resilience of existing urban infrastructure to cope with
wars, particularly in terms of evacuation efforts, shelter
zones and alternative life support infrastructure. Those
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

need to be complemented by the retention of support
systems that psychologically equip civilians with the
right tools, knowledge and skills required to build
faster to recover as much of their lives as possible after
wars ravage their lands.
Fourthly, I urge that we act to control the nature and
indiscriminate use of explosives in war, combined with
the management of the high civilian population density
of urban areas, to reduce the adverse impact that often
leads to the loss of lives, crucial infrastructure, such as
schools and hospitals, and sources of livelihood, such
as business centres in these areas.
We must recognize that in developing norms
and standards to protect civilian populations during
conflict, there is a strong need for local engagement
in order to assure the acceptance of such norms.
Local communities need to be empowered in order to
take required preventative actions and also in order
not to shield perpetrators of crimes against civilian
populations. Also, in addressing the resilience of
urban communities, the issue of poverty, which is an
important element in urbanization, would need to be
taken cognizance of and addressed. National initiatives
will therefore need to be supported to equalize access
to economic opportunities in all parts of the country,
develop alternate and reinforce urban communities,
and manage the push and pull factors of migration that
sometimes lead to unplanned urbanization outcomes and
create fodder for the intensification of such conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
Mr. Boubeya (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Norway, which, by convening the
Security Council to discuss the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts and wars in cities from
the perspective of the protection of civilians in urban
settings, has reminded us of a salient point of the
Council’s mandate, namely, ensuring the security of
civilians in times of war.
Wars are increasingly taking place in urban
settings. This is undoubtedly because that is where the
centres of power are, where resources are concentrated
and where civilian populations are a captive group. This
situation calls into question the law of war and the logic
of humanitarian action. From Tripoli to Mogadishu,
Mosul, Aleppo and even Sana’a, many cities have
recently experienced deadly and destructive conflicts
and are sometimes still the scene of complex and violent

S/PV. 8953

armed operations. The destruction of civilian property,
the disabling of health-care infrastructure and the
terror caused by bombings have claimed thousands of
civilian lives and led many survivors to flee.
Urban warfare has undergone significant changes
since the 1990s, taking on the characteristics of
contemporary armed conflict. They are more domestic
than international; they are long-lasting and they often
involve opponents with very asymmetrical resources.
For non-State armed groups, cities today are what
the jungle was in the 1970s and 1980s — an environment
where they can easily hide, exploit their knowledge of
the terrain and render inoperative some technological
weapons available to powerful armies. The urban
environment also gives them more media exposure
because it concentrates the economic, political and
symbolic centres of power that they are fighting.
When cities are targeted by bombings and shelling,
90 per cent of the victims are civilians. This is partly
due to the intertwining and proximity of the civilian
population and military targets. Cities depend on
a complex network of interconnected services, so
damage to one section of that network can trigger a
domino effect, resulting in even more suffering. When
water and electrical supply systems are destroyed, the
consequences for public health and the delivery of
health care can lead to loss of life that far exceeds the
initial direct impact. The destruction and degradation
of essential services render entire neighbourhoods
uninhabitable and can result in the forced displacement
of populations.
The most recent partial data reveal that urban
warfare today affects more than 50 million civilians
worldwide and kills an average of eight times more
than conflicts in rural areas. The complexity of
urban theatres is a major challenge for military and
humanitarian operations, owing to the density of the
population and the overlap of civilians and combatants.
Gabon, in its commitment to international
humanitarian law, strongly condemns these everincreasing practices, which lead to significant harm to
civilian populations, the most vulnerable categories of
which are women, children and disabled persons.
The international community must urgently
respond to these contemporary challenges. International
humanitarian law, as a body of rules designed to limit
the effects of armed conflict and to protect those who

22-238879/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

are not or are no longer participating in combat, must
be able to restrain the means and methods of warfare
that parties to conflict use in urban settings. Although
there are no specific rules for urban settings and the
use of explosive weapons in urban settings is not
expressly prohibited, the legality of these weapons
can be questioned in the light of the main principles of
international humanitarian law, such as distinction and
proportionality. In the case of the principle of distinction,
the objective is to protect civilian populations and
property by prohibiting the use of weapons of war that
cannot be aimed at a specific military target because of
a lack of precision.
In any case, it seems essential to legally bind the
parties to conflict in urban areas to the obligation of
precaution, which requires them to gather as much
information as possible to assess the effects of an attack,
in particular the use of dangerous plans and vulnerable
areas. There is no doubt that the use of explosive
weapons in urban areas can hardly be reconciled with
respect for international humanitarian law. That is why
Gabon joins the International Committee of the Red
Cross in calling on parties to conflict to avoid their
use in densely populated areas, because of the high
probability of indiscriminate effects.
The nature of the challenges posed by conflicts in
urban areas also calls for a rethinking of the modalities
of the humanitarian response that must be provided.
This is a real paradigm shift.
First, it seems necessary to provide a holistic
response to the humanitarian needs resulting from urban
conflicts. The interdependence of service networks, the
mixing of civilians and combatants, and the protracted
nature of conflicts call for cross-cutting, non-sectoral
and long-term interventions. At the same time, it is
essential to continue to carry out emergency actions
in order to help the affected populations to survive.
That would call for new financing schemes to address
short- and long-term actions, as well as individual and
systemic approaches.
Secondly, we note a significant increase in
humanitarian needs during urban conflicts, which
leads to many invisible forms of damage, such as the
psychosocial effects of continuous bombings, weeks
under siege and the destruction of important symbols.
More recently, a third generation of humanitarian needs
also seems to have increased in scope. Populations that
are victims of violence express a growing need to be
10/32

25/01/2022

connected and to see their digital data protected. Cities in
conflict are often fragmented and controlled by different
warring groups, some of which can deliberately impede
access to certain areas. It is important for humanitarian
organizations to be able to have more dialogue with
local authorities and civil society organizations in order
to decentralize humanitarian diplomacy.
Lastly, we cannot allow the enormous suffering
witnessed throughout the world, with entire cities
engulfed in combat, to become the new normal. Cities
are for civilians. They should not be the battlefields
of the future. My country, under the leadership
of His Excellency President Ali Bongo Ondimba,
remains convinced that by acting collectively and
with determination we can both reduce the suffering
caused by urban warfare and better assist the
affected populations.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for
convening this very important meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Maurer for their remarks
today. I would also like to express my appreciation
to Ms. Al-Mutawakel for her presence with us today.
I would also like to take a moment to welcome the
presence of Ghana’s Vice-President and Gabon’s
Foreign Minister here with us and reiterate our welcome
to the Security Council.
As we all know, around the world cities are
growing. The latest United Nations estimates predict
that two thirds of the world will live in urban areas by
2050. Those trends are exacerbated by conflict and the
climate crisis. The clear truth is that protecting civilians
in urban settings will become only more important
going forward, and the threat to civilians is horrifying,
as we heard from our briefers today.
Explosive weapons have made it devastatingly easy
to threaten and kill large groups of civilians. In some
instances, armed actors go so far as to use civilians as
human shields. In others, they deliberately place military
objectives near civilians, sometimes purposely, seeking
out the highest concentration of innocent people.
Putting schools, hospitals and civilian infrastructure
in deliberate danger is wrong, as is the terrible and
prevalent sexual violence perpetrated against women
and girls, as well as boys, which is not often discussed.
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I am particularly concerned by children pulled into
conflict in urban settings. Boys and girls are often
recruited as child soldiers, while attacks on schools
and hospitals have disrupted their ability to receive an
education, medical care and humanitarian aid.
On the subject of humanitarian access, we also
all know that one technique of armed groups is to
create unnecessary and dangerous impediments that
prevent civilians and displaced persons from accessing
and receiving life-saving aid. Humanitarian workers
and medical workers in urban settings are also being
attacked more and more frequently.
I do not want to dwell on that long list of challenges
because we all know them too well. Instead, I want to
focus on what we can do about them. I am optimistic
that we can work together on that because we have
had recent consensus on this issue in the Security
Council. Last April, during Vietnam’s presidency of
the Council, we unanimously adopted resolution 2573
(2021), demanding that all parties to armed conflict
fully comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. We also strongly condemned the
starvation of civilians as a weapon of war.
To build on that consensus, we should make
progress on some of the practical steps that the
Secretary-General laid out in his 2018 report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462).
As a first step, parties to armed conflict must respect
applicable international humanitarian law. To make
that commitment clear, Member States should adopt
and enforce national policies to support the effective
implementation of international humanitarian law.
Of course, the perpetrators are often non-State
armed groups. They too must abide by such laws. We
all need to clearly communicate that to them, and we
must hold them accountable. To start, States should
implement improved accountability measures to hold
themselves to a high standard. That means conducting
assessments and investigations, acknowledging civilian
harm when it happens and making serious efforts to
assist harmed civilians. We should also work together
to develop frameworks for addressing the most pressing
challenges. As just one example, the United States has
been working with a number of other States, led by
Ireland, to develop a political declaration on explosive
weapons in populated areas.
Our claim to maintain international peace and
security is only as strong as our results. We have an

S/PV. 8953

obligation to uphold international humanitarian law and
to turn those lofty and important words into real and
practical protections for civilians. The world’s civilians
are counting on us. Let us live up to their expectations,
enable their hopes and dreams and do everything in our
power to protect them.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The United
Arab Emirates thanks Norway for organizing this open
debate, and we thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for your
personal presence and for presiding over this meeting.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Peter Maurer for their insightful briefings. We
also listened carefully to the briefer in Sana’a, and we
of course strongly reject the allegations made against
my country and the coalition. Unlike the Houthis, we
reiterate the coalition’s commitment to complying with
its obligations under international humanitarian law to
protect civilians. We would welcome the Houthis doing
the same.
However, I will concentrate my remarks today on
the important and timely topic of urban warfare, which
Norway chose as the centrepiece of its presidency.
As a country that has recently defended itself against
multiple terrorist attacks by the Houthis within the
space of just one week, targeting civilian infrastructure
in densely populated urban areas, I could not agree
more with the Council’s condemnation of those heinous
attacks, not only within armed conflicts but also in
peaceful havens, such as the United Arab Emirates.
Since the Council adopted resolution 1265 (1999),
we have seen conflicts in urban areas proliferate and take
a devastating toll on civilians, with a disproportionate
impact on women and children. With rapid urbanization
continuing across the globe, particularly in fragile
settings, and the increased density of cities, urban
warfare has become more complex and the fundamental
principle of distinction more challenging for parties in
armed conflict to apply.
Yet some non-State armed groups exploit that
challenging environment and deliberately choose cities
as a primary battleground in complete disregard for
human life. The Houthis and other terrorist organizations
not only deliberately target civilians and civilian
objects, but also use schools and civilian infrastructure
to store weapons or to launch attacks, and they use
civilians, including children, as human shields. That
must stop, and it is the responsibility of the Council,
among other bodies, to make it stop.

22-2388711/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Against that backdrop, the United Arab Emirates
would like to make the following four suggestions
aimed at more effectively protecting, and mitigating the
cumulative impact of urban warfare on, civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
First, international law provides the necessary
framework for the protection of civilians in urban
warfare, and full compliance is even more critical in
the complex environment of urban warfare because of
its devastating consequences for civilians and essential
infrastructure. Training, capacity-building and sharing
best practices with parties engaged in armed conflict
can help strengthen compliance.
Secondly, sanctions remain an important tool of
the Security Council for achieving various objectives,
including the protection of civilians. They can work
either to deter or coerce actors into compliance with
international law. To achieve the intended results,
however, they must be carefully designed to ensure
that humanitarian actors can continue to deliver their
essential work in those urban settings.
Thirdly, we must more systematically support
early-recovery and reconstruction efforts to restore
critical infrastructure and basic services that are
damaged and disrupted by the impact of hostilities in
cities. The current pandemic makes that commitment
even more critical given that the heaviest toll of urban
conflict falls upon children. We welcome the fact that
resolution 2601 (2021) highlighted the importance
of the continuity of education in conflict and the
potential of technology, particularly digital platforms,
to mitigate disruptions to education. Developing and
supporting ways to allow children to continue their
education, even in the midst of conflict, is essential for
their development and contributes to the achievement
of peace and security.

25/01/2022

way to protect civilians is indeed to prevent conflict at
its onset. The United Arab Emirates remains committed
to working with the United Nations and its Member
States to prevent conflicts and take collective action
in the Council to promote the protection of civilians at
all times.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): We, too, thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and Ms. Al-Mutawakel
for their briefings.
The United Kingdom is grateful to Norway for
having convened this event, whose importance is
reflected by the presence of the Vice-President of
Ghana and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
As we have heard today, civilians are paying a
heavy price for the increasing urbanization of protracted
conflict. All too often, civilians find themselves
the victims of terrible violations of international
humanitarian law, as witnessed during the appalling
barrel-bombing campaigns in Syria and in the conflicts
seen in Yemen, Ethiopia, Mali and elsewhere, which
have caused devastating suffering and long-term effects.
Full adherence to international humanitarian law is
fundamental to the protection of civilians. Compliance
is not an aspiration; it is an essential legal and moral
obligation. Operating in an urban environment is
difficult and dangerous, but those doing so must take
all feasible precautions to minimize harm to civilians
and damage to infrastructure. If a military operation
cannot be conducted in compliance with the law, it must
not take place. The international community can and
must do more to assist and pressure States to protect
their civilians.

Fourthly and finally, protection and reconstruction
strategies are more effective when women and men are
equally included in consultation and decision-making. It
is therefore crucial that women and girls be empowered
in such a way that enables them to participate fully,
equally and meaningfully in those efforts. Their
inclusion in all sectors — public and private — is
critical for effective recovery as well as for helping
prevent the resurgence of conflict.

How do we achieve this? First, we must engage more
purposefully in the sharing of best practices to help
all parties to conflict enhance their compliance with
international humanitarian law. The United Kingdom
has long provided specialist training to the armed
forces of other States, including forces deployed in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the African
Union Mission in Somalia, to help build understanding
and compliance.

Urban areas are key hubs of civilian life; we must
ensure that the people, infrastructure and environment
within them are protected. We recognize that the best

Secondly, non-State armed groups need to
understand their obligations under humanitarian law
and the importance of compliance. The United Kingdom

12/32

22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

supports organizations such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross working to increase
awareness, and we are also supporting research to
improve our understanding of why non-State armed
groups do or do not comply and to identify approaches
to improve adherence.
Thirdly, we must work to ensure that those
responsible for breaches of international humanitarian
law are held to account. There can be no impunity for
crimes committed in conflict. So I want to welcome
the work that is being led by Ireland to seek a political
declaration on the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas. The United Kingdom is committed to
that process. It must serve to increase the protection of
civilians without hindering legitimate and proportionate
military operations in urban areas.
I would like to underscore the United Kingdom’s
own unwavering commitment to the full implementation
of and compliance with international humanitarian law.
Our defence policies have practical measures to protect
civilians integrated at every stage of the operational
process. We will continue to encourage others to do
likewise, share best practices and condemn those who
fail to meet their obligations.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to warmly
welcome you to the Chamber, Mr. President, and also
to thank you for having convened this dedicated debate,
where we really welcome the opportunity to discuss the
specific legal, moral and operational challenges faced
by parties to conflict, and, of course, by United Nations
agencies and civil society, in seeking to protect civilians
and to alleviate the devastating humanitarian impacts.
I would also like to warmly welcome the
Honourable Vice-President of Ghana and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Gabon to the Chamber today, and
to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Maurer for their
assessments of the Security Council’s obligations and
role in this space and what we can do better. I want to
especially thank our civil-society briefer, Ms. Radhya
Al-Mutawakel, for her remarks. It is important that we
heard her voice this morning; it is an important part of
our considerations here today.
In cities such as Idlib, Gaza and Taiz, millions
face the unacceptable humanitarian consequences of
deliberate violence through besiegement, starvation,
the use of explosive weapons, the destruction of vital
civilian infrastructure and the disruption of essential

S/PV. 8953

services. Those populations are viscerally aware of the
grim realities of war.
Civilians face considerable risk in simply
navigating their city. They must constantly determine
whether a road is safe to cross, a store is safe to access
for basic food, a hospital safe to enter with a desperately
ill child. Five years after the Council adopted resolution
2286 (2016), the targeted and systematic destruction of
health care and services, and the killing and maiming
of medical and humanitarian workers, shamefully
continues. It continues in Ethiopia. It continues in
Myanmar. It continues in Syria — in too many conflicts.
Urban
conflict
exacerbates
the
specific
vulnerabilities of children, the elderly and persons
with disabilities. Chilling reports from medical and
humanitarian agencies stress the deep psychological
trauma that air strikes inflict on children. In restricting
access to education, urban conflict also severely stifles
children’s development. Those who have fled urban
conflicts have shared harrowing testimonies, including
being forced to leave behind an older relative or a
person with disabilities in the hope of leading others
to safety — choices no one should have to make.
Those displaced face further challenges, often with no
prospects of returning to their homes or their families.
Urban conflict also has a disproportionate impact on
women and girls, including the risk of gender-based
violence in humanitarian settings.
Ireland is gravely concerned by the devastating
impact of the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/423), almost 90 per cent of those killed and
injured by the use of such weapons in populated areas
are civilians. Moreover, explosive remnants continue to
kill and maim long after the conflict is over.
Ireland believes more can and should be done to
reverse the pattern of humanitarian harm from the
use of weapons in populated areas and to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law. We
are proud to be chairing international efforts in Geneva
to agree a political declaration on the use of weapons
in populated areas. We are determined to deliver a
meaningful political declaration that improves the
protection of civilians during armed conflict and leads
to change in policy and in practice.
The protection of civilians plays a major role in
United Nations peacekeeping operations and is a key
pillar of many peacekeeping mandates. Ireland was

22-2388713/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

proud to ensure that the protection of civilians was
central to resolution 2594 (2021), which the Council
adopted unanimously during our September presidency
(see S/PV.8852). We know that risks to civilians
are heightened during transitions. It is imperative
that planning for their protection is a focus of any
mission reconfiguration.
In conclusion, I would like to reinforce two points
that should guide the work of the Security Council.
First, international humanitarian law must be respected
by parties to all conflicts, including in urban settings.
And finally, we know that without accountability we
are condemned to repeat our mistakes. It is essential
that those responsible for violating international
humanitarian law are held accountable. Countering
impunity is essential to preventing future violations.
The international community — importantly, the
Security Council — needs to do better.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Norway for its initiative
in holding today’s open debate, and I welcome Your
Excellency Prime Minister Støre to the Security Council
as you preside over this meeting. We look forward to the
adoption of the presidential statement on the protection
of civilians in the context of urban warfare.
I also thank Secretary-General Guterres and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, for their briefings.
Cities are where population, economy, science and
technology and civil infrastructure are concentrated.
They are the epitome of human civilization. Wars and
conflicts in cities often cause more devastating damage
and more serious humanitarian consequences.

25/01/2022

equity and justice. Meanwhile, we should persevere
in pursuing the political settlement of disputes and in
ensuring that all parties to conflict act in accordance
with international law and better protect the rights and
interests of civilians.
Ceasefire is the first step of a political solution.
The Secretary-General issued an urgent appeal for a
global ceasefire in March 2020, yet up till now, we still
see ongoing armed conflicts in various forms in many
parts of the world.
Last month, the General Assembly unanimously
adopted the Olympic truce resolution for the Beijing
Winter Olympics (General Assembly resolution 76/13).
Some 173 countries co-sponsored the resolution,
which has once again reflected the international
political consensus that all parties to conflict should
cease hostilities.
The Beijing Winter Olympics are around the
corner. Both President Shahid and Secretary-General
Guterres are calling for all countries to abide by the
Olympic truce resolution. China also strongly calls on
all countries and parties to conflict to earnestly follow
the tradition of the truce and the General Assembly
resolution, seize the opportunity of the Beijing Winter
Olympics to bridge differences through dialogue
and replace confrontation with cooperation, thereby
demonstrating the firm resolve of the international
community to achieve peace, unity and solidarity
together for a shared future.

In Palestine, the blockade has turned Gaza into
the world’s largest open-air prison whose civilian
population has experienced unspeakable sufferings
from siege and war. In Afghanistan, more than 20
years of war have left cities in ruins and displaced over
9 million people. In Syria and Libya, foreign military
intervention and imposed democratic transformation
triggered wars that have lasted a decade.

Eliminating the root causes of conflict is the
fundamental way for achieving lasting peace. War
represents a systemic risk for civilians. To eliminate
this risk, we must focus on the root causes and take
a holistic approach. We should persist in promoting
peace through development and, through sustainable
development, alleviate the absolute poverty that causes
conflict. China put forward the Global Development
Initiative and took the lead in setting up the related
Group of Friends with a view to forging strong
synergy for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and addressing the root
causes of conflicts.

Civilians and infrastructure were mercilessly
bombarded, reducing erstwhile prosperous cities to
ruins. These humanitarian tragedies are happening
all around us. The international community should
give great attention to pursuing accountability and
seeking redress for the related acts and uphold global

We should be determined to resolve disputes
peacefully, the Security Council should join forces
with Secretary-General, his special envoys and special
representatives, in stepping up mediation and good
officers on hotspot issues and in de-escalating tensions.
We should also coordinate peacebuilding efforts, help

14/32

22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

post-conflict countries and regions rebuild, restore the
rule of law, justice and order, and embark on a virtuous
cycle of peaceful development.
The countries concerned bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. The international
community should respect the sovereignty of these
countries, heed their views and help strengthen their
capacity to protect civilians and provide basic services
in the light of their national conditions. Humanitarian
assistance to these countries should be more relevant
and aligned with their needs. Politicizing aid should
be avoided.
At present, Afghanistan is witnessing a humanitarian
situation more serious than anywhere else in the world.
Nearly half of Afghans are facing extreme hunger.
Some 97 per cent of the population may fall below
the poverty line. These populations are mostly urban.
So far, the United Nations has launched its largest aid
programme ever for a single country, while the overseas
assets belonging to the Afghan people are still frozen.
We call on the countries concerned to immediately lift
the economic blockade and unilateral sanctions against
Afghanistan and other countries, undertake concrete
actions and fulfil their obligations under international
law, especially international humanitarian law.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Your participation in today’s debate,
Mr. Prime Minister, is a clear demonstration of the
importance Norway attaches to the protection of
civilians. My country also shares this perspective.
We thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Chairperson of the Mwatana Organization for
Human Rights for their briefings. We also welcome the
Vice-President of Ghana and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Gabon at today’s meeting.
Although the use of explosive weapons in urban
areas is not explicitly prohibited by international
humanitarian law, given the population density
prevailing there, it is practically impossible that
they can be used without a high risk of violating the
principles of discrimination and proportionality. It is
therefore necessary for the international community,
led by the Council, to recognize that their use in urban
contexts has unacceptable humanitarian consequences.
We hope that the current negotiations for a political
declaration in Geneva will recognize that, as well as

S/PV. 8953

the impact such weapons have on people’s physical and
mental health.
Deliberate and collateral attacks on civilian
infrastructure, whether by traditional methods of
warfare or in the form of cyberattacks, are deplorable.
They adversely affect the provision of electricity,
water, sanitation and health services, as well as hamper
humanitarian assistance.
Civilian populations in urban centres in the
Middle East — such as Gaza, Syria and Yemen — and
elsewhere are today paying the consequences of these
attacks in the difficult context of the pandemic. We
invite the Secretary-General to include in his reports
specific data and recommendations on the impact of
war in urban contexts so that the Council can respond
in a more timely and effective manner.
As some have mentioned, education has also been
affected by war in urban areas. We ex-press our deep
concern about the destruction or military use of schools
and call on those who have not done so to join the Safe
Schools Declaration.
It is clear that international humanitarian law is
not being respected. We therefore call on all States
to comply with their obligations, including resolution
2573 (2021), adopted last year.
Finally, we call for all violations of international
humanitarian law to be investigated and punished,
either in national courts or before the International
Criminal Court.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I welcome you to New York,
Mr. President. I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and Ms. Radhya
Al-Mutawakel for their briefings. I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Mahamudu Bawumia, Vice-President
of Ghana, and His Excellency Mr. Pacôme Moubelet
Boubeya, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
This debate offers us the opportunity to reconsider
the very reason for the existence of the United Nations
and the Security Council so that we can ensure that
they are fit for purpose to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.
None of us was born during the founding of the
United Nations. But we all carry in our mind’s eye the
searing images of the destruction of cities as emblematic

22-2388715/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of the untold sorrow to humankind that forced the
existence of our common enterprise into being.
We carry the indelible images of the siege of
Leningrad by Nazi Germany, which lasted almost 900
days, with untold suffering and heroism by its residents.
To this day, the culture of the British people is marked
by the experiences of civilians running into their bomb
shelters to the sound of wailing sirens warning of
incoming bombs.
History will always recall the nuclear bombings
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which, for the first time
in human history, literally vaporized civilians in
order to send a terrifying signal to their leaders. We
recall Hiroshima losing 60,000 of its 90,000 buildings
in a single morning. By 1945, many of the great
cities of Europe and Asia lay in ruins, their residents
mourning lost relatives and friends and scavenging for
food — many in countries whose will to fight had been
broken by the bombings.
The attacks on the cities were deliberate. They
were meant to break the will of the States waging war
by breaking the lives and hopes of civilians. Civilians
continue to bear the brunt of conflict in urban areas, as
witnessed in recent years in fighting by Islamic State in
Iraq and the Shams in Mosul and in the Syrian conflict,
to cite but two examples.
This leads us to wonder whether a war the equal of
the past two great global conflicts is possible today and
whether the Security Council has the will to recognize
its approach and act to prevent it. We ask that question
knowing that such a war will be an outlier and that our
tools to predict it are extremely poor. What is needed is
a system of State relations that lowers the incentives for
such a confrontation.
Yet, we are in a period of surging rivalries,
escalations of military spending and provocative
actions — on multiple continents. Some of the great
Powers involved in this rising geopolitical struggle are
members of the Council, while others stand outside
it. Their confrontations frequently lead to sparking or
worsening conflict situations in other parts of the world.
Africa is one of the regions that has historically suffered
the most from the proxy actions of great Powers.
The past two world wars have come as a surprise.
The next one is likely to be the same if we do not
undertake urgent Security Council reforms that bring
balance to permanent member-ship and the veto. If
16/32

25/01/2022

this famous table is to truly prevent major wars, then
its membership must expand or change substantively.
Added to the fact that the majority of the situations
before the Council today are in Africa and that great
power rivalries will be most keenly felt there, we call
for fundamental reform.
We call the Council’s attention to the Kampala
road map of the just-completed ministerial meeting
of the African Union Committee of Ten Heads of
State and Government, on the re-form of the Security
Council. International peace and security would benefit
immensely from the implementation of the Common
African Position, as encapsulated in the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration. Africa’s goal is to
be fully represented in a Security Council that retains
the power and capacity to save humanity from major
wars. We have had decades without a world war, but
we should not rest on our laurels and imagine that we
will not one day be thought of, disparagingly, as similar
to the hapless League of Nations that was unable to
prevent world war.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank Norway
for organizing this high-level open debate on such an
important topic. I also thank Prime Minister Støre for
chairing it — testimony of its paramount importance
for all of us.
I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and Ms. Al-Mutawakel for the information they
provided today.
This debate brings us to the heart of reflections on
the disastrous humanitarian consequences of conflicts
in urban settings and on the need to seek and take
appropriate measures to protect civilians, in line with
international humanitarian law.
Armed conflicts in urban settings always take a
terrible toll on innocent civilians. Tens of mil-lions
of civilians around the world are currently affected.
The 2021 annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/423) on the protection of civilians, as we heard
from him earlier, reveals worrisome trends in armed
conflict, with devastating impacts for civilians. Deaths,
injuries, trauma, displacement and severe damage to
essential civilian infrastructure and services, resulting
in dramatic humanitarian crises, are the well-known
consequences of urban warfare. That is what we have
seen in the armed conflicts in Syria, Yemen, Libya, the
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Central African Republic, Mozambique, Somalia and
Ukraine.
They all tell the same story. When cities become
theatres of war, houses are reduced to rubble, streets
become deathbeds for innocent civilians and services
are destroyed, with long-term devastating effects on
people’s lives. Nowhere has that been truer than in
urban environments, such as in Mosul, Taiz, Sana’a
and Donetsk, to mention some of the most appalling
cases. Urban warfare, in particular the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in the urban contexts,
always leads to mass civilian casualties, displacement
and the destruction of critical infrastructure and
systems, such as water, food, health services, education
and sanitation.
Those long-term and cumulative effects of urban
warfare on people’s lives require joint humanitarian,
development and peacebuilding efforts and actions.
It is therefore important to develop a comprehensive
approach that goes beyond the humanitarian aspect, in
line with humanitarian principles. We strongly believe
that States and all parties to armed conflict must, as a
matter of priority, ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians in
urban settings by adopting specific national policies,
based on best practices; make the protection of civilians
a strategic priority, in all military operations in urban
settings; avoid the use and stocking of explosive weapons
in populated areas and undertake mitigation measures
to reduce the consequent risk of harming civilians;
and, lastly, protect essential services to mitigate the
humanitarian consequences in urban settings.
Albania urges all States to seek and agree on the best
way to protect civilians. To that end, we recommend the
following actions.
First, Council Members should not allow political
differences to undermine collective action to protect
civilians. The Council must reach consensus and
stand united in taking all the necessary measures to
prevent and end armed conflicts in compliance with
international humanitarian law and always ensure the
protection of civilians.
Secondly, all Member States should support the
United Nations and others actors on the ground in
engaging with non-State armed groups to develop
policies to protect civilians, including in urban settings.

S/PV. 8953

Thirdly, all Member States must always ensure
accountability for crimes committed, refuse and reject
impunity and bring perpetrators before justice.
Albania strongly believes that Member States,
local communities, civil society and international
organizations can contribute to policy frameworks,
based on good practices, to prevent, respond to and
protect civilians. We must learn from good practices
to consolidate political will, participation and the
implementation of such initiatives.
(spoke in French)
Let me conclude by stating that we believe that
there is nothing more precious, important, imperative
or noble than the protection of innocent civilians and
saving lives, which is best achieved by avoiding and
preventing conflicts. In our view, that must be at the
core of the work of the Security Council.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would initially like
to convey our appreciation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Maurer and Ms. Al-Mutawakel for their thoughts,
which help frame our debate today. Let me thank
Norway for organizing this timely open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts carried out in
urban settings.
Protracted and asymmetrical conflicts have
nowadays become the norm, with dire consequences
for the civilian population, which can be exacerbated
in urban areas. Brazil reiterates its commitment to the
protection of civilians, which is a priority of our mandate
in the Security Council. The Council cannot normalize
the current situation, in which civilians account for the
majority of deaths in armed conflicts and are very often
deliberately targeted. It is unacceptable that in many
conflicts today the principle of proportionality has
been turned upside down.
Despite the heavy toll of armed conflicts in urban
areas, there are tools that parties can resort to as a way
to avoid or, at least, minimize civilian harm in such
contexts. The Council is well placed to recommend
some measures, and I take this opportunity to highlight
four of them.
First, respecting and ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law is not only a legal
obligation, but it is also an effective way to protect
civilians. The Council must be united in demanding
that all parties respect international humanitarian law
and in encouraging actions to strengthen compliance.

22-2388717/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Specific training tailored to urban settings is key, as
well as proper adaptation of the means and methods
of warfare to the specificities of densely populated
areas. It is also important to document civilian harm,
including as a means to assess whether the predicted
casualties of military operations correspond to the
damage actually caused to civilians. Parties must
plan their operations based on solid information with
regard to military objectives and the location of civilian
personnel and objects.
Secondly, the choice of weapons is a key part of
military considerations to protect civilians in armed
conflicts in urban environments. Brazil has endorsed
the Santiago Declaration, signed by Latin American and
Caribbean States in support of a political declaration on
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, and
has actively participated in the informal consultations
on the subject coordinated by Ireland. For Brazil,
such a political declaration should establish common
standards, promote policies to reduce the risk of civilian
harm and facilitate the exchange of good practices.
It is also an opportunity to promote compliance with
international humanitarian law and recognize the rights
of victims and affected communities, while providing
them with adequate assistance.
Thirdly, humanitarian actors must be able to
provide assistance to civilians in need. Parties to armed
conflicts should facilitate safe and unimpeded passage
for relief actions that are humanitarian and impartial in
character. In many instances, humanitarian actors might
need to engage with non-State armed groups to facilitate
humanitarian access, disseminate international
humanitarian law or even ensure the provision of
basic services in urban settings. Such contacts, when
carried out in respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles, should
not be criminalized. Moreover, the Council should
adopt safeguards to ensure that sanctions and counterterrorism measures do not have adverse consequences
to legitimate and impartial humanitarian action.
Fourthly, meaningful accountability for civilian
harm goes hand in hand with effective protection. When
violations occur, they must be investigated impartially
and their perpetrators must be held accountable.
The fact that civilians live in areas controlled
by non-State armed groups or even terrorists does
not make them combatants or terrorists. It does not
make them targets. It generally makes them victims
18/32

25/01/2022

of a situation that they often did not create. Those are
important points to recall when addressing the situation
of civilians in armed conflicts in urban areas, which
poses specific challenges for humanitarian principles,
especially the principle of distinction.
Finally, let us take this opportunity to renew, as the
Secretary-General reminded us earlier, our commitment
to the prevention of armed conflicts and the protection of
civilians in all conflict zones, including in urban areas.
The destruction of urban infrastructure, including
historical sites and cultural property, and the sight of
abandoned cities and the ruins of once vibrant urban
centres have often become images of contemporary
armed conflicts. They are also an eerie reminder of
the costs of reconstruction. Prevention, diplomacy and
de-escalation must therefore continue to be at the centre
of our joint efforts to promote respect for international
humanitarian law and to protect civilians in all armed
conflict situations, including in urban settings.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Sir, as President of
the Security Council. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his participation. We also thank the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and Ms. Al-Mutawakel for their information
and assessments.
Once again, we are grateful to the Norwegian
delegation for its proposal to address the question
of the procedure for conducting possible combat
operations in urban areas. It is commendable that the
theme of the protection of civilians remains in focus
for the close attention of the Security Council, which
has accumulated an impressive array of resolutions and
statements on the issue.
Minimizing casualties among non-combatants
requires a responsible approach to respecting the norms
of international humanitarian law. The task of adhering
to those norms is of particular importance in situations
of hostilities in densely populated areas.
The specifics of military operations in cities
include the fact that civilian and military objects are
often interspersed within urban spaces. In that context,
when planning operations, the use of the most accurate
and reliable information is of particular importance.
It is unacceptable to conduct strikes using unmanned
aerial vehicles or other means of remote warfare on the
basis of unverified intelligence.
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8953

The American drone strike on 29 August last year
in Kabul against a family with children is a real tragedy
and a good example of what not to do. Unfortunately,
the world has seen quite a lot of similar examples in
recent times.

law are flexible enough to ensure that the precautions
taken in planning military operations correspond
precisely to the context of combat and ensure that
damage be minimized — urban environments are
no exception.

In general, the States members of NATO and other
various coalitions for democracy have huge negative
experience in the framework of the topic under
consideration today.

Loose interpretation of international humanitarian
law, as well as the invention of endless innovative
constructs to fill the gaps in it that supposedly
exist, lead in fact only to the erosion of established
international legal norms. We must not weaken that
authoritative set of rules. Likewise, we cannot allow
international humanitarian law to become a tool for
political manipulation.

Moreover, the bombing of city blocks was often
carried out not with the aim of achieving a military
advantage, but for political intimidation, revenge or
the punishment of undesirable Governments. We all
remember the air strikes in the centre of Belgrade and
other Serbian populated areas in the spring of 1999, and
neither have we forgotten the root causes and methods
of warfare in Iraq and Libya.
Far from being the best examples of military
operations in cities are the actions of the Ukrainian
army against civilians in their own country. Currently,
against the backdrop of an artificially inflated imaginary
threat from Russia, Western countries continue to pump
weapons into Ukraine, post military advisers there and
generally indulge Ukrainian provocations, instead of
forcing Kyiv to comply with the Minsk agreements
endorsed by the Security Council. That means that, in
the eastern part of Ukraine, women, children and the
elderly — against whom the Kyiv authorities have been
waging an undeclared war for years — will continue
to die.
Today terrorist groups participating in armed
conflicts, primarily in Syria and certain African
countries, pose a particular threat to the civilian
population. The warring parties, militants and
terrorists are increasingly using civilian infrastructure
and facilities, including hospitals and schools, for
military purposes. We strongly condemn those actions.
Such irresponsible conduct turns those facilities
into legitimate targets for attack under international
humanitarian law. As a result, the lives of civilians are
endangered. We consider the practice of using civilian
objects for cover or civilians as a human shield to be
extremely shameful and immoral.
On the whole, we believe that the existing legal
framework, such as the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and their Protocols Additional, are sufficient for the
protection of civilians and civilian objects, including in
urban warfare. The norms of international humanitarian

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Norway for organizing this debate,
as well as the Secretary-General, the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Ms. Radhya Al-Mutawakel for their briefings.
Once again, we hear and acknowledge the gravity
of the humanitarian consequences of conflicts,
especially for civilian populations in urban areas.
The responsibility to protect civilians lies, first and
foremost, with those who wage wars, but that does
not exclude our collective responsibility to protect and
reaffirm our commitment to addressing the destructive
consequences of conflict for civilian populations
and guaranteeing the infrastructure necessary for
their survival. Our response in that regard must take
four trajectories.
First, the Security Council must remain fully
engaged to ensure that parties to conflicts comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian and
international human rights law. We must also ensure the
implementation of Council resolutions on the protection
of civilians. In that regard, we encourage all Member
States to endorse the Humanitarian Call to Action,
launched by France and Germany in September 2019.
Secondly, we must ensure better protection for
humanitarian and medical personnel and infrastructure.
Attacks and threats against women and men who
have dedicated themselves to serving others must not
be tolerated. Attacks on infrastructure in violation
of international humanitarian law, including in
cyberspace, must be condemned.
Thirdly, it is essential that the protection of civilians
remain at the heart of peacekeeping operations. The
mandates of those operations must take into account

22-2388719/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/01/2022

an analysis of threats to civilians, including threats of
sexual and gender-based violence and threats of grave
violations against children and their rights. The aim is
to do everything possible to prevent those threats from
becoming a reality.

Wars. Subsequent wars and armed conflicts have
also witnessed such acts under the guise of collateral
damage. With the growth in urbanization, it is inevitable
that the impact of armed conflicts on people living in
cities will increase.

Finally, attacks and violations against civilians and
civilian infrastructure must be strongly condemned and
cannot go unpunished. France condemns the methods
used by certain parties to conflicts, including the
massive and indiscriminate use of improvised explosive
devices, as well as the use of civilians as human shields.
The Council’s action against those phenomena must be
strengthened, as must cooperation with fact-finding
missions, commissions of inquiry and international
criminal justice instruments. We also reiterate our call
for a better use of sanctions against those responsible
for such acts.

We are already witnessing the effect of urban
warfare and terrorist attacks in cities. According to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/423), more than
50 million people were affected by conflict in urban
areas. The use of explosive weapons, particularly those
with wide-area effects, continues to expose civilians
to a high risk of indiscriminate effects. People in
Afghanistan, Libya, Syria and Yemen have witnessed
the devastation caused by urban conflicts.

Beyond those four aims, we must continue to
work together to propose concrete actions. That is
why France has taken the initiative, together with
the European Commission, to organize the first
European Humanitarian Forum, to be held from 21 to
23 March 2022.
We must take action for international peace and
security. We owe it to the civilian populations whom
we are mandated to protect.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, let me
thank the Norwegian delegation for organizing this
open debate on the important theme of “War in cities:
protection of civilians in urban settings”. I would
like to convey the greetings and best wishes of my
Prime Minister to Your Excellency, Mr. President, for
presiding over this important meeting. We thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. I also the President
of International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter
Maurer, and Ms. Radhya Al-Mutawakel for sharing
their insights with us. I also welcome His Excellency
the Vice-President of Ghana and His Excellency the
Foreign Minister of Gabon in our midst.
We have witnessed an unprecedented resurgence
in armed conflicts around the globe, which has been
further complicated by the ongoing coronavirus disease
pandemic. According to United Nations figures, over
half of the world’s population lives in urban centres
today. That is projected to increase to more than two
thirds by 2050. History has shown us that the targeting
of civilians and civilian infrastructure has been used
as a weapon of war, especially during the two World
20/32

There are other countries as well that are still
reeling from military actions carried out in the past,
either without due consideration for protecting civilian
populations or through the deliberate targeting of
civilians amounting to genocide, as was done in the
erstwhile East Pakistan in 1971, now Bangladesh.
The primary responsibility for ensuring the safety
and security of populations, including the maintenance
of essential services, rests with national Governments.
However, over decades of practice and shaped by the
calamitous experience of destructive wars, we now
have a set of international principles and jurisprudence
that places no less responsibility on the aggressor to
ensure that civilians and civilian infrastructure are not
targeted in situations of armed conflict. In the face of
such aggression, especially in urban areas, it is equally
incumbent on States to protect those who put their lives
in the line of fire to protect civilians. In other words, we
also need to protect the protectors.
It is a matter of concern that parties to armed
conflicts to this day seem to consider civilian
populations and civilian infrastructure as legitimate
targets. Such a despicable approach has resulted in the
maiming and killing of thousands and the rendering of
millions homeless. Civilian populations and civilian
infrastructure are also easy targets for terrorist groups
and non-State actors. Vulnerable groups, women,
children and minorities, as well as in-dispensable
civilian infrastructure, hospitals and irreplaceable
cultural heritage, have been the first casualties of
attacks by such actors.
Having suffered the scourge of cross-border
terrorism for decades, India has always been at the
forefront of global counter-terrorism efforts. We have
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

witnessed dastardly terrorist attacks on our cities
targeting innocent civilians.
Any debate on the protection of civilians in urban
areas would be incomplete without taking into account
the carnage wrought by terrorist forces, especially those
backed by State actors. The dastardly terrorist attacks
in Mumbai in 2008, which resulted in the killing of 166
innocent civilians of 15 nationalities, is still a ghastly
reminder to the entire international community. In
recent memory, the Mumbai terror attacks epitomize
the sheer scale and scope of urban warfare that we
had to mount against jihadi terrorists when our police
personnel had to put their lives on the line to secure the
city’s safety.
The international community should therefore
stand firm in its opposition to terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and reject any attempt to
provide any justifications for terrorist acts. We should
remember that the consequences of any relaxation of
our guard on this count would be borne not only by
civilians, but even by the security forces that combat
them in extremely difficult conditions in urban areas.
We have already seen implications of such an approach
in Europe, where lone wolf attacks have resulted in
killings of civilians in urban areas and the terrorizing
of urban populations.
While it is important to deliberate on the devastating
consequences of armed conflict in urban settings, we
should not ignore fundamental issues and international
power politics that contribute to the accentuation
of armed conflicts. Today we need to reaffirm our
commitment to the principles of non-interference in the
internal affairs of States. All conflicts must be resolved
by peaceful means and through political and diplomatic
efforts in line with international law and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Similarly, the debate on the effects of conflicts in
urban settings cannot be delinked from the post-conflict
role. In the post-conflict context, the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of civilian infrastructure and the
restoration of essential services should be given high
priority to facilitate socioeconomic recovery and
peacebuilding. Owing to the significant associated
costs, donor countries and United Nations agencies
must provide financial and technical assistance for
capacity-building.
For its part, India recognizes the importance of
rendering assistance to countries that have suffered

S/PV. 8953

the destruction of urban infrastructure. After the end
of the armed conflict in 2009 in Sri Lanka, India
assisted the Government of Sri Lanka in immediately
restoring some of the most basic and essential civilian
infrastructure. India deployed seven demining teams
on an emergency basis, which enabled internally
displace persons (IDPs) to return to their homes and
livelihoods. India contributed extensively to rebuilding
basic essential infrastructure in northern Sri Lanka,
including 46,000 houses for IDPs. India also invested
more than $3 billion in infrastructure and community
development projects in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, India stands ready to support efforts
towards strengthening the normative architecture
for the protection of civilians and the provision of
humanitarian assistance in armed conflict in urban
areas as part of a broader endeavour. Such a normative
architecture should respect the principles of the
sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity
and unity of countries affected by armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for getting us together today
for this important discussion.
The density of cities means that the suffering
caused by attacks against them is overwhelmingly
borne by civilians — 88 per cent of those killed
and injured in 2020, according to the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians (S/2021/423). Damage caused to essential
infrastructure — including water, sanitation, power
supplies and health care — forces survivors to flee
and aggravates health risks, such as those posed by the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Irreplaceable cultural
heritage may also be threatened. Explosive remnants
of war remain long after the immediate hostilities end,
continuing to kill and injure and deterring civilians
from returning and rebuilding their communities.
The heightened risk of indiscriminate harm to
civilians and civilian objects serves only to emphasize
the importance of strict compliance with international
humanitarian law in such situations. Over a decade ago,
the International Committee of the Red Cross called
for the use of explosive weapons that have wide-area
effects — the weapons predominantly used in urban
warfare — to be avoided, owing to the significant
likelihood of indiscriminate effects.

22-2388721/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Unfortunately, respect for the rules and principles
governing the conduct of hostilities, including the
prohibition of direct attacks against civilians and civilian
objects, is eroding, which poses a particular challenge
to the Security Council. Parties to armed conflicts must
put respect for international humanitarian law at the
heart of their military planning and operations. While
some claim that innovations such as increasing the
precision of munitions or reliance on enhanced data and
surveillance collection and analysis tools can help to
minimize civilian harm, even the most prepared State
actor cannot technologize away the risks that any use
of armed force in urban areas poses to civilians. Strict
compliance with the obligation to ensure necessity,
proportionality and distinction is now more important
than ever.
The Council should backstop such efforts, as it
did in resolution 2573 (2021), on attacks on critical
infrastructure. Going forward, the Council should
better acknowledge the preventive dimension of the
protection-of-civilians agenda, including by ensuring
the credible prospect of accountability for those that
violate international humanitarian law — a responsibility
to which it has largely failed to live up in recent years.
The Council can also see to it that engagement with
non-State armed groups, whose cooperation is often
essential to the protection of civilians in urban areas,
is not criminalized, but rather seen as a means to avert
further suffering, including with respect to those actors
under sanctions designations.
Civilians in urban areas face a particularly
acute vulnerability to attacks carried out through
cyberoperations, for example on the electric grid or
water supply. We would again like to quote the ICRC:
“International
humanitarian
law
limits
cyberoperations during armed conflicts, just as it
limits the use of any other weapon.”
Moreover, irrespective of whether an act is kinetic
or conducted through cybermeans, the law reflected
in the Geneva Conventions and in article 8 of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) applies once international humanitarian law
is triggered.
The Council has the power to refer situations to
the ICC to ensure accountability and further deter
such crimes. Indeed, as discussions on the application
of international law to cyberspace continue in several
forums at the United Nations, we must include the
22/32

25/01/2022

Rome Statute and international criminal law more
generally in such analyses as a matter of prevention.
That is why, together with partners, we created a
council of advisers, which helped to produce an
in-depth report of the application of the Rome Statute
to cyberwarfare. We invite everyone to read the report,
which, with our partners, we will disseminate widely in
the coming weeks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland): I am honoured to
take the floor on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict — a crossregional network of 27 Member States.
We thank Norway for organizing this important
debate. I would also like to thank the briefers, the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the civil-society
representative for their important insights.
According to the Secretary-General’s 2021 report
(S/2021/423), a large majority of casualties in armed
conflicts in urban settings are civilians. Ample
evidence of the devastating impact of war in cities has
been collected, including the negative long-term and
systemic consequences on basic health and education
services. The Group of Friends therefore stresses the
importance of respecting international humanitarian
law and the need to enhance the protection of civilians,
including from the humanitarian impacts that could
arise when explosive weapons are used in populated
areas. The Group of Friends takes note of the ongoing
consultations led by Ireland. I will concentrate my
remarks today on actions that the Security Council and
Member States should take to remedy that tragedy.
First, the strict application of the rules and principles
of international humanitarian law, including those of
distinction and proportionality, as well as precautions,
are required by all parties to armed conflict. The
Group of Friends emphasizes that only full respect for
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and a reduction in hostilities can protect
the civilian population, including in cities. The Group
of Friends echoes its constant calls for ensuring strict
compliance with international humanitarian law in
all circumstances and for the political settlement of
armed conflicts. We welcome the adoption of the
landmark resolution 2573 (2021), on attacks on critical
infrastructure, and emphasize the call to avoid, to the
22-23887

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/01/2022

extent possible, establishing military positions within
or near densely populated areas.
Secondly, the implementation of international
humanitarian law at the national level is key, and it
requires both legal and practical measures in times
of peace and of armed conflict. Military doctrine and
practice should provide the basis for the development
of military competence in protecting civilians during
military operations in cities. That should include
specific training and the development of good practices
in planning and conducting military operations in cities
during armed conflict.
Thirdly, respect for the rules and principles
governing the conduct of hostilities, in particular
the prohibition of direct attacks against civilians and
civilian objects, is eroding, including in situations on the
Council’s agenda. The dissemination of international
humanitarian law to all parties to a conflict is therefore
important to increase compliance and generate better
protection of civilians. Engaging armed groups is also
essential, and contacts for such purposes should not
be criminalized.
Fourthly, war in cities has altered and shrunk
the humanitarian space. Those complex security
environments lead to access restrictions and impede
humanitarian assistance and protection, in particular
for women and children. Therefore, it remains all the
more important for all parties to armed conflicts to
allow and facilitate humanitarian activities. It is equally
essential to ensure the participation and leadership
of women and girls in humanitarian processes and
initiatives. Furthermore, even when parties comply
with international humanitarian law, warfare often
leads to civilian losses and destruction, which must be
addressed. Comprehensive approaches by humanitarian
and development actors, including preventing further
negative impacts of armed conflict, are highly
important, especially in addressing protracted armed
conflict in urban areas.
Allow me to
national capacity.

add

the

following

in

my

“Boredom, shooting, shelling, people being killed,
despair, hunger, misery — that’s my life”. Those were
the words of author Zlata Filipović, who, as a girl,
was trapped in the siege of Sarajevo. Almost 30 years
later, too many girls, boys, women and men still find
themselves in that reality in conflict zones around
the world. We must strive to ensure that cities remain

S/PV. 8953

spaces of life and hope, even during armed conflict.
Strict respect for international humanitarian law is key
to achieving that.
As a candidate for the Security Council, my country
is committed to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the full implementation of international
humanitarian law. We work for human dignity in war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and Norway for
convening this debate on war in cities. I also thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and Ms. Radhya Al-Mutawakel for their briefings
earlier today.
Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the protection
of civilians and that to be delivered by the Head of
Delegation of the European Union. In our national
capacity, we would like to add the following elements.
Tragically, war in cities is not a new phenomenon
either for humanity or for the Council. What is new,
however, is the increasingly devastating impact of
urban warfare. There are several reasons for that.
Today larger shares of populations live in cities than in
earlier times. There are more cities and their areas have
expanded exponentially. Cities host ever more critical
infrastructure and new lethal weapons, and technology
can cause greater havoc and devastation.
As a result, the international community can see
the cruel, disruptive and lethal impact of urban warfare
now more clearly than ever. In his recent reports on
the protection of civilians, the Secretary-General
mentioned some figures. Today almost 90 per cent
of casualties in urban warfare are civilians. Globally,
50 million civilians are estimated to be affected by
urban warfare. Those numbers are simply too high.
A common pattern among conflicts in urban
settings is the systematic violation of international
humanitarian law. Indeed, international humanitarian
law and the principles of necessity, proportionality,
distinction and humanity are flouted precisely in those
circumstances where adherence is most needed. We
join the call on all parties to armed conflict to fully
comply with international humanitarian law under
all circumstances.

22-2388723/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Austria is particularly worried about the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas and are addressing
this issue and this concern with partners. The gruesome
humanitarian impact of this type of warfare manifests
itself not only directly in the form of injury or death
as a result of explosions but also indirectly, as such
explosions disrupt essential infrastructure and the
provision of services. Schools are destroyed, children
stay home in fear of attacks, and this leads to follow-on
effects on education but also on the social development
of children. Austria has long advocated a convincing
reaction by the State community to the call of the
Secretary-General for urgent and determined action.
The 2019 Vienna Conference on Protecting
Civilians in Urban Warfare underscored that call. As
a start, we need a strong political declaration on this
matter, which is currently being negotiated under
Ireland’s leadership, for which we are very grateful.
The Security Council has shown in recent years
that it can respond to urgent protection challenges. Last
year’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2573 (2021), on
the protection of infrastructure that is indispensable to
the survival of civilians, was a welcome step forward.
The resolution also applies to urban warfare, as much of
today’s infrastructure is located in cities and towns. The
Council should urgently address the implementation of
the resolution, taking into account the specific needs of
urban populations.
Finally, in the case of conflicts, we have the issue of
humanitarian aid. Help and assistance can be delivered
to cities only when those delivering aid are granted safe
access. The Council must strive to enable unimpeded
access for humanitarian workers to cities in conflict
areas. That is especially relevant in cases where urban
conflict leads to food insecurity and malnutrition. In
that context, we reiterate our strongest condemnation
of the use of starvation as a method of warfare in armed
conflict, which can amount to a war crime.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): We would like to express
our appreciation to Norway for having convened this
timely open debate on the protection of civilians
in urban settings and to thank all the briefers: the
Secretary-General; Mr. Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross; and the
civil-society briefer. I acknowledge the presence of the
24/32

25/01/2022

Vice-President of Ghana and the Honourable Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
Today we continue to witness an alarming increase
in an armed conflict, including in urban settings around
the globe, in a pressing challenge to international
humanitarian law and to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/423) highlights the perpetuation of
civilian casualties in armed conflict in several parts
of the world. It also demonstrates the devastating
repercussions that the spread of armed conflict has on
civilians’ access to food, water, health care, education
and other essential services, thus aggravating the plight
of civilians as a result of conflict, war and instability.
Unfortunately, people in vulnerable situations
continues to be the most impacted, particularly women
and children. We also observe that in numerous armed
conflicts around the world, medical personnel and
health-care facilities continue to come under attack.
In addition, the coronavirus disease pandemic has had
grave effects on conflict-stricken countries and has
severely affected efforts to end armed conflict.
In that regard, it is imperative that the international
community prioritize ensuring safe access to and the
delivery of health care in situations of armed conflict. In
addition, there is a strong need to protect humanitarian
and medical personnel and peacekeepers, whose work
translates into a significant component of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
Egypt has always been a staunch supporter of
the advancement of the agenda of protecting civilians
within the United Nations system. In 2016 Egypt
joined efforts with other Security Council members
to introduce resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of medical personnel and facilities in armed conflict.
The resolution drew upon the existing legal framework
that binds all parties involved in armed conflicts and
condemned violations of international humanitarian
law, urged Member States to adopt practical measures
to prevent their occurrence and called on States to
ensure unimpeded access to medical care. Those efforts
must be advanced through a strong political message to
uphold the principles of international humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians in armed conflict while
refraining from politicization and selectivity.
Furthermore, it is crucial to note that enhancing the
protection of civilians requires an integrated approach to
addressing this important issue. The role that non-State
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

actors have in armed conflict and in targeting civilians
in a systematic manner has become increasingly evident,
resulting in higher levels of violence and threatening
regional and international stability, particularly given
their role in the proliferation of arms and the increase
in smuggling activities.
Therefore, one of the essential components of
protecting civilians lies in the provision of effective
political solutions aimed at ending crises and ensuring
that they do not reoccur. That can materialize only
through a tackling of the root causes of conflict
through a comprehensive approach that addresses the
need to achieve sustainable development and increase
employment, especially in the light of the presence of
the other threats posed by international terrorists in
already volatile regions.
In addition, noting the primary responsibility of
States to protect civilians, it is key to highlight the
importance of enhancing the role of the relevant State
institutions and the national mechanisms responsible for
addressing conflict in order to pro-mote their stability
and adherence to the relevant norms of international
law. Moreover, peacekeeping operations, to which
Egypt remains a major contributor, play an important
role in the protection of civilians, including through
building capacities and strengthening the institutions
of host States to enable them to take ownership and
ensure the sustainability of efforts in that regard.
We therefore reiterate the need to match
peacekeeping
operations’
protection-of-civilians
mandates with adequate human and material resources.
We urge Member States to meet their commitments
and ensure the provision of sufficient resources to
peacekeeping operations so as to enable them to
fulfil their protection-of-civilians mandate, while
reaffirming the importance of adhering to the principles
of sovereignty, national ownership and the specific
conditions of each host country.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by thanking Norway
for having organized today’s open debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Maurer for their
invaluable insights and the civil-society briefer for
sharing her experience.

S/PV. 8953

Malta aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the European Union and would like to add a few
remarks in its national capacity.
In recent years, we have witnessed fighting taking
place in various towns and cities. From Aleppo, Mosul
and Sana’a, to Marawi, Mogadishu, Donetsk and
Mekelle, civilians continue to bear the brunt of the
consequences of such urban conflict.
Urban warfare kills, injures and displaces civilians.
It destroys critical civilian infrastructure and essential
services. Too of-ten civilians are deprived of food,
water, sanitation, electricity and health care. We also
see that the impacts of urban conflict persist long after
hostilities. Explosive remnants of war and unexploded
ordnance delay reconstruction, prevent the return of
those displaced and prolong the suffering. We also
emphasize the disproportionate impact suffered by
women and children in urban warfare, as well as the
mental dimension, with long-lasting psychological
trauma suffered by survivors.
We reiterate that all parties to conflict must ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law and its
foundational principles. Let us commit to safeguarding
the protections afforded to civilians and civilian objects.
Let us ensure that life-sustaining humanitarian
assistance and relief continues to be delivered
without obstacles.
Reports of war crimes must be effectively
investigated, and perpetrators brought to justice and
held accountable. This is indispensable to ensuring
deterrence and providing justice for victims. The
Security Council has a fundamental role to play in
advancing compliance with international humanitarian
law and ensuring accountability. It is equally important
for the Council to ensure the implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions. In this vein, we highlight
resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of health-care
workers, resolution 2573 (2021) on the protection of
civilian infrastructure, and resolution 2601 (2021) on
the protection of education in conflict, all of which
Malta co-sponsored. Synergies should also be explored
with other international instruments, such as the Safe
Schools Declaration.
To effectively protect civilian populations and
related infrastructure, we need to re-evaluate previous
military practices. This is particularly applicable to
the use of wide-area explosive weapons in densely

22-2388725/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

populated areas. Today the Secretary-General
highlighted once again the devastating toll suffered
by civilians and civilian infrastructure when such
weapons are used. Reassessing the use of such weapons
in populated areas is imperative, given their nature,
likelihood of indiscriminate effects and risk posed to
civilians. We echo his call for parties to conflicts to
avoid using wide-area explosive weapons in populated
areas and express our strong support to the Irish-led
initiative that seeks to adopt a political declaration on
this issue.
In conclusion, the responsibility to promote this
agenda lies with the international community and the
Security Council. Malta will not shirk this responsibility
should we be entrusted to serve as a member of the
Security Council in 2023-2024.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer, and by the
representative of Switzerland, who spoke on behalf of
the Group of Friends for the Protection of Civilians.
We thank Norway for bringing the issue of the
protection of civilians in urban warfare to the attention
of the Security Council. We are also grateful for the
briefings by the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the civil
society representative.
This debate comes at a particularly challenging
time for the protection of civilians, as several conflicts
in urban settings are currently raging throughout
the world. Civilians continue to account for the vast
majority of casualties in armed conflicts and are
widely affected by gross violations of international
humanitarian and human rights laws. The coronavirus
disease pandemic is exacerbating this situation, as
many of the affected civilians are also more exposed to
the effects of the virus.
Wars in cities challenge the basic principles of
international humanitarian law, with devastating
consequences for civilian population and infrastructure,
as well as on cultural heritage. War in urban settings
has also triggered the creation of new warfare tactics,
causing even more disruption and casualties among the
civilian population. In urban warfare, civilians have
few possibilities for finding a secure place to hide or
26/32

25/01/2022

live, while the existence of military objectives within
densely populated urban areas makes it difficult for
the combatants to respect international humanitarian
law provisions. As cities grow and expand, armed
conflicts tend to spill more and more into urban
areas, making cities the battlefields of our time. In
this particularly worrisome context, it is key to make
the protection of civilians a priority in the planning
and conduct of military operations and to find ways
to ensure full respect for international humanitarian
law, particularly in the context of urban warfare, in
line with the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Protocols Additional of 1977.
Respect for international humanitarian law must
be ensured at all times and in all circumstances, which
includes the need to comply with the obligation to
pursue accountability through all available international
justice and ad hoc mechanisms. In this perspective,
Italy reaffirms, in particular, its support for the work
and the independent role of the International Criminal
Court. As stated in resolution 2573 (2021), all parties
to armed conflicts should distinguish between civilian
population and objects, on one hand, and combatants
and military objectives, on the other.
Specific attention should also be paid to the
continuity of such key infrastructure and service
providers as hospitals and schools. In this respect,
Italy would like to reiterate its full support for the Safe
Schools Declaration, stressing the vital importance of
protecting education from attack and to restrict the use
of schools and universities for military purposes. Italy
also firmly condemns the use of explosive weapons
with wide-area effects in populated areas, which causes
unbearable urban destruction and human suffering.
Last, but certainly not least, all efforts must be put
in place to safeguard humanitarian and aid workers,
including in urban settings. It is not only a moral
imperative but also an obligation for the international
community and, specifically, for the Security Council,
to make sure that those who put their lives at risk in
order to save the lives of others are adequately protected.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let me
first thank the Norwegian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this particularly important
and relevant high-level open debate on the protection
of civilians in urban areas. I take this opportunity to
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

thank the Secretary-General and the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter
Maurer, for their comprehensive briefings. I also thank
the representative of civil society.
The regularity with which the Security Council
addresses this important issue is amply justified by a
turbulent international situation that calls on all of us to
promote and ensure respect for the principles and rules
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Morocco reiterates its rejection and
condemnation of acts of aggression and intimidation
perpetrated against civilian populations. The recent
attack by the Houthis on peaceful cities in the United
Arab Emirates unfortunately confirms the relevance,
timeliness and importance of today’s public debate.
Systematic and premeditated attacks against civilians
in cities should be considered terrorist acts, and the
perpetrators should be considered terrorists.
The complexity of urban needs, particularly
the primacy of civilian protection, presents a real
challenge. To minimize collateral damage therefore
requires not only the implementation of the principles
of international humanitarian law, the application of
very precise targeting procedures, the tactical decision
to remove conventional combat from cities, and the
taking of precautions in attacks or against the effects
of attacks, but also, and above all, the analysis and
practical implementation of effective military actions
that are still legitimate.
Moreover natural disasters continue to cause
dramatic consequences for cities and urban populations.
Indeed, human-made crises have severely affected
urban environments, generating urgent humanitarian
needs. The majority of refugees and internally displaced
populations often seek refuge in cities or peri-urban
areas. In addition, the proliferation of armed conflicts
the parties to which are often violent extremist groups
or non-State armed groups or separatist groups makes
it even more difficult to protect civilians from the
effects of conflicts in urban areas which benefit from
the proximity of civilians and critical infrastructure,
thereby transforming modern conflicts into complex,
dynamic, and fragmented phenomena.
I would like to highlight four main points in this
regard. First, we reiterate that the protection of civilians
is primarily the responsibility of States. Nevertheless,
peacekeeping operations, when so mandated, play a
decisive role in this regard, ensuring and strengthening

S/PV. 8953

the political process and deploying to areas where
civilians are potentially at risk. Indeed, the protection
of civilians requires adequate human and financial
resources, whether in terms of the number of Blue
Helmets deployed, their equipment or their training. It
is also necessary to be able to manage the expectations
of the different parties involved, whether it be the local
populations, the authorities of the host country or the
members of the Security Council.
Secondly, humanitarian action in the context of
the protection of civilians must be clearly separated
from political objectives and protected from being
instrumentalized by a party to a conflict. In order to
better protect humanitarian personnel and ensure that
humanitarian aid is delivered to those in need, the
missions mandated with that task must deploy adequate
protective mechanisms so that civilians are not the
targets of armed groups.
Thirdly, all parties, in particular host countries,
must abide by international humanitarian law, honour
their commitments to protect civilians and ensure the
access and delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need.
Increased coordination in the humanitarian sphere
among the States Members of the United Nations, its
agencies and civil society organizations is necessary
in order to prevent the violation of international
humanitarian law and ensure that civilians have safe
and secure access to humanitarian aid. In addition,
humanitarian actors should be allowed to fulfil
their noble mandate in complete safety and without
political interference.
Fourthly, we believe it is desirable to promote
a preventive approach to the protection of civilians,
which can be achieved by building the capacity of
the States concerned with respect to the rule of law,
the assurance of good governance, the entrenchment
of a culture of human rights and the establishment of
early warning mechanisms that can detect emerging
conflicts and prevent their transformation into open
and deadly confrontations.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco shares
the firm conviction of the Secretary-General that the
protection of civilians requires the enforcement of
the provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Morocco takes the
opportunity of today’s debate to pay a heartfelt tribute
to the women and men who protect civilian populations
in conflict zones, often at the risk of their own lives.

22-2388727/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
European Union.
I would like to thank Norway for hosting the debate
today, as well as the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Ms. Radhya Al-Mutawakel for their important remarks.
Unfortunately, with armed conflicts being
increasingly fought in urban areas, we see their impact
on people on a larger and larger scale. In densely
populated areas, civilians account for up to 90 per cent of
casualties and the risk of critical civilian infrastructure
being damaged or destroyed is multiplied.
Today I would like to focus on four central aspects
that Germany considers of particular importance.
First, we call on all parties to armed conflict to
fully comply with international humanitarian law.
We all have to make the protection of civilians an
undisputed priority. Last year, the Security Council
adopted landmark resolution 2573 (2021), which calls
on conflict parties to avoid establishing military
positions in densely populated areas. Member States
must ensure respect for international humanitarian law,
including resolution 2573 (2021), and urge all parties
to armed conflict to do so as well. Those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and for
human rights abuses must be held accountable.
Secondly, with respect to humanitarian assistance,
it is crucial that parties to armed conflicts grant access
to humanitarian assistance for all those in need, in
compliance with international humanitarian law.
Safe, rapid and unimpeded access for medical and
humanitarian personnel must be guaranteed and their
safety must be ensured at all times.
Those are the core demands of the call for action
to strengthen respect for international humanitarian
law and principled humanitarian action, which was
launched by France and Germany in 2019. We call on
all Member States to join its 52 signatories in their
efforts to protect the humanitarian space.
Thirdly, unexploded ordnance poses a major threat
in densely populated areas, especially when displaced
communities start to return after the end of hostilities.
Explosive remnants of war not only endanger lives but
28/32

25/01/2022

also impede the provision of much-needed humanitarian
assistance. Humanitarian mine action is an important
first step to protect civilians in urban settings after
fighting has ceased.
Among other projects funded in the past two
years, Germany funded two projects implemented by
the international non-governmental organization the
HALO Trust to identify and clear hazardous areas in
southern Tripoli.
Fourthly, armed conflict in urban settings and
impeded humanitarian assistance affect genders
differently. Women and girls face particular risks in
their homes or while fleeing. Sexual and gender-based
violence is a particularly heinous crime.
In our effort to combat such violence, Germany
joined the Humanitarian Call to Action on Protection
from Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies and
assumed the role of co-Chair of its States and
Donors Working Group. To address those and further
challenges, we have to ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and girls in all
humanitarian processes and initiatives.
Let me conclude by calling on the United Nations
and its Member States to do more to protect the most
vulnerable in situations of armed conflict and ensure
the protection of civilians. Germany will continue
to insist on the principles and rules of international
humanitarian law, accountability for serious violations,
humanitarian principles and the protection of human
rights in order to help better prevent casualties of
civilians in armed conflict in future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Allow me to thank Norway
for organizing this timely debate. Slovenia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the European Union
and would like to add the following remarks in our
national capacity.
Slovenia wishes to reaffirm its support for the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire during
the coronavirus disease pandemic. We would also like
to thank him for his annual reports on the protection
of civilians, which help guide our action to strengthen
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The humanitarian consequences of urban warfare
are complex and have both immediate and longterm effects, resulting in tragic human losses and
immeasurable development costs. The increased
complexity and resurgence of urban warfare calls for
the increased engagement and continued focus of the
Security Council.
First, I stress that we must ensure the compliance of
urban warfare with international humanitarian law. In
that regard, humanitarian law, education and training
on the basic principles of distinction, proportionality
and precautions in all aspects of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict should be reinforced at the
national, regional and international levels. To that end,
the contributions of Slovenia include the establishment
in 2019 of the Peace Operations Training Centre,
which provides national and international training to
military, police and civilian personnel, including on the
protection of civilians.
Secondly, the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations should better reflect the
realities on the ground regarding the protection of
civilians in urban settings, including by strengthening
the humanitarian, development and peace nexus.
They should also build capabilities for different types
of conflict analysis across the spectrum of urban
operations, as well as for foreseeing the risks to civilians
and vital civilian infrastructure. Planning, training and
resourcing to mitigate risks in order to protect civilians
in urban settings are also essential.
Thirdly, urban warfare takes a devastating toll
on civilian infrastructure and services, such as water,
electricity, sanitation, health and schools. Water too
often becomes a military and strategic tool, which is
unacceptable. We believe that water-related issues
should be of particular relevance to the Council’s
agenda. Slovenia continues to address those issues in
its capacity as Chair of the Group of Friends on Water
and Peace, which is based in Geneva.
Last but not least, Slovenia is a consistent advocate
for the protection of vulnerable groups. We provide
assistance to victims of armed conflict, especially
children. More than 1,600 children from various urban
conflict settings have been rehabilitated in recent years
in our health institutions. A project run by the Slovenian
organization ITF Enhancing Human Security also
works on humanitarian demining and to address the
impact of explosive remnants of war.

S/PV. 8953

Let me conclude by expressing our deepest gratitude
to all the humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers
who continue to risk their lives in order to protect and
improve the safety of civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Iran): I thank Norway for
having organized this important meeting. I also thank
all briefers for their insightful presentations.
Urban warfare has devastating consequences for
civilians and critical infrastructure as we witness
increasing attacks against civilians and civilian objects.
The latest United Nations report on the protection of
civilians (S/2021/423) indicates that armed conflicts
continue to be characterized by high numbers of civilian
deaths, injuries, displaced persons and disappearances,
as well as of damaged and destroyed homes, schools,
hospitals and civilian infrastructure. The protection
of civilians in urban settings requires the adoption of
a comprehensive approach in order to anticipate and
mitigate such risk and suffering. Every effort must be
made to ensure that international humanitarian law is
respected and that civilians and civilian objects are
protected, regardless of the theatre of combat.
To that end, the role of the United Nations in
compelling parties to a conflict to adhere to their
obligations and respect international humanitarian law
is more vital than ever. In addition, States need to do
much more to ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law.
States also need to fulfil their obligations under
international law to prevent conflicts and resolve
them through peaceful means. We share the view that
sustainable political solutions remain the only way
to ensure that civilians are safeguarded from harm
and suffering.
The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Protocols
Additional thereto constitute the corner-stone of the
legal framework for the protection of civilians and
those who do not take part in hostilities.
Furthermore, in its 1996 advisory opinion on
the Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons
(A/51/218, annex), the International Court of Justice
places emphasis on two cardinal principles of
international humanitarian law — the distinction
between combatants and non-combatants and the
prohibition of unnecessary suffering.

22-2388729/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Court stated clearly that States must never make
civilians the object of attacks and consequently must
never use weapons that are incapable of distinguishing
between civilian and military targets. Unnecessary
suffering should also not be caused to combatants and
in that regard States do not have unlimited freedom of
choice in the weapons they use.
Despite the legally binding rules of international
humanitarian law, the serious challenge that
the international community faces today is the
non-compliance of the parties to a conflict to such
rules. Equally important is the inaction of the Security
Council in the face of serious violations of international
humanitarian law.
It is regrettable and alarming that in the Middle
East, the implementation of international humanitarian
law is being seriously violated. The most serious
violation of international humanitarian law is the
decades-long systematic inhumane and apartheid
policies and practices of the Israeli regime in the
occupied Palestinian territory, which include a range of
brutalities such as the deliberate, systematic and massive
killing of civilians, including women and children; the
seizure and demolition of homes; the confiscation of
the land and property of Palestinians; their forceful
eviction; and the blockade of the Gaza Strip.
Similarly, systematic and serious breaches of
international humanitarian law in Yemen have caused
the widespread and deliberate destruction of civilian
infrastructure; targeted killings of civilians, including
women and children; and severe and unlawful
blockades of civilian ports and airports, resulting in the
extreme suffering of civilians, the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation and continued disregard for the
most basic principles of international humanitarian law.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
ensure the protection of civilians, compel the violators
of international humanitarian law to immediately end
such flagrant violations and hold them accountable for
their crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Portugal aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and the statement delivered earlier by
the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the protection of civilians. We thank Nor30/32

25/01/2022

way for organizing this open debate and would like to
add the following points in our national capacity.
The urbanization of warfare is one of the chief
humanitarian and legal challenges of contemporary
armed conflict, which has a disproportionate impact
on persons and objects protected under international
humanitarian law. While that is not a new phenomenon,
it is resurging and likely to endure since two thirds
of the global population are expected to live in cities
by 2050.
Sustainable solutions are required to prevent and
mitigate the human cost of urban warfare and address
the needs of communities affected by war. Networked
multilateralism, in particular the promotion of the
triple nexus of peace and security, development and
humanitarian action, is the way to go as set out in Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982).
Explosive weapons and improvised explosive
devices can prove especially challenging, as can new
technologies with integrated autonomy. The political
declaration on explosive weapons in populated areas
promoted by Ireland is certainly a good example of
encouraging best practices in urban settings, based on
international humanitarian law.
Ultimately, however, improving respect for
international humanitarian law and ensuring that the
protection of civilians is a priority in planning and
conducting military operations will require military
training and doctrine to be adjusted and kept up to date.
Member States have an important role to play.
In our case in that regard, I am glad to announce
that Portugal established the National Committee on
International Humanitarian Law this year to provide an
important tool to support compliance with obligations
under international humanitarian law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I wish to thank Norway
for choosing the pertinent issue of the protection
of civilians in urban settings as the theme for this
open debate. Let me also express my appreciation to
you, Madam President, for your country’s successful
presidency of the Security Council this month.
Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
and the statement delivered by the representative of
22-23887

25/01/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8953

Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
protection of civilians.

sick, especially during the ongoing coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.

Poland is deeply disturbed by the severe
humanitarian consequences of urban warfare — the
direct harm done to civilians, the long-term damage
done to essential infrastructure and the protracted and
repeated urban displacement.

In places like Libya and Ukraine, fighting has
damaged water infrastructure and hindered its
maintenance, leading to cuts and shortages. We hope
that resolution 2573 (2021), which was unanimously
adopted last year, will ensure better protection of civilian
infrastructure and lead to a durable humanitarian pause
to facilitate assistance, including the equitable, safe
and unhindered delivery and distribution of COVID-19
vaccinations in conflict-affected areas.

The most recent report of the Secretary General
(S/2021/423) on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict found that more than 50 million people were
affected by conflict in urban areas, where the use of
explosive weapons continues to expose civilians to a
high risk of indiscriminate effects. That subject is
especially dear and important to us, as we remember
the tragic fate of Warsaw, the capital of Poland, 80 per
cent of which was destroyed in the Second World War,
with enormous human losses.
Therefore, Poland emphasizes the need to ensure
respect for and full compliance with inter-national
humanitarian law and calls for urgent action to
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The promotion of and strengthening of respect for
international law was one of the priorities of our term in
the Security Council for the period from 2018 to 2019.
Today we are continuing our efforts to uphold
international law during our term on the Human Rights
Council. Our priority is to protect groups in vulnerable
situations, in particular civilians in armed conflicts,
persons with disabilities, children and members of
religious minorities.
That vision also guides the Polish chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in 2022. In that respect, Poland plans to pay
special attention to the protection and assistance of
civilians affected by armed conflict.
In that context, we would like to call for continuing
the promotion and full implementation of resolution
2475 (2019) on persons with disabilities in armed
conflict, which was unanimously adopted by the
Security Council at the initiative of Poland and the
United Kingdom.
The use of explosive weapons in urban areas
takes a devastating toll on essential infrastructure and
services. It not only results in damage or the destruction
of water, electricity and sanitation infrastructure
but also causes severe disruption in the health-care
services that are critical to caring for the wounded and

We should also bear in mind that the corrosive
impact of violence on the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals puts millions of
people at risk of being left behind in conflict-affected
urban areas. In view of that, Poland fully supports the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, as the
COVID-19 pandemic remains far from over.
Immediate, full, and uninterrupted humanitarian
access in situations of conflict is an important
prerequisite to effective humanitarian action. We
strongly condemn attacks against humanitarian and
medical workers in armed conflicts and reiterate our
commitment to bringing the perpetrators of these
heinous crimes to justice.
Poland recognizes and appreciates the unique
capacity of multilateral organizations, especially
United Nations agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, to efficiently address the
most pressing and complex humanitarian issues. We
consider the ICRC to be one of the key partners in the
field of providing humanitarian aid in hard-to-reach
areas. Since 2010, Poland has been providing regular
payments to that organization in response to crises in
Syria, eastern Ukraine, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Pakistan
and Haiti. In its humanitarian assistance efforts, Poland
concentrates on areas in which humanitarian crises
overlap with violence and unstable political situations,
such as the Middle East, with a particular focus on the
Syrian civilian population and hosting communities in
Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq; Ukraine; and the Caucasus.
The protection of children in armed conflict
remains a priority for Polish humanitarian assistance
and development cooperation efforts. In order to
implement feasible solutions, Poland cooperates
closely with UNICEF and the United Nations Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter. Since 2019, Poland

22-2388731/32

S/PV.8953

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

has continued to support both offices by making
regular contributions.
In conclusion, let me assure the Security Council
that Poland remains concerned about the humanitarian
harm caused during active hostilities in populated
urban areas. We believe that only full respect for
international humanitarian law and international

32/32

25/01/2022

human rights law and a reduction of violence can
protect civilian populations.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence of the
members of the Security Council, I intend to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

22-23887
