THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING:

14 APRIL

1977

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . _, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

.. . .. .. . . . . . ,, . . . . . . . ,. . . ... . ... . .. ,. .

1

Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the People’s Republic of
Benin established under resolution 404 (1977) (S/ 12294 and Add. 1) . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2005)

Adoption

of the agenda

S/PV.2005

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2005TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr. Simbn Alberta CONSALVI (Venezuela).

14 April 1977, at 3.30 p.m.

bique), Mr. -J. Poisson(Niger), Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. M. Fall (Senegal),Mr. A. H. Hussen(Somalia),
Mr. A. A. Kodjovi (Togo) and Mr. S. aale (United Republic of Tanzania)took theplacesreservedfor themat the
sideaf the CouncilChamber..

Pmmt:

The representatives of the following States:
Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Statesof America and Venezuela.

Benin,

2. The PRESIDENT(interpretationfrom Spanish):1wish
to inform the membersof the Councilthat I havereceiveda
letter from the representativeof Upper Volta in which he
requeststo be allowedto participatein the debateon the
question on the agenda. Consequently,I propose, in
accordancewith pastpractice andwith the consentof the
Council, to invite that representativeto participatein the
debate, without the right to vote, underthe provisionsof
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rulesof procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2005)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council SpecialMissionto the
People’s Republic of Benin establishedunderresolution
404 (1977) (S/l 2294 and Add.1)

3. In view of the limited numberof placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite the representativeof UpperVolta to
take the place reservedfor him at the sideof the Council
chamber,on the usualunderstanding
that he will be invited
to take a placeat the Counciltable wheneverhe wishesto
addressthe Council.

The m&ring wascalled to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
7’he agendawasadopted.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. A. Mensah(Upper
Volta) took the place reservedfor him at the sideof the
Councilchamber.

Complaint by Benin
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin establishedunder resolution
404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add.l)*

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
considerthat, for the sakeof orderly procedure,we should
first hear the membersof the Councilwho wishto speak,as
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): III
well asthe representatives
of the MemberStatesthat have
accordance with the decisionspreviously taken by the
been
invited
to
participate
in the discussions,
and then
Council, I invite the representativesof Algeria, Botswana,
should
proceed
to
vote
on
the
draft
resolution
[S/12322].
Cuba, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Guinea,the Ivory
Coast, the Lao People’sDemocratic Republic,Madagascar, Naturally, any membersof the Councilwho wishto speak
Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,Niger, may do so at the appropriatetime.
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Togo and the United
of UpperVolta. 1
Republic of Tanzania to take the placesreservedfor them 5, The first speakeris the representative
invite him to take a placeat the Counciltable andto make
at the sideof the Council chamber.
hisstatement.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. F: K. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. M. Modisi (Botswana),Mr. L. Gdmez
Anzardo (Cuba}, Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. M.
Ecua Mike (Equatorial Guinea), Mr. L. N’Dong (Gabon),
Mr, M. 6’. Gzmara (Guinea), Mr. S. AkC (IVoV Coast),
Mr. K kourinho (Lao
People’s Democratic Republic),
Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar),Mr. M. 8. Kant& (Mali),
Mr. M. Kane (Mauritania), Mr. T. Puntsagnorov(Mongolia),
Mr. A. Bengelloun (Morocco), Mr. J. C. Lob0 Wozam-

6. Mr. MENSAH (Upper Volta) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President,I thank you for allowingme to
addressthe Security Counciland,sincethis isthe first time
I have spokenhere, I shouldlike first of all to congratulate
you most warmly on your accession
to the presidencyof
the Council, whose work you are guidingwith skill and
competence.
7. At i&e sametime, on behalf of my delegation,1should
like to welcomethe appointmentof Ambassador
Young to
head the Permanent Mission of the United States of
._

* Subsequently issued
BS Official
Records of the Secun’ty Councils
77&y-Second Year, Special Supplement NO. 3 W2294lRev.l).

1

refrain from using language that threatens to jeopardize the
solidarity and unity of our States.

America to the United Nations and to extend to him our
most heartfelt congratulations and wishes for success in the
lofty tasks entrusted to him.

12. Lastly, I call on the members of the Council, as well as
on all those who would take advantage of this affair to
settle personal accounts having nothing to do with the
higher interests of Africa, to act in such a manner that the
present debate can proceed calmly and produce a speedy
condemnation of the act of aggression and of the use of
mercenaries. Africa’s enemies, like the perpetrators of this
tragic act of aggression, must be rejoicing at seeing us
tearing each other apart before the Council.

8. I have asked to speak at this stage in the Council’s
debate on the act of aggression against the People’s
Republic of Benin, not to support any of the statements
made here regarding the identity of the authors of and
accomplices in that act of aggression, but to voice mY
country’s deep anxiety at the deplorable spectacle which
the Africans are providing here in disregard of moderation,
of our proudest traditions and of African wisdom.

13. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Mozamibique, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

9. It is customary to refer to Upper Volta as la ten-e des
hommes, which is another way of saying that my country
attaches the utmost importance to human values, to
concord, moderation and wisdom.

14. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique): First of all, Mr. President,
allow me to congratulate you most warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. My delegation feels very confident that, under
your experienced guidance, the Council will be able to
come up with some concrete guidelines and effective
measures aimed at finding a just and meaningful solution,
not only to the problem of the act of aggression against
Benin, but also for the total elimination of mercenaries
throughout the world.

10. The sorry spectacle we have been witnessing here is
not remotely African, to say the least. I would remind my
brothers of Benin, on the one hand, and my brothers from
Senegal, Morocco, the Ivory Coast, Togo, Guinea and
Gabon, on the other, that, over and above ideological
commitments and temporary conflicts of interest, we are
and remain Africans and that we are doomed to live
together, so solid and indestructible are the ties which
history and geography have woven among us. Indeed,
Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Guinea, the Ivory Coast, Niger,
Benin, Togo and Upper Volta, in the colonial era, were part
of the vast entity called French West Africa, the political,
economic and cultural capital of which was Dakar. In one
way or another, as students, as officials or as members of
parliament, we have all passed through Dakar-we have sat
on the same benches, served in the same services, or in the
Grand Conseil of French West Africa. Neither Ambassador
Boya, whom I met at the University of Fann, nor
Ambassador Ouattara of the Organization of African Unity
nor Ambassador Ake, will contradict me on this. The
complete list would be far too long for this statement. And
still today, we meet in the same regional and subregional
drganizations, side by side, in order, together, to combat
underdevelopment and ensure our survival.

15. I should like to take this opportunity to associate
myself with all the tributes paid to Ambassador Andrew
Young for the competence, skill, dedication, spirit of
understanding, clarity of political vision and all the other
great talents we have come to appreciate in him during the
time he presided over our deliberations last month.
16. Before going into the substance of the issue under
consideration, my delegation would like to express its
satisfaction and appreciation for the valuable and excellent
work performed by the special fact-finding Mission to
Benin. Through the Chairman of the Mission, Ambassador
Jorge Enrique Illueca, my delegation wishes to congratulate
each of the members of the Mission.

11. I have briefly evoked this historical background by
way of telling the members of the Council that anything
that affects one of us cannot leave the rest indifferent, and
that we severely condemn the act of aggression perpetrated
against the brother people of Benin. We are in solidarity
with them; nevertheless, we cannot approve of the discourteous language and the personal attacks to which my
brothers have seen fit to resort. I solemnly appeal to them
in a brotherly fashion to abandon this practice of which the
least that can be said is that it is not African at all. In Africa
as elsewhere, but particularly in Africa, dirty linen is
washed at home. The Security Council is not the proper
place to air our domestic discords in a discourteous and
even malevolent manner. As the old adage puts it: “One is
master of the unuttered word, but the slave of the word
already spoken”. I invite my brothers of Benin, Senegal,
Morocco, Guinea, the Ivory Coast, Togo and Gabon to
observe that maxim and to reconsider and draw inspiration
from our ancient traditions, so as to put an end to these
rhetorical fireworks in which they are indulging, Let them

17. On 16 January this year, the Mozambican people were
astonished to learn that the People’s Republic of Benin had
been the victim of an act of armed aggression perpetrated
by a horde of mercenaries who flew into Cotonou, the
capital city of Benin, in a pirate plane. In solidarity with
the brother people of Benin, and on behalf of the
Mozambican people and FRELIMO [Frente de LibertaW
de Mogambique], President Samora Moises Machel imme
diately sent a message of solidarity to President Kerekou,
strongly denouncing and condemning the criminal and
cowardly aggression of the mercenaries against the people
and Republic of Benin. On that occasion, President Machel,
expressing the sentiments of the Mozambican people with
regard to the aggression, said:
“We vehemently condemn this attempt of the defenders
of imperialism to interfere in the internal affairs, demo
cratic order and sovereignty of the progressive countries
through such acts of subversion and by resorting to armed
aggression without hesitation.”
2

18. Tflere iS 110dOUbt that the Cowardly armed aggression
against 13enin hy tile nlercenaries was the work of international imperialism and reactionary forces in their cuntinuous Cffort to destabilise the progressive Governments in
Africa. In Mozambique, we are very much aware that
internationa1 imperialism and reactionary forces will neve,
be ll~lppy with thoSC peoples and Governments that are
seriously dedicated to :I democratic popular revolution,

23. The whole world knows that a seriouscrime against
humanity was committed when mercenariesin Angola,
during that country’s second war of liberation, were
involved in the summaryexecution of prisonersand the
massacreof thousandsof civilians. For a time, those
international outlaws terrorizcd the people of southern
Sudanand northern Nigeriaby killing thousandsof people
in their efforts to divide and weaken those African
Where
thC WOlkillg
IllaSSeS
CXerciSe
:ictu[ll
control
over
their
countrieswhich internationalimperialismhad conceivedas
own politics1 and socio-economic system. So the violation
beinga possiblethreat to its interests.Noneof the activities
of the SoVerCigllty :md territorial integrity of the People’s
of those mercenariesin these examplesshould ever be
Republic of Benin by mercenaries is an effort on the part of
condonedby a MemberStatethat believesin the principles
the rC:ictioniEy
lim’cs
to turn
back
the
]liStoric$
clock
of
of our Organization. We do not think that any State
froctfom and progress in Africa. On this matter, the leader
Member of the Organization would find ambiguousor
of Benin himself, President KErCkou, speaking to the nation
controversialthe fact that all thoseinternationalsoldiersof
on 16 January, said:
fortune who are fighting on the sideof racist rigimesin
southernAfrica againstpeoplesstrugglingfor their freedom
“‘The illtCrllatioilal inlpCria1ists and their local l;,ckcyS
are involved in international terrorism. Membersof the
110 not forgive us for having put a definite end to their
United Nations should combine their efforts to fight
Criie1 111ystific:ition of our people by telling them clearly
mercenarism,
which meansstoppinginternationalterrorism,
on 3 November 1974 that scientific socialism was the
sincemercenaries
are the bestclassicexampleof terrorism
onI)’ hiStoriC:ll path for us in our African land of Benin,
that we in Mozambique can think of. If the entire
and that Marxism-Leninism was tile only philosophic&l
internationalcommunity is seriouslyconcernedwith eradiguideline for any true revolutionary action.”
cating internationalterrorism,let it giveproperattention to
the problem of the mercenaries.UnlessWCare serious,
19. Mercenary activity is one of the manifestations of
nationscan go on speakingof the variouswaysin which to
international imperialism, through which it desperately
stop internationalterrorismand at the sametime continue
attempts to prevent the struggle of the oppressed peoples.
to allow the recruitment of mercenarieswithin their
That is wlly mCrCenilries, those professional assassins, agents
boundaries.Unlesswe are serious,nations can go on
of imperialism, were brought to Cotonou: to stop the
drawing up beautiful draft resolutionscondemninginterrevolutionary process going on in the People’sRepublicof
national terrorismaseachnation conceivesit, while at the
Benin.
sametime keepingon organizing,financing,equippingand
20. We hail the courage of the militant people of Renin training soldiers of fortune. Unlesswe decide to be
seriously and earnestly dedicated,the horrifying crimes
HIKE their
determination to build their own country in full
committed by international terrorism will go on and
national independcrice and sovereignty.
nationswill continue affording transit facilitiesand transport to mercenariesto enable them to go wherever
21. On the other hand, we deeply regret the lack of
internationalimperialismis interestedin opposing,through
African pride and dignity demonstratedby all thosetraitors
who hctrayed Africa by shamefully playing a leadership armed violence, the processof self-determinationof the
people. This option is ours. So long as we permit the
rol& in the ganleof international imperialismin the criminal
situation to continue, Benin will be just one of many
aggressionagainst Benin through the collaboration and
assistancethat they extended to the terroristswho invaded examplesto come. Paragraph144 of the report of the
Security Council SpecialMissionto the People’sRepublic
Benin on 16 January. At Cotonou, the mercenariesexercised terrorism through the useof force againstthe people of Beninstates:
of
the sovereignPeople’sRepublic of Benin. There is no
“From the mannerin which the operationwasconroom for doubt that at Cotonou the mercenariescornceived and executed,the SpecialMissionbelievesthat a
mittcd a crime againstthe peopleof Benin.
similar operation could be conductedelsewhereagainst
smalldefenceless
countriesfor similarpurposes.”
22. For a long time, international imperialismhasbeen
usingAfrican soil as a stagefor the criminal activitiesof its
24. But as far as my Government is concerned,the
base, imperialist, criminal Elite: the mercenaries.Those struggle of the people of Benin against international
agents of imperialism have tortured, massacred
and shot
imperialismwill be part of ajoint action with the Peopleof
countlessnumbersof the best sonsof Africa. Men, women, Mozambique.We shall never remainindifferent to imPechildren and defencelesspeoplehave beenmurderedin cold
rialists who, through their internationalterrorists,attack
blood by the mercenaries.Whereverthey havestruck, asat
the brother people of Benin or any other part of Africa.
Cotonou, not only has the population beencruelly massa- Whenever that happens,we, too, feei attacked and the
cred, but the economic infrastructure senselessly
Partially
entire African continent feelsattacked. PresidentMachel
to the peopleof Benin
or totally vandalized. To think and to speakof mercenaries stated this clearly in his message
in Africa is to revive the memoriesof the barbaricmassacre whenhe said:
at Stanleyville, the imperialist-inspiredinvasionof Guinea,
“We want the enemiesof liberty and peaceto know
and a number of our African leaderswho wereassassinated
that in Benin, in Mozambique,aswell asifi any other
in a cowardly fashion by the agentsof thoseinterestedin
country, anti-imperialistAfrica will know how to rePlY
maintaining, establishingor restoring fascism,Colonia1ism,
with determinationto all PrOVOCatiOns.”
neo-colonialismand racismon our continent.
3

25. NEJXviO
and the People’s Republic of Mozambique
are an integral part of the world’s anti-imperialist front and,
as such, will always side with other progressive forces of the
world, especially with the African nations and peoples
fighting for justice, freedom and dignity.

somewhat blustering statement, took the liberty of attacking my country.
31. I was very surprised to hear my brother from Benin
state here that the delegation of Gabon had prepared its
statement hastily. Gabon had known since the month of
January 1977 that it might be accused of having been
involved in the events which took place at *Cotonou,
because a bulletin of the embassy of a big Power in central
Africa, circulated a few days after the attack, contained
information to the effect that the aircraft that transported
the so-called mercenaries had come from Gabon. When
called on by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of Gabon, the Ambassador of
that big Power in Libreville was not in a position to say
where that information had come from and simply stated
that it had been provided by friendly countries. However, it
was not till 4 March that Gabon reacted publicly during a
press conference held at the Waldorf Astoria in New York
by Mr. Martin Bongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Co-operation of my country. Bearing in mind what I have
said, can we really speak of haste here?

26. Like the people of the People’s Republic of Benin, we
in Mozambique are engaged in the struggle for the
construction
of a new society free from the colonial
mentality and free from the exploitation of man by his
fellow.man. SO our struggle is the same and we are fighting
on the same front as the people of Benin.
27. International imperialism is and has always been our
enemy. The bombs, guns and ammunition which were used
to massacre our people during the armed struggle for the
liberation of Mozambique were provided to the Portuguese
colonialists by international imperialism. All the weapons,
the bayonets and ammunition used at Sharpeville and at
Soweto were given as presents to the South African racists
by international imperialism. The jet fighters, helicopters,
tanks, bombs and explosives, as well as the mercenaries
themselves that Ian Smith used to violate our frontiers and
spread terror among the people by indiscriminately killing
women, children and old people, and blowing up bridges,
schools and houses, were the gifts of international imperialism-the same international imperialism that organized,
recruited, trained, armed and financed the professional
assassins who stormed and terrorized Cotonou on 16
January this year. In Mozambique we are contident that the
Benin revolution will win, as the People’s cause is just and
the people themselves are invincible and ready for the
revolution.

32. In ‘fact, the whole attitude of my colleague and
brother from Benin leads me to believe that, running short
of arguments to answer the relevant questions which were
asked of him by the delegation of Gabon. and other
delegations-questions
on the fate of the mercenaries who
were captured and of the corpses, questions on the rather
tardy reaction of the “Beninese revolutionary armed
forces”, questions regarding the conditions in which BP
Alpha Oumarou was arrested-, he saw fit merely to resort
to the same calumnies he accuses other delegations of
having uttered. Is this the attitude that we can expect ofa
diplomat who, in a paternalistic tone, allows himself to
teach others a lesson?

28. We call upon the Council to take urgent and effective
measures to end the activities of mercenaries in Africa.
Specific measures must be taken by the Council to
discourage the use of mercenaries in Africa and especially
against those who arm, employ and assist mercenaries in
their operations. A great deal of responsibility in the case of
Benin must lie with them.

33. Once and for all, the delegation of Gabon solemnly
and categorically refutes all the unfounded accusations that
have been levelled against its country and its dynamic
President, accusations which are all the more surprising
since the Republic of Gabon and the People’s Republic of
Benin have heretofore always had excellent relations,
notwithstanding the differences in their political choices.

29. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Gabon, whom I invite
to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

34, As I said in my statement of 6 April, the motto of our
great national political party, the Democratic Party of
Gabon: “Dialogue, Tolerance, Peace”, is the triple principle
that underlies our domestic and foreign policies (2000th
meeting, para. 1401. I should like to reaffirm here that, in
its foreign policy, my country has always applied the
fundamental principles of peaceful coexistence and aonintervention in the internal affairs of other States. In this
context, my country must strongly condemn any foreign
intervention, whatever form it may take, including the use
of international mercenaries. I apologize for repeating this,
but I really felt obliged to do so.

30. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (irzterpretation from French):
Mr. President, I thank you for being so kind as to allow me
to speak once more. Indeed, after reading the “Report on
the imperialist armed aggression committed on Sunday, 16
January 1977 against the People’s Republic of Benin”
(,S/1231Y/Add.l/
drawn up by the Government of Benin
and circulated here on 6 April, my delegation could not
remain silent, especially as we note that that document was
distributed
in violation of the gentlemen’s agreement
reached within the African Group only a few hours before
the meeting of the Security Council. With all deference to
those who tried to give reasons for this distribution, which
smacks somewhat of a conjurer’s trick, like pulling a rabbit
from a hat, the delegation of Gabon feels all the more
impelled to speak once more in this debate, since the
representative of the People’s Republic of Benin, in his

35. Bearing in mind the political philosophy that we have
just briefly defined, there can be no question for Gabon of
harbouring any training base for international mercenaries
as was stated in the national report of Benin.
4

36. As for the Beninese living in Gabon-and there are
thousands of them who are sending funds, officially or
covertly, to line the coffers of our detractors-,
they are
bound to respect the laws which govern foreigners residing
in Gabon, foremost among which is that mandating
non-interference in the internal affairs of the host country
and a total ban on involvement in politics and on the
undertaking of subversive activities from Gabonese territory,
with the aim of overthrowing the regimes in power in
their respective countries of origin.

nistic error nevertheless. In fact, in the documents [see
S/12294fAdd.l,
annex VI, document No. 401 they used
the acronym V.P.G., that is, “vice-presidence du gouvernemen?, which no longer existed at the date we find on this
document but had by then been replaced by the word
or by the acronym “PM”, that is, “Premier
“Primature”
Ministre”. As to the so-called signature of the head of State
of Gabon, it is an imperfect imitation and we are obliged to
conclude that it is purely and simply a fake.
41. This clarification ipso facto answers
raised by one representative on 12 April:

37. As I have already said, Gabon has good relations with
all African countries, both at the regional and continental
levels. That is why my country cannot find words to
express its surprise at noting that, in the national report of
Benin, a meeting that took place between the Presidents of
Togo and Gabon has become the subject of a gross
accusation concerning a plot directed against Benin. I
should like to inform the Security Council that His
Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo did not meet President
Eyadema on 2 January 1977. But even if he had, what is
more normal than the meeting of two heads of State who
have fraternal relations? I am obliged to ask myself
whether, during his visit to Gabon in July 197%and here I
am in a way following the rather far-fetched logic of our
Beninese brothers-President
Kerekou made that visit to
President Bongo to conspire against some other Govemment.

the question

“Who can prove that the Government of Benin forged a
single one among the many documents contained in the
file? One would have to prove false only one document
to demolish the whole lot.” [2002nd
meeting,
para. 11 O./
I thank him for saying that. To follow the logic of the
author of the words I have just quoted, my delegation has
the right to consider that ah the proof submitted in the
report is now demolished.
42. I would reiterate here that neither directly nor
indirectly has my country been involved in this sordid,
lamentable aggression. Benin should look elsewhere for
those who were really responsible for the aggression of
which that country was allegedly the victim on 16 January
1977.

38. On reflection, we see that our Beninese brothers show
a certain consistency since President KBrCkou took advantage of his visit to Gabon, notwithstanding
all the elementary rules of civil behaviour and courtesy in international
relations, to direct, to put it mildly, seditious and defame
tory words to his illustrious hosts when addressing the
people of Port-Gent& the economic capital of Gabon. What
did the head of the Beninese revolution wish to achieve in
doing this?

43. The PRESIDENT {interpret@io,z from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Equatorial Guinea. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
a statement.
44. Mr. ECUA MIKO (Equatorial Guinea) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, allow my delegation to join
those which have congratulated you on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. The firm ideals of social, economic and cultural
progress in Venezuela, a country you represent with so
much dignity in this international Organization, combined
with your vast political and diplomatic experience, which
has already been demonstrated, persuade us that the
present debate will conclude with just decisions reiterating
the imperative need to implement and apply the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations.

39, We can only describe this attitude as purely and
simply one of gross interference in the internal affairs of
the Republic of Gabon. But the representative of the
People’s Republic of Benin may rest assured that Gabon
will never imitate his behaviour, Gabon has no time to
waste in becoming involved in the affairs of other States.
Gabon knows that you do not feed a people with
blandishments, even when your words are revolutionary.
Our sole concern is to further all aspects of the development of our country for the well-being of our people.
40. To come to the documents presented in the report of
the Security Council Special Mission and the annexes
thereto, and essentially to answer the question posed
yesterday [2003rd meeting] by the representative of Benin
relating to the alleged decision to recruit Gilbert Bourgeaud, alias Maurin, I wish solemnly to state that my
country knows nothing of that mysterious person. Surely
this is a figment of the sick and overactive imagination of
our Beninese brothers. As to the decision itself, I might
state that, if the authors of that forgery thought they had
imitated the official documents of my country very
well-and that is very easy to do, because we have all been
influenced by France and we all prepare documents in more
or less the same way-, they did commit a grave anachro

45. Through you, I should like to express to the members
of the Council our profound gratitude for allowing us to
participate in the debate on the present agenda item. Apart
from the fact that it is our duty to express our militant
solidarity with and support for the brother people of Benin,
recently the target of the evil designs of colonialism,
neo-colonialism and imperialism, the report of the Security
Council Special Mission makes us feel obliged to participate
in this debate. In this connexion, I shall quote paragraph
142 of the report:
“Inasmuch as the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of the State of Benin were violated by this
invading force which came from outside the territory of
5

other manner inconsistent
United Nations.”

that country, there can be no doubt that the State of
Benin was subjected to aggression.”

with

the Purposes of the

Accordingly, the members of the Council will be able to
decide that the use of that diabolical instrument is a threat
to international peace and security.

Paragraph 144 emphasizes that
“From the manner in which the operation was conceived and executed, the Special Mission believes a similar
operation could be conducted elsewhere against small
defenceless countries for similar purposes.”

49. The reasons for our demands have been eloquently
stated by several preceding speakers, particularly by my
brother of Algeria, Mr. Bouayad-Agha who, in his statement
on 7 April, said:

Accordingly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea cannot fail
to condemn that recent dastardly manifestation of international imperialism and the puppets in its pay of which
the people of Benin was victim on 16 January 1977.

“The members of the Security Council will understand
that our apprehension and that of all African countries is
quite justified, since this is not a purely theoretical, but a
real threat to our independence and sovereignty. The
planning of the plot, as revealed by the documents
collected by the Special Mission, clearly demonstrates
that a scheme was drawn up that could easily be applied
to each of our countries. We have every reason for
concern at the training of what would now appear to be a
body of professionals in subversion, prepared to place
themselves at the service of any Government not too
much bothered by considerations of international morality and prepared to pay large sums to get rid of
political enemies without assuming direct responsibility
for the act.” /200lst meeting, para. 144.1

46. For more than one reason my delegation wishes to
congratulate the Special Mission, which consisted of Ambassador Illueca of Panama, Ambassador Kikhia of Libya
and Mr. Mulye of India, for the excellent work it did with
complete responsibility, objectivity and impartiality, thus
satisfactorily complying with the instructions given to it by
the Security Council. The report submitted not only
convinces my delegation that the doubts and assumptions
which were current have been dispelled-even if, as a result
of short-sightedness, they are in fact still being circulated in
the corridors of this great building-but
also once again
shows that the Western press, far from serving as a means of
communication and education of the masses with regard to
what is happening in the world today, is nothing more than
an instrument
at the service of neo-colonialism, imperialism, racism and other forces of evil, since, as I said, even
at this time doubt is still being spread as to whether the
People’s Republic df Benin was actually the victim of
armed aggression from outside.

50. From the statements we have heard here we may
conclude that armed aggression and the use of mercenaries
have not had a single advocate, and are therefore to be
condemned. As my brother, Ambassador Boya of Benin,
said in his statement on 6 April:
‘(These different reports confirm that those responsible
for the abominable crime of 16 January 1977 did not
come from Mars-they
are not imaginary creatures.”
[200&h meeting, para. 58.1

47. The doubts and various assumptions which were
expressed shortly after the events of 16 January 1977
warranted the adoption of Security Council resolution
404 (1977), which provided for the dispatch of a special
mission to Benin. The report which it submitted and which
is now being considered by the Council once again confirms
the existence and use of another imperialist instrument
which has become fashionable, namely, mercenaries. This is
nothing other than the application of the law of the jungle
in international relations in the present-day world.

51. We therelore believe that the people and the Government of the People’s Republic of Benin deserve the support
and assistance of the international community in order to
repair and recover in part what has been damaged and lost
as a result of the cowardly armed aggression of 16 January
1977.
52. As a final observation, my delegation also believes
that, for humanitarian reasons, the international community should respond to their appeal, in solidarity with the
people and the Government of Benin, because, while
mercenaries in present conditions are, as I said, an
instrument for the application of the law of the jungle and
hence do not represent any danger to the strong, the latter
must nevertheless admit that “whoever sows the wind will
reap the whirlwind”.

48. There is a saying in my country, which is often
invoked: “If YOU aim too cautiously, you will only hit the
animal’s tail”. That is why my delegation is convinced that
the members of the Council, in response to the imperatives
of the Charter of the United Nations and in order to avoid
“aiming too cautiously”, will not hesitate energetically to
condemn the wanton armed aggression which claimed
human lives and caused considerable material damage in the
People’s Republic of Benin on the morning of 16 January
1977. The members of the Council will not allow an
opportunity
once more afforded them to go by without
again reaffirming that the use of mercenaries is contrary to
the Charter and specifically to Article 2, paragraph 4, which
states that:

53. With regard to the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, a
country which, despite its small size, has not been neglected
by the imperialists, in their hatching of evil schemes in a
desperate attempt to get it back, His Excellency Comrade
Macias Nguema Biyogo, President for Life of the Republic,
has on many occasions reiterated that, just as our country
prefers poverty in liberty to riches soiled by the bioodstained hands of the imperialists and imported by puppets

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any state, or in any
6

directed by remote control, so do we prefer and also accept
to be the target of these evil and cowardly neo-colonialist
and imperialist acts of aggression--which have just caused
the 10s~ of lives in the People’s Republic of Benin-rather
than allowing ourselves and our country to become a
springboard for the destabilization of other countries and
the creation of strife in them, since such co-operation
makes possible the installation of lackeys directed by
remote control from the great imperk&t
capit&
and
would mean returning our wealthy continent, which is
gradually attaining complete liberation, to the same oppressive masters which humiliated it for centuries.

Prerogatives and mandate. The speed and effectiveness with
which its eminent members discharged their duties are
Praiseworthy. We are very grateful to them.
59. As regards the facts, the Special Mission’s inquiry has
rigorously established that armed aggression was committed
against Cotonou, capital of the People’s Republic of Benin.
by a commando of mercenaries on the morning of 16
January 1977. Paragraph 141 of the report states:
“On the basis of the testimony received and evidence
examined by it, the Special Mission is in a position to
conclude that the People’s Republic of Benin was thus
subjected to an armed attack by the armed force which
arrived at Cotonou airport on the morning of 16 January
1977. The primary objective of the invading force was the
overthrow of the present Governmenl of Benin.”

54. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Mali. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.,
statement.
5.5. Mr. KANTE (Mali) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, may I add the voice of my delegation to that
of preceding delegations in congratulating you very warmly
and in a most brotherly manner upon your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. You are a man of
conviction who has braved the deprivations of prison and
the vicissitudes of a clandestine existence in exile, and it is
thercfore most fitting that you should be guiding the work
of the Council precisely when it is seized of grave questions
such as the one we are considering today. Through you in
your dual capacity as parliamentarian and Ambassador,
your country,
Venezuela, and its people, which you
represent with so much dignity, are being honoured. I
should like, on this happy occasion, to express the
appreciation of my delegation for your personal, active part
in strengthening relations between your country and mine.
Your lang and rich experience as an intransigent militant in
the ranks of the progressive forces in Latin America, your
knowledge
of men and affairs and the role which your
native Venezuela plays in the forefront of the bitter
struggle which the third world wages for the advent of a
new international
economic order are, in our opinion,
certain guarantees for the success of the Council’s work
during this month of April.

Paragraph 142 of the report is even more categorical:
“Inasmuch as the territorial integrity, independence
and sovereignty of the State of Benin were violated by
this invading force which came from outside the territory
of that country, there can be no doubt that the State of
Benin was subjected to aggression.”
Paragraph 143 identifies the invaders as follows:
“It is also clear that a majority of the attacking force,
not nationals of Benin, were participating in this action
for pecuniary motives and were, therefore, mercenaries.”
Paragraph 136 is even more specific:
“On Sunday, 16 January 1977, at about 7s.m. (local
time), a four-engine aircraft with no identification marks
made an unauthorized landing at the Cotonou international airport. From this aircraft disembarked a group
of about 100 persons wearing military uniforms. A large
majority of this group were persons belonging to the
white race. The others were black persons. They carried a
large quantity of various categories of arms and ammunition with them. . .“.

56. I wish next, through you, to thank the members of the
Security
Council fbr having allowed my delegation to
participate in this important debate.

To this must be added that the bodies of the two
mercenaries who were killed in the fight-one European and
one African-were
seen by the Special Mission at the
morgue at Cotonou, and that later the members interrogated the mercenary who was captured. AI1 this constitutes irrefutable evidence.

57. Before dealing with the serious question that concerns
us today, that is, the complaint by the People’s Republic of
Benin about the act of armed aggression of which it was a
victim on the morning of 16 January last and which was
committed
by a commando of mercenaries, I wish to
congratulate the eminent members of the Special Mission,
established by the Security Council under its resolution
404 (1977), and to comtiend them for their objectivity,
integrity and devoti0.n.

60. The second fact which is highlighted in the report is
the moral and material damage caused by that aggression
against
the People’s Republic of Benin. Paragraph 139
states:
“The casualties on the Benin side were six dead and 51
wounded. In the fighting, a number of foreigners of
different nationalities residing in Benin were also
wounded.”

58. me

voluminous report and its annexes, published
respectively
in documents S/12294 and Add.l,bearwitness
to the seriousness, probity and dedication of the Chairman,
Ambassador
nlueca of Panama, Ambassador Kifiia of
Libya and Mr. Mulye of India in the discharge of their lofty
mission. They deserve our warm thanks, particularly since
we how
tJlat the Special Mission was limited in its

61. As regards
the foreigners who were wounded in the
course of the aggression, there were two European assistants and a international expert who had to be evacuated
7

-----

to their countries of origin for medical attention. That is
yet another tragic aspect of the affair that has not even
been mentioned by the great international press. It was not
even accorded the interest usually given by the same press
t0
miSCdhkeoUs
news items-and for good reason!
62. The material
paragraph 140:

damage is described

as follows

place; they have all condemned that aggressionand expressedsympathy for the People’sRepublic of Benin. The
disagreementsconcerning some of the documentation or
evidence in the matter in no way change the relevant
responsiblepositions that have beentaken, positionswhich
are all to the honour of our Organization. Furthermore,
controversy cannot be avoided in the consideration of so
serious
a question as the aggressionagainst,Cotonou,
masterfully prepared by the agents of subversion and
destabilisation. That is why the Special Mission, in its
wisdom, has made it clear, in paragraph145 of its report,
that in regardto someof the evidence:

in

“in the course of the fighting, during which the
attacking force used such weapons as machine-guns,
mortars and bazookas, substantial damage was inflicted
on a number of public and private buildings, including the
premises of some diplomatic missions in Cotonou and
even a hospital.”

‘L. * . the terms of its mandate, as well asthe time at its
disposal for its implementation, did not permit it to
investigate further and verify the testimony of the
prisoner pertaining to thesematters. The sameis true of
the suggestiveevidencecontainedin the documentation.”

63, The conclusions of the report of the Special Mission
on those two fundamental aspects of the case are confirmed
by the statements and testimony of personalities whose
honour cannot be questioned. They are the ambassadors
from Europe, Asia and Africa accredited to the People’s
Republic of Benin who were witness at Cotonou to the
tragic eventsoft
January 1977.

67. We owe it to the truth, however, to recognize that
although the SpecialMission did not have the jurisdictional
competence, or the powers, or the freedom to act, or the
meansavailableto anexaminingjudge in regularcourts-the
Security Council does not yet, unfortunately, have the
powers of a world government-the membersof the Special
Mission did everything humanly possible to discharge
honestly and correctly the very delicate and complex task
entrusted to them, that is, to make known t!ie truth and
the whole truth about this seriousand sombrematter.

64. The missionof the Organization of African Unity also
arrived at the sameconclusionsafter its on-the-spotinquiry.
That led the OAU Council of Ministers, at its twenty-eighth
ordinary session held at Lome, Togo, from 21 to 28
February 1977, to adopt a specialresolution by which it

68. It goes without saying that the Mission, with its
litnited mandate and its limited powers,iould only suggest,
as it has done, that investigations should continue on
certain pieces of evidence in order that answersmight be
found to the rather numerous questions that are still
outstanding, questions which present themselvesin any
preliminary inquiry of this nature. I am sure it will be
agreedthat theseaspectsof the matter could not be cleared
up in a preliminary investigation, even if it wereconducted
with the diligence of an examiningjudge with his army of
assistants within the framework of a regular judicial
procedure. It should be noted here that the judicial
investigation of an ordinary felony or misdemeanortakes
one year, two years, or even five years.We mustremember
that the Mission had only 30 days,including travel time, to
carry out its inquiry and submit its report.

“St~o/2g& rondenzl?sthe act of armedaggressjonagainst
the People’s Republic of Benin and congratulates the
‘heroic brotherly people of Benin on their courageous
routing of the aggression.”
That same resolution, in its paragraph4, commits the
delegationsof African States at the United Nations “to act
in solidarity with Benin during the debate of the caseby
the United Nations Security Council”.
65. The grave matter that concerns us today is therefore
no stageplay, fairy talc, fable or other fiction. It is armed
aggressionperpetrated by a commando of mercenariesin
the pay of the forces of evil against the independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the People’sRepublic of Benin, a State Member of our Organization. That has
been proved by the material evidence in the case.And, 8~
the Security Council Special Mission affirms in paragraph
144 of its report:

69. The offer of co-operation made on 7 April to the
Government of the People’sRepublic of Beninby the head
of the French delegation to the Security Council /2001st
meeting], on behalf of his Government, to seek out and
punish personsimplicated in the aggressionof 16 January
must be considered, in this connexion, as a positive
reaction, an adequate responseto the suggestionsof the
SpecialMission.

“From the manner in which the operation was conceived and cxccuted, the SpecialMission believesa similar
operation could be conducted elsewhereagainst small
defencelesscountries for similar purposes.”
That is why the armed aggression perpelrated on 16
January against the People’sRepublic of Benin first and
foremost concerns the community of nations, that is, the
United Nations, which guaranteespeaceand security in the
world.

70. Indeed, the subject of the aggression
againstCotonou
must not be closedat this meeting of the Security Council,
because,for the first time, we have documentation which
enables us to reach the mercenaries in their dens of
recruitment and their hide-outs. The investigationsshould
be continued on that line. Thus, it is for eachState Member
of our Organization to co-operate sincerely and actively
with the Council in order that all possiblelight may be shed

66. 111that respect, my delegationis happy to note that all
the delegations that have already taken part in the
discussionhave recognized that the aggressiondid take
8

-photographs of and interviews with these villains as they
embark at airfields and railway stations; on the television
screen we have seen large pictures of the new recruits being
trained in parks. The recruiting sergeants, identified and
well known, freely place their offers in the newspapers of
those countries.

on this serious matter. Above all, let us not wait for the
mercenaries who survived the aggression against .Cotonou to
enlighten us on the tragic events. And such a possibility
should not be ruled out a priori, because many examples of
it can be found in modern history.
71. Everyone must undertake, as France has done, to
co-operate in ensuring that the truth will out, so that we
may know all the details of the armed aggression perpetrated on 16 January 1977 against the city of Cotonou. In
that way, and only in that way, will the Security Council be
able, in all objectivity and in a completely responsible
manner, to take adequate and effective measures to wipe
out this phenomenon of the international use of mercenaries which has constituted a serious threat to the security of
African States since 1960.

77. That unwonted publicity obviously gives a certain
semblance of authenticity to these adventurers whose
criminal expeditions are often presented as the exploits of
heroes and knights by some of the mass media. As proof, I
would cite the following statement by an important
dignitary of a large country, who was interviewed in 1976
while civil war was ravaging Angola: “While I was stationed
in Africa, many mercenaries became my friends”. He
added: “The cause for which one fights is more important
than knowing whether a mercenary is persona non grata”.

72. At the outset, the villains were recruited among the
survivors of the wars of colonial reconquest. Trained like
wild animals for the profession of killer, to serve the needs
of total war in far-off regions, they were unable to fit into
the social structure after their return to their countries.
They therefore became social outcasts, abnormal persons-to speak frankly, misfits who very quickly turned
into hired killers. Disconsolate over the complete defeat
they suffered overseas, they are wandering all over Europe,
Southern Rhodesia and South Africa in search of armed
adventures against the young African States to appease
their hatred against the peoples of the former colonial
territories, Thus, they were found in the Congo, in Biafra,
in Guinea, in the Sudan, in Southern Rhodesia, in Namibia,
and so on and so forth. Obsessed by their bitterness, they
have learned no lesson from their defeat on those fronts,
and that is why we found them in the People’s Republic of
Benin on 16 January 1977 and, more precisely, at Cotonou,
the capital.

78. Furthermore,
“Colonel Steiner”-a
veteran, so to
speak, of the Congo and the Fourth Biafran Commando
Division, of sinister fame-sentenced in August 1971 to 20
years in prison in the Sudan for having committed a crime
against the Sudanese people and the unity of the Sudan,
and pardoned by President El-Nemeiri on 28 March 1974,
had the audacity to sue the Sudanese Government before
the International Court of Justice at The Nague for
damages, asking for about 23 million francs “for having
been illegally sentenced” in 197 1 by those authorities to 20
years in prison.
79. It should be noted here that “Colonel Steiner” had
been arrested in 1971 in Uganda, to where he had retired
after the defeat of his column in southern Sudan by the
Sudanese governmental forces. He had enrolled in the ranks
of the dissidents, at whose side he had fought from 1969 to
1971. He had subsequently been extradited to the Sudan,
where he had been tried and sentenced, in accordance with
normal procedure, to 20 years in prison.

73. The market composed of remnants of the wars of
colonial reconquest is shrinking as the mercenaries of this
generation grow older, and therefore the imperialist and
neo-colonialist circles are now turning more and more to
the dregs of European society, made up of the unemployed
and the super-charged people of the extreme right, to
recruit their soldiers of fortune.

80. The summary execution in Angola at the end of 1975
by the well-known “Colonel Callan”, head mercenary, of
some 15 of his comrades was one of the tragic episodes in
the history of the use of mercenaries; we should reflect on
that too. We ought not to be beguiled by the shadow and
miss the substance.

74, The use of mercenaries, which we with reason regarded as a passing phenomenon because of the inevitable
drying up of the traditional sources of recruitment, is
unfortunately becoming established as a habit in our
society. And that is the danger-the great danger-to world
peace and security.

81. On the basis of the evidence before us, a number of
measures can already be envisaged at this stage.
82. The Security Council must take this opportunity to
complement and strengthen the resolutions adopted against
the use of mercenaries, notably resolution 239 (1967)
which:

75. The United Nations cannot remain indifferent to the
development and strengthening of this disturbing phenomenon. The armed aggression of 16 January 1977 against
the People’s Republic of Benin is further proof of the
inadequacy and ineffectiveness of the measures SO far
contemplated by the Organization to wipe out the use of
mercenaries.

“Condemns any State which persists in permitting or
tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations”.

76. In recent years, we have seen Governments demonstrating a disconcerting passivity about the recruitment and
induction of mercenaries on their territory, while at the
same time the sensational press has been publishing

83. In its programme of work, the Organization must give
high priority to the elaboration of an international convention on the use of mercenaries.
9

.-

84.. The armed aggressionof 16 January against the

my country and my person. I reiterate that I am very
pleasedto have contributed to a closerrelationshipbetween
our two countries.

People’s Republic of Benin, the use of mercenariesand
interference in the internal affairs of States must be firmly
condemned. Furthermore, the Council must consider specific measuresof compensationfor the damagesuffered by
the People’s Republic of Benin as a result of this criminal
aggression.

92. The next speakeris the representativeof Mongolia,
whom I invite to take a placeat the Council table and to
makehis statement.

85. No Member Slate ought to be able to take sbeltcr any
longer behind the shortcomingsof its national legislationto
justify its passivity in the face of the mounting use of
mercenaries,who may be comparedwith the criminal gangs
that are condemnedin the penalcodesof all countries.

93. Mr. PUNTSAGNOROV (Mongolia) (interpretation
Russian): Sir, first of all I should like to extend
heartfelt thanks to you and the membersof the Security
Council for the opportunity you havegiven me to speakon
this item on the agenda.It givesme great pleasure to see
you, the representative of Venezuela, a country whose
generosity and hospitality I always recall very warmly,
occupying the lofty and responsible
post of President of the
Council for the current month.

jfom

86. Nor can one any longer invoke democratic traditions
in regard to individual freedoms to explain away the
inaction of Governments in the face of the organization in
their territories of destabilization operations againstother
States. Indeed, law itself being a relative concept, individual
human rights cannot prevail over those of’ the community,
iIIlCl those of the community itself cannot prevail over those
of society at large. Harmony, which is the basis of
international peace and security, of necessity implies
compatibility between those various rights-that is to say,
between the rights of individuals and groups,both within
States and at the international level.

94. I should also like to note the great tact and skill of
Ambassador Young, who conducted the work of the
Council last month.
95. As one of the lastspeakers,I might recall a Mongolian
saying: “The last camelof the caravancarries the heaviest
load”. But I must say at the outset that I wiIl not tax the
Council with a long statement.

87. Those arc the conclusions which my delegation has
seen fit to draw from this debate. Hence, what appearsto
be :I controversy amongAfrican countries doesnot concern
the substance of the issue,but only certain evidence. In
fact, in our statementswe all agreein our reaffirmation of
the common destiny of the African States, in our firm
condemnation of the act of aggressionperpetrated on 16
January 1977 against the People’sRepublic of Bellin by a
commando group of mercenaries,in our active solidarity
with the brother people of Benin, in our condemnation of
the use of mercenariesand of interference in the internal
affairs of States, and in our concern, as membersof the
African continent, for the collective and individual security
of stntes.

96. My delegationdecidedto makea statement becauseit
believesthat the substanceof the questionbeing examined
by the Council concernsone of the most dangerous types
of international crime, which is to say, an attack on the
sovereignty and independenceof a State. Indeed, it is not
to be ruled out at all, as has been stressedby previous
speakers,that an act of aggression
similarto that which was
perpetrated against Benin could be repeated in another
place, in another country or on another continent. Therefore, the scope of the discussionof this question in the
Council, as we have said,,isnot restricted merely to the
confines of the African continent, but hasa wider and more
seriousinternational significance.

88. The prophets of doom who thought they had detected
in this controversy a fundamental divergence among African States on the substanceof the problem-a divergence
which would obviously confirm their evil forecastsand the
tendentious split which they want to cause on our
continent---will surely be repaid in kind. They do not
understand that Africa hasalwayssilencedand overcome its
internal quarrels so as to unite and, with equal ardour, face
the dangerfrom outside.

97. The incontrovertible facts show that the economic
capita1of Benin, Cotonou, wasthe object of a direct act of
aggressioninspired from abroad, accomplished with the
participation of foreign mercenariesequipped with modem
weapons. The aim of the attack, aswasconfirmed by the
investigation of the Security Council Special Mission, was
to overthrow the Government of Benin which, as is well
known, is pursuing an independent and revoiutionary
course for the developmentof its country. It is quite
obvious that the aggressionagainst Benin was carefully
prepared and orchestratedby elementswhich, through the
use of certain renegadesfrom bankrupt groups of 10~~1
reactionaries as their mercenary shock-troops, cunningly
mounted a surpriseattack on Cotonou.

89. It is certainly ignorance of this cardinal virtue of
Africans which explains the obstinacy of the imperialist and
reactionary forces and of their hordes of mercenariesin
attempting to destabilise and reconquer our States. Their
criminal assaults will always be shattered against the
unassailableramparts of Africa.

98. The armed incursioninto Benineseterritory claimed
human lives and causedgreat material damage. It must be
viewed as an attack on the very basisof contemporary
international relations and thus as a defiance of the
purposes of the United Nations, which are based on the
principles of respect for national independenceand sovereignty, non-interferencein the internal affairs bf Statesand

90. That is the second lessonmy delegation draws from
this debate.
91. The PRESIDENT (irzterpretation
from Spnnish):
1
thank the representative of Mali for his kind referencesto
10

the non-use of force against the tcrritotial
States.
99. There
Be&

js

is

110

CormeCted,

doubt

thi.lt
to

~1 CWtZliIl

the

X3
eSteIlt,

integrity of

106. The Mon~~olian delegation would like to express its
fraternal solidarity with the people and Government of
Benin in their valiant struggle to strengthen their independence and economic and social progress. We wish them all
success and prosperity.

of aggression against
with

the

;ltteIll~ltS

of imperialism to maintain Or prolong the existence of the
last vestiges of colonialism and racism WI the African
continent. Our delegation considers the attack on Benin to
be a link in the chain formed by the plot of imperialist
forces against the African ~COP~CS who have chosen the
path of progressive socio-euonomil tra~~sfonnatio~i, and an
attempt to weaken the unity of African States in their
struggle against imperialism and racism.
100. Externally, the aggression against Benin perhaps
recalls, to a certain extent, the activities of the heyday of
colonialism when the pirates of expeditionary units of
colonizers sealed the fate of entire peoples. But now times
have changed and, as we say, other songs are being sung.
Confronted with the firm fighting spirit of the people of
Benin, the aggressors, to save their own skins, fled like
cowards, leaving absolutely everything behind.
101, International life shows that peoples who are fighting
for the right cause--and, of course, our African brothersare not alone. They receive the lirm support oF progressive
and peace-loving forces, including the Ii111support of the
socialist countries.
102. However, it would be unrealistic to minimizc the
danger of the recent event, more so since the ominous
smoke of this criminal conspiracy has not yet cleared, and
most of the organizers and direct perpetrators of Lhc
aggression against Benin are now beyond the confines of
that country.
103. ‘Ilie international community should learn a useful
lesson from what took place in Benin. Nowadays, any
aggressive acts of imperialism arid neocolonittlism against
peoples that have chosen the path of freedom and
independence exacerbate the international situation and
constitute a threat to world peace.
104. Given the present situation, the Security Council is,
we believe, in duty bound to take effective steps aimed at
preventing and halting any aggressive actions in the future,
on the basis of the provisions of the Charter. The Council
must not only strongly condem~l
the aggression committed
against Benin but must also once again recall the great
political and material responsibility that the aggressors bear.
Weexpress the hope that the Council will, with all the force
of its authority and lofty powers, decisively condemn that
disgraceful phenomenon of our time: the use of mercenaries.
105. I express the hope that the decision that will be
taken by the Council will not only be helpful to the people
Of Benin in its attempts to eliminate the last traces of the
aggression,but will also serve as a serious warning to those
who love hazardous adventures and to those who use
violerice in their attempts to exacerbate the international
situation in order to throw Ihe peoples of countries which
have freed themselves of international oppression off their
chosencourse of building a new life.

107. The PRESIDENT (B~terpretation from Spanish):The
next speakeris the representativeof the Ivory Coast. I
invite him to take a placeat the Council table and to make
hisstatement.
108. Mr. AKE (Ivory Coast)(interpretutiorzfrom Fre&):
Speakingon 7 April in this debate [ZUOlst meeting], we
went into the weighty reasonsfor which the Ivory Coast
and its Governmenthad not been and could not havebeen
involved, either directly or indirectly, in the aggression
perpetrated on 16 January 197’7 against the People’s
Republic of Benin. We consequently rejected the accusations of complicity levelledagainstthe Ivory Coastby the
Benincscauthorities in their national report /S/12319/
Adtf.l/ on thosesameeventsand by the representativeof
Guinea,whosetiovemment, we know, tried to statethat its
neighbourswere implicated in that aggressionin order to
justify again its slanderouscampaign against the Ivory
coast.
109. WC would
llave refrained Fromspeakingagainin this
dd~lt~ if, in exercisinghis right of reply /200&h meeting/,
the representativeof Guinea had not repeated thosevery
sameaccusationsandmadesomeslanderousremarksabout
our head of State and the Government and people of the
Ivory Coast.
110. It is not our intention to becomeinvolved in this
becausewe are usedto these Guineancalumnies.Oneonly
needs to leaf through the issue of the Guinean paper
Hurqva, the central organ of the Guinean State Party, or
the statementsof President%kou Tour6 to be convincedof
this. Wewill not lower ourselvesto their level. Wewill not
even give them the pleasureor honour of repeatingthose
accusationsand slanders.Nevertheless,we should like to
refer to one of them, the descriptionof our Head of State
as a “puppet”, a “traitor to Africa” ot a “lackey of
imperialism”.We arc quite happy that our colleagueshould
dischargehis duty in the way he did this morning, in the
true Guineanstyle that we know so well, but he will agree
with us that PresidentHouphoudt-Boignyis perhapsoneof
the few African headsof State to which thosedescriptions
do not and cannot apply. My colleaguefrom Guineais a
militant of the Democratic Party of Guinea, a part of the
African DemocraticAssembly,and he knows full well the
,roleplayed by that great African patriot and nationalistin
the strugglefor the liberation of Africa, a role to which
history will bear witness,We therefore scornfully reject
those slandersand that judgement passedon our headof
State. Impartialobserverswill makethe distinction between
what happensin the Ivory Coast and what happensin
Guinea. The people of the world will be able to sumup
what hasbeensaidby our two leaders,and they will judge.
1I I, Nevertheless,I should like to raise a question. If
Guineais indeedthe paradisethat hasbeen describedthis
morning by our colleague,how doeshe then explain that
hundredsof his compatriotshavefled the Country, 300,o~
11

having come to find refuge in my country and 500,000 in
Senegal?
112. For usthe policy of a country can be measured
by its
results. A policy which gives the people more freedom,
more dignity, greater well-beingand better socialstanding
inspiresconfidence.Onthe other hand, a policy which aims
at depersonalizinga people in the name of imported
ideologies,which leadsthe country to ruin and poverty,
which setsup a systemof governmentconsistingof public
delation,persecution,oppression,political assassination
and
the suppressionof individual democratic freedoms,can
only inspirepity for the peoplewho are subjectedto its
regime.
113. We shouldlike to make one last comment.Yes, it is
true that PresidentHouphougt-Boignyis goingto Europe.
But what may be forgotten is that he will alsobe goingto
numerousAfrican countries,asis indicatedby the official
visit he is making right now to the Republicof Liberia at
the invitation of PresidentTolbert and the visits he has
madeto Lagos,Nigeria,severaltimesin recent months,and
to Kigali, LomC, Bamako and Ouagadougouto take a
personalpart in inter-African summit meetingsand tdkS.
One cannot say the samefor the Presidentof Guinea,who
has not been seenfor years.They alone know the reasons
for this. Wewill not sayanything more about that.

going to distract US. In the Ivory Coast we are too
concernedwith giving substanceto our political independence and ensuringthe happinessof our people to waste
our time in pointless bickering or to train mercenaries,
whether Guinean or otherwise, to prepare an aggression
against their country. Faithful to our policy of noninterference in the affairs of other States,we respecttheir
institutions and the path they have chosen. The 1~0~
Coast, a land of hospitality and freedom, fraternity and ’
dialogue, will never consent to our land’s being made a
training camp or base for subversiveactivities againstan
African country, in particular against the Republic of
Guinea with which we have so many links, in spite of the
bitternesscausedby the far-fetched accusationsand the evil
words repeatedby the representativeof Guinea. Today, as
yesterday, we deny categorically all these allusions and
accusations, because there are no mercenariesin my
country who wish to overthrow the Government of Guinea.
There are no campsof that kind-none at all-in the Ivory
Coast.

117. Becausethe assurances
that we give do not seemto
allay the fears or dispel the hallucinations of our friends
from Guinea, we shouldlike, through the Presidentof the
Council, to renew our invitation to all the membersto send
a visiting mission to the Ivory Coast to check into the
existence or otherwise of those mercenary camps. This
invitation is also extended to the Secretary-General,who
114. In his statementof 6 April, and againthis morning, could bear witness to the truth. Such a missionof the
the representativeof Guinearepeated,somewhatdocilely,
Council or the Secretary-Generalcould have free passage
in
accusationsto the effect that mercenarieswere massed the Ivory Coast and interrogate whomever it wished in
along the frontiers of Guinea and of certain fraternal order to shedlight on thesenew accusatflions
levelled against
neighbouringcountries, ready to invade Guinea.He added: us, becausewe sincerely believe that once and for all we
must destroy this myth of a plot that haunts our Guinean
“The Government of the Republicof Guineahasused friends.
all possiblediplomatic meansto bring the Governments
of certain neighbouringStatesto ceasegiving assistance
to
118. The Ivory Coasthasnothing to hide. We havea clear
the mercenariesgrouped in their countries. They have conscience.We bear no ill will towardsGuinea.Wehaveno
alwaysdeniedthe existenceof thoserenegades
assembling quarrel with it, apart from our constant andabidingrefusal
on our frontiers. Yet their peoplesknow that every day
to deliver to PresidentSBkouTour& his political opponents
our national radio station, the voice of the revolution of
who have found asylumin our country.
the Republic of Guinea, broadcastsevidence of the
training of those mercenaries
in neighbouringcountries.”
119. The Ivory Coast, I repeat, has nothing against
[ZOOOthmeeting,para. 177.1
Guinea. That is what President Houphou&t-Boigny has
always stated to President SBkou Tour&. In a message
115. We reassertstaunchly that theseso-calledrenegades addressedto the President of Guinea a short time ago,
arenot presentin the Ivory Coastandif they exist it isonly
PresidentHouphou&t-Boigny,in a statement which shows
in the mindsof thosewho imaginethem. It will be difficult
his stature asa leaderandthe grief he feelsasa result of the
for US to convince the Guinean authorities that those Guineanleader’sbehaviour,saidthe following:
mercenariesdo not exist on the border between our two
countriesany more than on the Senegalese
side.In spiteof
“I have always said,and I repeat it solemnlynow, that
all the assurances
given directly or through our mutual
we have no reasonto harbourhostile feelingswith regard
friends, they continue to believein the existenceof those
to YOU andyour country, If we are occasionallysadin the
mercenaries.This is an obsession,a hallucination, The
faceof the depressingatmosphereand the disunity among
accusationsof our colleaguefrom Guineaarenot new:they
the Guinean intellectual elite, we do not think that that
can be remediedby us, becauseit is an internal Guinean
arepart of the deliberatepolicy of the Presidentof Gumea
to find scapegoats
to whom he can shift the responsibility
affair. More than that, we believethat if there is to be any
for the difficulties of Guinea.
change,it will not come from outside but rather from
insideyour own country, at the initiative of leaderswho
116. The aggression
of which Benin wasthe victim gave
daily confront the problemsof Guineanlife. That iswhy
him a marvellous new opportunity to accusethe Ivory
we prohibit any political activities on the part of the
Coast.We are therefore not surprisedby thesemanoeuvres
numerousGuineanswho seekrefuge here, or any action
and slanders,which do not affect us but which unmask
directed againstyour rbgime,under pain of expulsion.We
their authors.Theselying accusationsand slandersarenot
cannot root out from their heartsthe feelingsyou inspire
12

in them, but, on the other hand, if you give us the
slightest proof of subversive activity organized from our
territory or from outside the Ivory Coast by’residents of
our country, we shall not hesitate for an instant to ask
them to do their work elsewhere.
“While I lack such proof, threats of this kind against me
on your radio will not make me flinch in my determination to welcome and to try to find employment in the
Ivory Coast for each of our Guinean brothers who prefers
to live away from his country, My attitude is dictated by
humanitarian feelings, but I am aware also of the fact that
one day Guinea, reconciled to them, will be happy to
gather in all its sons who are now separated from their
country so that they may participate in its development.”
120. We are not distracted by these accusations, We
believe in peace for all. We believe in a free, humane Ivory
Coast, fraternal prosperous development and friendship
with all peoples of Africa and elsewhere.
121. I now come to the report of the Security Councik
Special Mission. In our statement last week, we refrained
from commenting on certain evidence provided by the
Mission because we did not deem it necessary to do SO.
Some may think our silence marked slight embarrassment,
and we should therefore like to make the following brief
comments.

124. We should like to point out that those documents
can in no way constitute valid proof on the basis of which,
unless one is dishonest, one could try to implicate the Ivory
Coast. Even if the tickets were purchased at Abidjan and
some of the mercenaries did make a stopover at the Abidjan
international airport and vaccination certificates were
delivered to some of them by Ivory
Coast authorities, it
seems strange, since these documents were acquired in the
normal way and the journeys were made on regular flights,
to try to establishsomelink between the commandogroup
and the Ivory Coast authorities, unlessit is established
beyond the shadowof a doubt that the tickets used for
thosejourneys or the meansof acquiring them wereput at
their disposalby the Ivory Coast authorities so that they
might perpetrate aggression
againstthe People’sRepublic of
Benin or any other African country. That wasnot the case,
and there isno proof of it.
125. The Ivory Coastis not a police State which suspects
every visitor or foreigner. Wewant all visitors to feel free in
our country. We are a country in which foreignersof all
nationalitiescome and go asthey please,What is important,
we would repeat, is that foreignersshould respectour laws
and the principles which guide our policies and not abuse
the hospitality we extend to them to jeopardize the
good-neighbourlyrelations we maintain with other African
countries. If it were establishedthat foreignershad contravened our laws, and if proof of that were available,we
can assurethe Council that the authorities of my country
would not fail to take the necessarysteps.

122. Among the documents the invaders left behind them
in their canteen were found three certificates of vaccination
given in the Ivory Coast, a certificate of declaration of loss
made out by the Ministry of the Interior of the Ivory Coast
on 2 September 1970 for Mr. Gilbert Bourgeaud concerning
the loss of his driving licence in Morocco and air tickets
delivered by Air France, UTA and Royal Air Maroc for the
routes Paris-Dakar-Abidjan, Abidjan-Casablanca and Abidjan-Dakar-Paris. We say right away that those documents
prove nothing. In New York, Cotonou, Abidjan, Paris or
anywhere, anybody can go to a health office and
obtain an international vaccination certificate, make a
statement of loss to the police or buy an air ticket in a
travel agency. Furthermore, the report states in paragraph 145:

126. In conclusion, we should like to add that our
country, our Government is ready to co-operatein every
possibleway to shedfull light on the aggression
perpetrated
against the People’s Republic of Benin. But we also
reiterate our requestthat the Security Council sendto the
Ivory Coast a missionto confirm the truth regarding the
presenceof mercenarieson our soil. We believe that, in SO
doing, the Council would render a great serviceto Guinea,
to the Ivory Coast and to their peoples and would be
servingtruth and peacein Africa.
127. The PRESIDENT (interpretntinn
fbn?
Spanish):
The
representativeof Senegalwishesto speakin exerciseof his
right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and I give him the floor.

“According to the testimony of the prisoner and parts
of this documentation, the attackers, who were recruited
in Europe and Africa, came to Morocco from Paris, Dakar
and Abidjan.”

128. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (in terpretatim
jbnz
French):
The representative of Guinea started his statement this
morning by protesting against the disgustingcomments
made by some delegationsagainst his Government. The
membersof the Council heard him, and I amsurethat they
got the impression,just asI did, that the text which he read
out did not exactly contain lofty views either.

123, We do not exclude the possibility that some of those
incriminated were indeed on the flights serving Abidjan,
Dakar, Casablanca or Paris. However, what people seem to
be unaware of is that the Beninese, like the majority of
African nationals, particularly those of the former FrancoAfrican community, come and go freely to and from the
Ivory Coast and do not need entry or exit visas. The
movements of these persons prove nothing unless they
benefited from the complicity of local authorities, which
remains to be irrefutably proved. Those journeys may be
checked, certainly, but that would in no way mean that
they had been made with the assistance of the Ivory Coast
authorities.

129. He reproached us for having said that he had not
even leafed through the report of the SpecialMission. It is
my impressionthat my colleaguefrom Guineais actually a
recidivist, becausehe replied to my statement without
having listened to it and also without having read it
properly, I-I&d he read that statement, he would have
realized that at no point in it did my delegationquestion
the fact that an act of aggressionhad actually been
perpetrated againstthe People’sRepublic of Benin on 16
January.
13

130. 1 must add further that there is actually a great deal
that ITV colleague from Guinea is unaware of. He has
declared here that his country lives in opulence, when
everyone knows that Guinea is listed among the 25 poorest
CWmtrieS
of the world-,to be poor is no shame, but it is a
fact-although
it is considered to be potentially one of the
wealthiest in Africa. Our colleague from Guinea spoke to us
of the happy people of Guinea. I do not want to go into
this question, for jt would be too easy to demolish his
arguments. To speak of the happiness of the people of a
country with 4 million inhabitants, I ,200,OOO of whom live
in exile is, 1 believe, the height of impertinence.

136. Nevertheless,this attitude in no way meansthat the
refugeesinvolved should be consideredashostagessubject
to surveillance during their residencein my country. For
my Government, those refugeesare neither a political
weaponagainstour neighboursnor prisoners.They havethe
opportunity to seek employment and to circulate freely
throughout our country. This humanitarian. treatment
reserved for our African brothers has never been to the
liking of the Conakry authorities,which would have wished
the Government of Senegalto consider those persons,in
the name of African solidarity, ascriminalswhich could be
returned to them whenever the Conakry authoritieswished.
My Government has never accepted that and will never
accept it.

131. The delegation of Senegal has asked to be allowed to
exercise its right of reply after hearing the latest slander
from the: delegation of Guinea, not in order to provoke an
awment,
which wuuld be as useless as it would be sterile
and harmful, but to drsw the attention of the Council to
tilt
reasons
which have led to our conflict with the
Government of C’unakry.

137. The Government of Senegalrefusesto be associated
with the execution of crimesthe authors of which andthe
accomplicesin which will be severelyjudged one day by
history. No one, neither the Governmentof Guineanor any
other Government, can compelus to renounceour solemn
moral obligation to respect the terms of the Universal
Declaration of Human Kights to which we havesubscribed
freely and in complete sovereignty.

132. The problem of our dispute with Guinea is, as I said
to the Council the other day, the presence of 500,000
Guincans in Senegal. This situation, which Senegal has
ncitller desired nor crcatcd, has led to an influx of
additional workers, with all the inconvenience which that
entails in the economic, sociai and political fields. That is to
say that my country has found itself grappling with a
problem from which it is far from drawing advantages.

138. Unsuccessfulin its efforts, Conakry hasembarkedon
violent attacks by radio accusingthe Senegalese
Government of harbouring and training Guinean refugeesto set
them up againsttheir own country. In the face of thoseacts
of deliberate provocation, my country hasalwaysexercised
the utmost calm and has refusedto embark on a “radio
war”, We felt Lhat a war by radio broadcastwasunworthy
of a self-respectingcountry. Nevertheless
that calm attitude
on the part of Senegalhas never disarmedthe Guinean
authorities, They have persistedthus in an endeavourto
distract the attention of their people from the grave
economic and social problemsthat the country confronts.

133. The first refugees from Guinea arrived in Senegalin
the spring of 1958, that is to say, four months before the
independence of Guinea. They had been chased by the
r6gimc of terror establishedby the party in power at the
time. IIIC movement gatheredstrength asthe years went by
and was to affect every ethnic group and every social
crrtegory
of that country. Therefore, today 500,000
Guineans are living in Senegal, tlius escapingthe atmosphere of insecurity and terror reigning in their country.
134. Senegal’sattitude in the face of this displacementof
the population of Guinea was guided by purely humunitarian
consideratiotu.
My Chvcrnn~ent,
faithful to its
tradition of hospitality, has~cl~urn~d theseAfrican brothers, as it 1~~sdone other foreign communities, establishing
11sthe only c0ndition that they respect the laws of our
country and refrain from any activity which might jeOpardixe our relations wjth their country of origin.

139. I would add that, to the Conakry authorities, any
Guinean national who is not subjectedto their dictatorship
is a traitor or a mercenary. We, for our part, considerthat
political intolerance is contrary to fundatnental human
rights, becauseit goes without sayingthat, in the logic of
that interpretation, any action of political adversariesto
re-establishdemocracy and freedom in a country can be
considered only as foreign aggressiondirected by mercenariesal the serviceof animperialistPower.

135. The Government of Senegalhas been mainly guided
by two considerations as regards the Guinean refugees:
respect for 11nman
rjghts and non-interference in the
inlerna] affairs of a neighbouring State. That is why those
tcfugees

he

never

been

given

any

encOUragenlent

by

thC

autlloritics of my country or any direct or indirect support
[(or slrbversjve activities. On the contrary, all those Who
tried to abuse our hospitality in order to embark up011
actions contrary to our policy of good-neighbourliness,
r:~pprocl~elnent and co-operation with the neighbouring
States of our subregion have been expelled from Senegal,
because for us the first objective is freedom and the unity
of Africa. This implies that the presenceof severalhundred
tllousand Guinean nationals on our territory must be
considered as a humanitarian problem, which in 110case
should give rise to political implications.
14

140. That Machiavellian distortion of facts shouldbe given
no credit, no matter in what form it is presentedto our
Organisation. The Govqnment of Guinea has used and
abusedthese terms. It has thus sought to camouflagethe
growing opposition of the population of Guineaon its own
terri,tory. The strong internal opposition, regrettably, has
affected the external policy of Guinea and given it this
disorderly, chaotic characterwhich we have all observed.
141. African unity or subregionalor regionalintegration,
has little weight in the eyes of the Conakry authorities,
because they need to make believe that their rBgimeis
threatened by external forces so as to win over African
solidarity to ensure the survival of their r6gime. Thus
Conakry is always brandishingthreats of all kinds, transforming internal or external adversariesinto mercenaries
who are manipulated by imperialism.While those manoeu-

wes were able to deceive some people a few years ago,
today we must recognize that the world sees things Inore
clearly.

146. Jn our statement on 8 February 1977 [Iy87t/l
meeting]t when the Councilwascollsideringthe complaint
bY Benin, the Chinesedelegationpointed out that the
incident which bad taken placeon 16 January at Cotonou
142. The representative of Guinea said that Senegal and
constituted an encroachmentby imperialismandits mercethe Ivory Coast were showing hostility to the Republic of
narieson the independence,
territorial integrity and soverGuinea, but forgetting to commit
themselves,
or rather
eignty of the People’sRepublicof Benin. Wecondemnthe
refraining from CoI~~nlittillg themselves,to the combat invasionof the People’sRepublicof Beninby imperialism
WJliCh
Africa k IlOW waging
against
the white
racist
&$mes
and its mercenaries.At the sametime, we strongly
of southern Africa. I am not the representativeof the Ivory
condemn that super-Powerwhich styles itself a “natural
Coast, but 1 am the representativeof Senegal,and 1should ally” of the African peoplefor engineeringsingle-handed
like to recall or to state-becauseI am suremy colleague the grave incident of a massiveinvasion of Zaire by
from Guinea doesnot know this-that Senegalis at present
mercenaries.This graveincident is another glaring revela.
a member of the Committeefor the Liberationof Southern tion of the aggressive
and expansionistfeaturesof socialAfrica. Senegalis a memberof the United NationsCouncil imperialism,andit is only natural that it hasbeenstrongly
for Namibia. In 1974, it was on the proposal madeon
condemnedandfirmly opposedby the peoplesof Zaire, the
instructions f~lll
my
Government
by the
delegation
of
rest of Africa andthe wholeworld,
Senegal,which 1 headed, that the CredentialsCommittee,
for the first time in the history of the llnited Nations,took
147. Under the leadershipof His Excellency President
the decision to reject the credentialsof the representative JShrBkou,the Governmentandpeopleof Beninvictoriously
of Pretoria, and it W:IS on the basis of that decision
of the
repulsedthe invasionof 16 January and defendedtheir
Committee that from that day the representativeof Vorster
national independenceand sovereignty. Once again, we
has ceasedto occupy
his scatin the GeneralAssembly.That
wish to expressour congratulationsto them and our
is Senegal’scontribution with regard to the struggle in
profound sympathyfor the lossessufferedby them in the
southern Africa. How happy I would be if the represen- above-mentioned
incident.Wearefirmly convincedthat the
tative of Guinea wcrc to say what the representatives
of his people of Benin will certainly heighten their vigilance,
Gnvcrnmcnt have done.
strengthen their unity and continue to safeguardtheir
nationalindependence
andState sovereignty.
143. The representative of Guinea has told us that in
Guinea everything belongsto the people which works and
148. Based on the foregoing, the Chinesedelegation
struggles. In this respect, 1 should like to quote the
supportsthe draft resolutionsponsored
by Benin,India, the
following, which showswhat the newspaperAfifca thinks
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,Mauritius and Panama,asconOT that affirmation, from its January 1977 issue,page90:
tainedin documentS/l 2322.
149. The PRESIDENT(interpretationJ?OVZ
Spanish}:The
“As foreign capital increasesits control over the
economy through direct investments,Guinea becomes representativeof Guineawishesto speakin exerciseof his
right of reply. 1 invite him to take a placeat the Council
increasingly indebted to foreign governmentsand intertableand I givehim the floor.
national financial institutions.
150. Mr. M. S. CAMARA (Guinea)(interpretationfrom
French): The delegationof the State Party of Guineacan
easily understandwhy the representativesof the Ivory
Coastand Senegalshouldbe strivingto divert the Security
Council’s attention from the agendawith which we are
familiar. We understand why they are hounding the
Republic of Guineainsteadof replying to the questions
144. We will bc told that that is the opinion of a raisedby the report before the Council. The Republicof
reactionary press, but that cannot changethe facts. What Guineais not a perInanentmemberof the SecurityCouncil.
that newspaperstatescan be checked at any time. Thereis Mence,it hashad no influencein the SpecialMission.That
no need for any lengthy demonstrationto showthat never Mission, establishedafter consultations,had no Guinean
bei’ore has imperialismfelt as safe asnow in Guinea.The representative.We understandfull well that the documents
prepared by the Missionbelongto the Security Council
anti-imperialist rhetoric uttered by Conakry is plainly
and, unlessthey wanted to harassthe membersof the
intended to camouflagethe penetration and establishment
Council, Senegaland the Ivory Coastcould only play the
of international imperialismand the money Powers.Wlrdt is
confusion.
at stake today in the feverish activities of the Government Gufiean cardin orderto SOW
of Conakry is not the anti-imperialistcombat but, rather,
151. At t& stageof the debate,a clearview hasemerged
the desperateefforts of a dictatorship at bay striving to
of what happenedat Cotonou.
It hasbeen proved that
ensureits survival.
subversivemovementsareinstalledin Senegal
andthe Ivory
Coast,The Governmentsof thosecountriescould help the
145. Mr. LAI Ya-lj (China) (rm?zslationfrom C%llese):
The Chinesedelegationhasstudiedthe report of the Special internationalcommunity by putting a halt to the actionsof
with the
Mission to the People’sRepublic of Benin established
under adventurersIike B1Alpha Oumarou.In accordance
laws of Senegaland the Ivory Coast, Guhaan nationals
Security Council resolution 404 (1977) and composedof
livblg in their countriesenjoy all their fights.as Africans,
the representativesof Panama,Libya and India.
“furthermore, the domination of the commodity market by the aluminium trusts givesGuinealittle manoeuvring room. And what becomesof Guinea’s socialist
options when the key sector of the national economy is
virtually under the domination of foreign trusts and
banks?”

15

against the authorities of the central Government. The
situation appears to be entirely clear: it is a strictly
internal conflict, which need not concern anyone outside
that country.

provided they do not engage in any subversive activity. If
our brothers from Senegal and the Ivory Coast had ensured
scrupulous respect for those principles, we certainly would
not be here today paying the price for a shameful
aggression perpetrated against the sister Republic of Benin.

“However, from the outset, there have been those who
wished to interfere in these events. There are such people
in the West, in the Middle East and in the Far East. A
number of Western countries, as well as China, are hastily
sending arms and military supplies to the central Government of Zaire.”

152. For our part, our concern is to lend Benin all the
support it needs to get out of this unfortunate situation
caused by the actions of unprincipled bandits. That is why
our delegation, faithful to the options worthy of the State
Party of Guinea, refuses to utter uncomplimentary words
and feels duty bound to express once again to the heroic
people of Benin all the militant solidarity of its constant
ally, the people of Guinea.

The statement goes on:

1.53. Nor shall we reply to the plagiarism of the reactionary press. Persons who visit Guinea frequently and who
have had occasion to come in contact with the masses in
our country, with all strata of our workers, are perfectly
capable of stating whether people live well or badly in
Guinea. We already gave a reply in that connexion in our
statement this morning and one need only refer to that
statement.

“AS can be seen from the aforesaid facts, hands that are
at first sight very different from one another have been
outstretched towards Zaire, all out of a common desire to
impose, at all costs, their own regimes on the people of
Zaire. They are the hands of those who would like to
create a new international problem, a new and dangerous
hotbed of tension in the world-those
who arc clearly
anxious to warm themselves at the fire to which they
themselves are adding fuel.

1.54. With regard to the many Guineans living in Senegal
and in the Ivory Coast, we shall not reply, since the
representatives themselves recognized, in their statements,
that those countries were keeping a close watch on the
activities of the Guineans in question. Nevertheless, the sole
mercenary captured, B% Alpha Oumarou, did say, in his
statement, that in Senegal these Guineans were perfectly
free to make all kinds of insane remarks against the
Government and people of Guinea, with the full knowledge
of the Senegalese authorities. In my Government’s view,
that is inadmissible.

“In a bid to cover up their interference in the internal
affairs of Zaire, the imperialist forces and their accomplices began by circulating a false account alleging an
invasion of Zaire by Angolan troops and Cuban servicemen. That was a short-lived lie. Today, no one attempts
to deny the fact that there is not a single Angolan or a
single Cuban among the rebels in the south of Zaire.
Nevertheless, the slanderous campaign continues with the
aim of casting suspicion on Angola, Cuba and also on the
Soviet Union, which are alleged to be behind the events
occurring in Zaire.

155. Many meetings have taken place between Senegalese
and Guinean leaders; statements of consensus have been
drawn up and agreed upon, but the Senegalese party has
always refused to respect these agreements,

“This is an old, time-worn trick. It is as if the thief were
shouting ‘Thief! ’ louder than the others in order to
divert suspicion from himself. However, in politics this
trickholds no promise of success for those who resort to
it. The peoples of Africa know how to tell genuine friends
from those unfriendly to them, and still more from their
enemies.

156. For our part, in the Republic of Guinea we are not in
the pay of any money Power and, as Guineans, we are
aware that the future of Guinea is in good hands: the hands
of Guineans. And it is the Guineans themselves, masters of
their fate, who, before the eyes of the world, always declare
their readiness to fulfil their obligations to the international
community.

“The Soviet Union resolutely rejects as absurd any
allegations of complicity in the events in Zaire. At the
same time, the leading circles of the Soviet Union deem it
inadmissible for any external forces to interfere in the
internal struggle in Zaire. Each people, and it alone, must
manage its own internal affairs. Let no one entertain the
illusion that he will be able to deprive peoples of this
inalienable right.”

157. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanishj: i
call on the representative of the Soviet Union, who wishes
to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
158. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation porn Russian}: Since one delegation has referred to the Soviet Union in connexion with
events in Zaire, I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to
exercise my right of reply by explaining our position on
this matter, as it appears in a TASS statement of 12 April,
that is, the day before yesterday:

159. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): 1
now call on the representative of China, who has asked to
exercise his right of reply.
160. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): In
its statement just now, the Chinese delegation referred to
the fact that Soviet social-imperialism had been organizing
its hired mercenaries for an invasion of the Republic of
Zaire. Apparently this has hit social-imperialism where it
hurts. That is why the Soviet representative hurriedly came
forward to justify and whitewash these crimes of aggression

“As is known, in recent weeks Zaire has been beset by
disturbances. In the southern part of that country, the
former province of Katanga, there have been attacks
16

and to attack and vi)jfy the just stand of China. We deem it
necessary to say a few words in reply.
161. In order to cover Up the crimes of aggression
committed by its hired mercenaries against Zaire, Soviet
big lie. While it is a
social-jmperjalisrn is telling an0thCr
glaring
case of several thousand Soviet-hired mercenaries
1auncb.Q a flagrant large-scale invasion of Zaire from
outside its borders, Soviet social-imperja!ism has arbitrarily
described jt as the so-called internal lnilitary conflict in
Zaire and an uprising in the south of Zaire. ~[OW can t!lis
deceiveanyone? Can the several thousand Soviet-equipped
mercenary troops have dropped from outer space or
emergeds~&JenJy front under the ground in the south of
Zaire’? No, As is known to all, the mercenaries invading
Zaire are ynaiylly composed of part of the remnant forces of
the old co!onialjsts, cx-gendarmes of t!ie former Katanga
province who had fled to Angola. At the time of the Soviet
anned intervention in Angola, they were already rigged up
as a part of the mercenaries hired by the Soviet Union and
serving jts aggressive activities. Under the command of
Soviet social-imperialism, they rutlllessly butchered and
suppressed the Angolan people and carried out repeated
armed Provocatiolls against and an invnsicln of the Republic
of Zaire. ln January last year, the Soviet Union instigntcd
jts !ljrcd mercenaries to bornhard savagely the cities in the
south of Zaire. The current invasion of Zaire by mcrcenarjes from Angola is unpreccdcntcd in scale, scope and
duration. Things are crystal clear: it is none other than
Soviet social-imperialism which is the boss of these mercenaries. Despite the various ljcs spread by Soviet socialjmperjaljsm, descrjbjng its prcrneditatec! aggression as a
Zajrian civil war in an attempt to cover up its glaring acts of
aggressionagainst Zaire, the pcoplc of Africa and throughout the world have a discerning eye and will not be
deceivedby any lies.

further argument on this matter. I should simply like to say
that what I read out from the TASS statement was a reply
to the fantastic allegations which have just been made by
the representative of China.
166. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (interpretation from Spanis/z): The representative of Senegal put a question this
mornjng to the Security Council Special Mission [2004th
meet&, para. 671. We deliberately waited until the list of
speakers was exhausted before answering that question or
any other that might have been asked, so as to abide by the
promise that we made to give a forthright answer to any
questions that might be asked about the contents of the
report, its annexes and the work done by the Special
Mission.
167. The representative of Senegal specifically asked
whetller the Special Mission had asked the Government of
Benin if it could see the white prisoners and, if it did, what
had been the reply of the authorities. So the question might
be divided into two parts: one concerning the Mission and
the other the Government of Benin. We shall answer it in
that order.
168. The first part of the question can be answered
affirmatively. As soon as it began to organize its work in
New York, the Special Mission asked about the number of
mercenaries held and which it might be possible to
interrogate for purposes of investigation. After its arrival at
Cotonou, the Mission stressed that point which it considered important.
169. Before turning to the second part of the question, we
should like to explain to the Council that it is obviously
designed to determine whether or not there were mercenaries. The Mission can now tell the Council, and also the
representative of Senegal, in all cordiality, that all the
evidence produced regarding the existence of mercenaries
can be said to have been overwhelming. That question was
resolved, in ,the Mission’s view, by statements made by not
just one but many witnesses, African as well as European
and North American-I am referring to Canadians and to
Americans-and also by the fact that the diplomatic corps
made it clear that not only had there been mercenaries but
that fierce and cruel action had taken place.

162. It has been repeatedly pointed out by fair-minded
world opinion that the Soviet-cnginecred invasion of Zaire
constitutes a new round jn its offensives of political and
lniljtary aggression in Africa, in the wake of its massive
aggressionin Africa early IilSt year, as well i1S aJl0 t!lN llli\jOr
move in jts rivalry with the other su pcr?ower to seize
Europe.
163. Under the lcadershjp of President Mobutu, the
Zajrjan Government and people, defying brute force, are
wagjng a valiant struggle to defend their national independence, territorial integrity and state sovereignty against
foreign aggression. The just struggle of the Zajrian people is
winning more and more extensive sympathy ad support
from the people of Africa and tile whole world. We firnlly
believethat the Zairian people will win final victory in their
resistance to aggression. Africa belongs to t!ie African
people. Upholding unity and pcrsevcring in struggle, the
heroic African people wj!! surely drive a11extcrllnl forces of
aggressionout of Africa.

170. Among the diplomatic representatives, we might
mentjon first, because of the clear, categorical and specific
testimony he provided, Mr. Christian Blanchard, a representative of the European Economic Community, a French
cjtjzen who not only described the mercenaries but also the
weapons they carried: automatic weapons and bazookas.
171. The Ambassador of the Soviet Union, Mr. Ivan S.
Ijyjn, also confirmed the existence of the mercenaries. He
said tllat he was not an eyewitness but that Soviet citizens
!lad informed the Embassy and also that he had heard
heavy shootjng.

164. The I’IIESIDENT (j/lto~/~ret~~tior1J’i’om S~~~rish): The
representative of the Soviet Union has asked to be allowed
to exercise his right of reply and I now call on him.

172. The Charge d’affaires a.i. of Ghana, Mr. Kwadwo
Kwakye, also confirmed the existence of the mercenaries.

165. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Ilnjon of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (i~lterprctntion pWn Rlcssia~l): 1 do not think we
really need occupy the attention of the Council with any

173 So djd Mr. Muabi Kumuamba, the Ambassador “f
Zajrk to Benin, who was not an eyewitness but who did
17

allow the Special Mission to inspect his Embassy, which had
been damaged by the firing.

Oumarou, td whom I should like to refer very briefly, made
an exhaustive statement before the Mission and was
intensively questioned over many hours,

174. We also heard the statement of the dean of the
diplomatic corps, Mr, Jean Meadmore, Ambassador of
France, who pravided some explanations. He was not an
eyewitness either, but he did have information from French
citizens and he co-operated with the Special Mission in his
function as dean of the corps. It was he who arranged for
the appearance of diplomatic representatives before the
Mission. The French Ambassador said in his statement that
he had heard over the radio certain warnings issued to the
Beninesc citizens, urging them to attempt to cut off the
flight of mercenaries who were escaping towards Togo. We
shall refer to this point kter.

180. Because of the concern of the Mission and because of
the statements of the Ambassador of Fra&e about the
information he had heard over the radio, the Mission made
a formal statement. To satisfy the representative of Senegal,
I should like to read what appears in the verbatim record.
TO a question asked by a member of the Mission, Prefect
Ogouma, Vice-Chairman of the Committee established by
the Government
of Benin for the investigation requested by
the Security Council, replied the following, as it appears ia
the verbatim record:
“BP Alpha Oumarou’s case indicates that it is very
possible that what he said is true. BB said that he looked
all over and saw the plane take off. If other mercenaries
were in his same situation and could not have boarded the
plane when it took off, it is very likely that they fled
either to Togo or to Nigeria; this is possible. On our part,
even though we did not have evidence that the mercenaries took off to Togo or Nigeria, we gave instructions
on 16 January to our militants that they should block the
road to Togo or Nigeria because these were the normal
security measures to be taken. We do not know whether
the mercenaries really crossed our country to those other
countries, but these instructions were given by the
Beninese State.“’

175. The ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the United States of
America, Mr. W. Kenneth Thompson, was hot present the
day the events took place, but he informed the Mission of
the heavy damage sustained by the Uniled States Embassy
and the Ambassador’s residence and of the fact that two of
their guests had been in danger of being killed in a place
where there had been a good deal of shooting.
176. The Chargk d’affaires a. i. of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea also confirmed the existence of the
mercenaries,
177. The Special Mission heard testimony from two
French nationals, a Spaniard, a Canadian and six Beninese
in formal meetings held in the room assigned for the
Mission’s work. Then, going to the places where the events
had taken place, it took statements from a Soviet citizen
and from five Canadians, including a young Canadian who
had been seriously wounded.

181. That was the result of the inquiry of the Special
Mission, and I hope that that information will be entirely
satisfactory to the representative of Senegal.
182. Before concluding, 1 should like to refer briefly to
the prisoner, BL Alpha Oumarou. After he had been
questioned very closely by the members of the Mission-as
is very clear from the transcript of his statement-, the
Mission considered that there was nothing in his testimony
to justify doubt being cast on his credibility. He was born
in Senegal of Guinean parents. He belongs to the ethnic
group known as Peulh. He is a Muhammadan. The Peulhs
number approximately 6 million. They live not only in that
part of Guinea and Senegal but throughout the States
which are part of the Sahelian region.

178. In addition, immediately after the events of 16
January, according to what two witnesses said-they were
deEinitely French and the veracity of their statement can be
checked-, the Beninese authorities took measures to round
up all those who might possibly have been involved in the
events, That naturally meant that a great number of whites
were assembled in one place, in a camp, Mr. Jean-Jacques
Georgcs Mischcl said so at the end of his statement: “All
the occupants of the building were taken to a military camp
in order to be interrogated”.’
So there were a large number
of individuals who had been detained. Another French
witness, Mr. Christian Lecadre, said that they had been
detained and added: “until early in the morning of the
nineteenth”.1 That means that, from 16 to 19 January, an
indeterminate number of whites suspected of being mercenaries were held. Obviously, that can be interpreted in a
variety of ways, but we have endeavoured to interpret it in
the most objective way possible. Those are the facts that
the Mission was able to establish.

183. The Mission was there to determine the facts, not to
establish responsibility. It was trying to collect the facts SO
that the Security Council, in its wisdom, could take
appropriate and just action in keeping with the functions
assigned to it and with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
184. B5 Alpha Oumarou was asked by one member of the
Mission whether he could say if the authorities of the
countries that he said he had travelled through during the
plotting were aware of what was going on or actually
involved. It is important that the members of the Council
pay close attention, because this is what is at stake in the
inquiry. BB Alpha Oumarou answered this questioll as
follows:

179. The Mission, I repeat, asked the Government of
Benin for information about the number of mercenaries
detained and was informed that there was only one
prisoner, Mr. BI Alpha Oumarou. it was also shown the
corpses of two members of the group of mercenaries, one
white and the other black. The prisoner, Bsi Alpha
1 Quoted

“The only thing I know is that if the States themselves
were not directly involved, some of their officials were,

in English by the speaker.
18

because they did document-forging, camouflaging, and all
that. Those officials of the countries concerned knew all
about this matter.
“For instance, in that base where we were, there were
members of the Moroccan army guarding the place, and I
saw a helicopter of the Moroccan army flying over the
base. It would even transport the Colonel, and they
would shuttle him between the base and some other
place. There were some soldiers of the Moroccan army
with the Arabic letters “da/” and “minz” on their
uniforms. They were gendarmes of the Moroccan army.
Obviously, if something happens in a country, the high
authorities may not know about it, but some of their
officials should obviously know about it. And they are
the accomplices in this matter.” [See s/Iz.z~~/A&z. I,
at1n ex III.]
Those were the exact words of B5 Alpha Oumarou.
185. I repeat that the Mission was endeavouring to
establish the facts for presentation to the Council, as it did
in the report and its annexes and in the verbatim records, in
order to give the Council what it needed.
186. l35 Alpha Oumarou is not a man who appeared out of
the blue in a place other than where the events took place.
One representative said that Ba Alpha Oumarou had been
found in rdther
picturesque circumstances in a different
place carrying all kinds of documents, including his birth
certificate and school diploma. But that matter was cleared
up by the Special Mission, In actual fact, B1 Alpha
Oumarou had no documents on him. That was explained in
his statement and was part of the system which the
recruiters of the mercenaries probably used to keep a hold
on those who were not acting just for profit, but who might
have political motives. The documents were taken away
from the individuals. It is a little lilce taking a passport away
from someone who wants to travel; it is a very subtle way
of keeping control over him.
187. My colleague from India, Mr. Ramesh N. Mulye,
asked this question: “You mentioned this Guinean identity
card. Do you have that Guinean identity card with you? ”
BL Alpha Oumarou replied:
“The day we were about to leave for Morocco, this
Joseph demanded all the identification papers from
everyone. We had to surrender them. I gave him mY
identity card, my certificates of studies, my working
papers-everything.
Everything had to be given to the
authorities.” [Ibid.]
188. It is therefore abundantly clear that those men who
had been drawn into the group who were of Guinean
nationality and had been involved in this Special training
for
political reasons could on the way have become aware of
the fact that they were being used for other purposes and
could have got out. But they did not get out. Had they
tried, they would perhaps have been shot.
189. Such, then, is the personality of BI Alpha Oumarou.
190. The Special Mission has also presented to the Council
a table with a complete description of the airline tickets

that were used by the members of the attacking force in the
period directly before preparations for the operation were
made Lib& annex VI, document No. S2/. The members of
the Mission were entirely satisfied that those tickets were
authentic. Most of them had been partially used. They were
round-trip tickets and had been used only for the outward
journey; the return half had not been used.
191. 1 mUSt COnfeSs that, when I heard the Ambassador of
France making his statement, I was much impressed with
his equanimity and objectivity. He said something that is a
fact and shows a very reasonable approach: buying a ticket
from
an airline is, after all, legitimate; opening a bank
aCCOUnt
is equally legitimate. I think that that is very fair
because, since those tickets were issued by Air France and
by Royal Air Maroc, it was very easy to establish whether
or not they were genuine,
192. The Special Mission was very careful to check each
ticket for the name of the airline and the serial number. It
did what it could to ensure that anyone having any
objection could make the necessary investigations: the
name of the passenger, the date of issuance of the ticket
and the route followed, that is, the place of embarkation
and the destination, the date of the flight and whether the
ticket had been used up or whether it was open, and the
means of payment. Naturally, the tickets were paid for in
cash.
193. Obviously we could not check into every aspect of
the 103 tickets that were contained in the box of
munitions, in which all kinds of other objects were found.
As the report of the Mission says, from the tickets it was
clear what the routes were.
194. I should also like to refer to three individuals, one of
whom is identified as the leader of the operation-Gilbert
Bourgeaud-who had four tickets for various flights. The
route shown on the first was Paris-Marrakesh-Paris. The
date of issuance and flight was 12 November 1976. For a
date immediately preceding the operation, we found a
ticket for the route Paris-Libreville-Paris. The dates of the
flights were as follows: from Paris to Libreville, 8 January
and from Libreville to Paris, 10 January 1977. There was
another ticket, for Paris-Casablanca-Paris. The ParisX’asablanca part of the ticket was the only part used-on II
January, five days before the operation. Another ticket,
dated 29 December 1976, was also routed Paris-Casablanca-Paris.
195. The other tickets listed also have special significance.
There is one which corroborates a statement made by Bg
Alpha Oumarou. He said that when he had entered the
aircraft he had been given a ticket with a false name,
Mohamed Djougou
or a similar name. Such a name does
appear on one of the Air France tickets.
196. Mr. Sy Sawant, who was in charge of the Africans,
had three tickets, whose dates are again revea&. He had
one ticket dated 22 December, Abidjan-Dakar-Paris. No
date is indicated, but there is a coupon missing. Anpt*her
ticket was used on 24 December, Paris-Dakar-Abld.lan.
Another ticket Dakar-Casablanca-Dakar, bears a,date Wluch
is significant: 50 December 1976. The prisoner Bi Alpha

Oumarou indicated that that had been the date on which
they had travelled from Dakar to Casablanca, the date when
they had been at Yoff airport.
197. So there are details which are particularly enlightening. There are others which also would require additional
investigation, but which, as has been said, were not within
the terms of reference of the Special Mission. There is an
Air France ticket No. 24659496234, issued in the name of
Hem-i Simon, who also travelled on 30 December from Paris
to Casablanca.
198. There is a point in the annexes which requires
clarification. It is against the dictates of conscience, the
dignity of men and normal behaviour in society that
something as shameful and harmful as what happened at
Cotonou should occur and that, after this debate and the
resolution which, we hope, wiil be adopted and which will
obviously have great significance, no action should be taken
with respect to the members of the group of mercenaries
involved and that we should have to come to the sad
conclusion that, in spite of a condemnation issued by the
highest political body of mankind, the Security Council,
those mercenaries are still on the loose without having to
bear any kind of responsibility or be punished, even though
they can be characterized as both common and political
criminals engaged as mercenaries in some type of political
conspiracy in which other private or public persons may be
involved.

who have been vaccinated know that there is a record of
the patient. Could not some States carry out an investigation so as to safeguard something which is absolutely
essential for good relations among peoples, namely, elementary and mutual respect for the human condition where
criminals are not protected, where situations are not
created in which we are made to feel that we are living in a
society in which we are exposed to criminal conspiracies
without even the hope that at a given time justice will be
done and the criminals punished‘?
202. 1 conclude by saying, as the representative of
Panama, that the draft resolution which has been circulated
[S/12322/ is, in my opinion, prepared in such a way that
its authors merit our thanks because of the intelligent and
serious manner in which it was drafted and because it
contains the foundations for ftlrtller positive action in
defence of the best interests of the membersof the
international community, I should like to announce my
support for it.
203. I would ask the membersof the Council to accept
my apologiesfor having prolongedthe meetingsomewhat,
but I did feel that it wasnecessaryto prove that an effort
had been made to carry out a serious,objective investigation without exaggerations,exhaustingwhatever meansthe
Missionhad within its termsof reference.
204. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (ifuerpretation jiorn French): b1y
delegation feels, at this stagein the discussion,that it is
hardly necessary for us any longer to reply to the
statementsmade by certain delegations.Our statementsof
7 February fI986th meetingj’, 6 April [ZOOOth rneetirrgj
and 13 April (2003rd meeting/ speakfor themselves.We
repeat that the People’s Republic of Benin has never
accusedor will ever accuseGovernmentslightly, The facts
are there; we shall not repeatthem.

199. The ticket of the individual listed here-Henri
Simon-has a bearing on other documents found in the
same box and according to which an official of the
Republic of Gabon by the name of Louis Martin appears to
have issued a permit to bear arms to Mr. Gilbert Bourgeaud.
‘Later, on 29 December, one day before the African
members of the group travelled to Casablanca, a receipt was
signed by Henri Simon for 200,000 CFA francs received
from General Louis Martin /ibid., document No. ,241.

205. We should simply like very sincerely to thank all
those delegationswhich, during the very lengthy meetings
we have held, have spokenherein order to expresssupport
for the causeof Benin, the causeof justice, the causeof
peaceand security, which is surely a sinequanon conditiorl
for a just international order in which the inalienablerights
of small defencelesscountries are respected and safeguarded.

200. Similarly-and
I wish to conclude my statement SO as
not to prolong the debate-there is evidence not only of a
decision in which Mr. Gilbert Bourgeaud appears to be
connected with a given Government but there is also the
bank statement of the pay received by this Mr. Gilbert
Bourgeaud for his activities. If the existence of this decision
is denied, then where does this document of the Banque du
Gabon et du Luxembourg come from Iibid, document
No. 41]? Is Gilbert Bourgeaud perhaps a ghost?

206. We should also like very sincerely to thank the
Secretary-General,Mr. Kurt Waldheim,who made available
to the Special Missionsentto Cotonou a devoted and very
conscientiousstaff of high calibre,whoseconstant technical
support wasdecisivefor the success
of the Mission.

201. I confess that I was very much surprised to hear, in
the course of the debate, someone saying that Gilbert
Bourgeaud did not exist, However, there is a whole series of
documents, there are bank statements, there are airline
tickets. We wonder whether it would not be feasible for an
investigation to be launched by the States where some of
these journeys took place, and this does not imply an
accusation against any State. This is how an objective
inquiry could be undertaken. After all, when someone goes
to an airport, it is necessary to fti out an embarkation card;
when one buys a ticket from the airlines, there is a record
of the individual who is travelling and his telephone number
and his address are taken down; when a person is vaccinated
and a certificate is issued, a record is also made. Those of us

207. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Council will now take a decisionon the draft resolution
submitted by Benin, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius and Panamain documentS/12322. As a result of
consultations, I understand that the members of the
Council wish to adopt the draft resolution by consensus,
that is, without putting it to a vote. Consequently,if I hear
no objection, I shalldeclarethe draft resolutionadopted.
lRe draft resolutionwasadopted.2
2 See resolution 40.5 (1977).
20

---

208.

(United States of America): the
able to support the resolution just
adopted by the Council because of its concern at the armed
attack O~I Benin and the loss of life and damage to property
suffcrcd by the people and Government of Benin. We want
t0 extend Uur S)‘lll~athy t0 the people of Benin through
their Ambassador to the United Nations, Mr. Thomas BUYS,

IJltitCd

Mr. .SlIEREK
SttiteS

WXi

209. 7%~ United States also wishes to express its concern
at the apparent violation of the territorial integrity of
Benin. As numbers of the Council know very well, threats
to thC territorial integrity of African States have beoor-ne a
serious problem, whether made by mercenaries or any other
type of armed intervention. More than mere lip service and
selective concern must be paid to the principle of territorial
itlt.Cgrity if international peace and security are to be
maintained.
2 10. I should also like to express briefly the views of my
Government on the question of mercenaries and comment
paragraphs 4 and 5 of the resolution.
211, Under United States law, it is a criminal offense for
any person to recruit an American citizen in the United
States for service as a soldier in foreign armed forces or for
any American citizen to enlist in the United States for
such service. In the event of there being evidence of such
activity taking place in the United States, my Government
would move vigorously to investigate and, where stlfficient
evidence is available, to prosecute. We are opposed to the
use’ of nicrcenarics to intervene in the internal affairs of
other countries and are committed to the enforcement of
ollr laws concerning the recruitment of American citizens as
mercenaries.

216. 1 also thank all the members of the Council who have
co-operated fully with US African members in cr()wIling
our
efforts with a consensus of all the members. The nt,rrabed mnbers
of the Council, as well as Pakistan
Romania and Venezuela, have shown great understandin;
of the African problem of which the Council was seized, we
African members appreciate the co-operation we have
received from the Western European members, as well as
from China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Seldom has a consensus been so easily negotiated in the
COUnd.
Like the Organization of African Unity, the
Council is today united-at least on the question of Berlin.
217. It is true that the debate on Benin’s complaint toOk a
sad turn the moment a national report was circulated. we
witnessed a rather unfortunate spectacle of Africans &uting at Africans across this chamber. Our attention was
diverted from the more important aspect of the question,
that of international mercenaries. We were even taken on a
short surprise journey to Zaire. But as Lady Macbeth would
have said: “There is a soul of goodness in things evil would
men observingly distil it out”. The exchanges of views
between my beloved African brothers have been, in a sense.
a healthy exercise.
218. It is not uncommon for members of the same family
to thrash it out publicly, so to speak. These contradictions
have been a sign of African virility, which is itself a sign of
African strength. We have demonstrated that members of
the Organization of African Unity are not afraid to agree
temporarily to disagree. My African brothers have proved
that diversity is the crucible in which friendship is tested
and that there can exist unity in diversity.
219. At Niger’s reception this evening, all my African
brothers will be found shaking hands in the English manner.
kissing each other on the cheeks in the French manner,
hugging each other in the Arab manner, laughing loudly
with each other and exchanging endearing and affeCtkmt~
terms with each other in the African manner. They will be
doing so in the best traditions of African unity, because wc
Africans will not be divided.

212. While a literal interpretation of paragraphs 4 and S-of
the resolution would inevitably pose problems for any
Government in terms of effectively controlling activities Of
its citizens outside its territorial jurisdiction, the United
States will make every effort to ensure that its laws on the
subject are complied with strictly, so as to discourage
American citjzens from becoming involved in any type of
unlawful mcrccnary activity.

220. All’s well that ends well.

213. Mr. I{AMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, i wish to
thank you for having presided over the debate on Benin’s
complaint SO successfully and with Your usual integrity and
paticncc.

221.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation
frO?n $Wltsh):
Phe
Council has now completed this stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda. As mentioned in the resohlti0n
just adopted, the Council Will remain Seized of the
question.

2 14. Ambassador lllueca of Panama, Ambassador Kikhia
of Libya
and Mr, ~ulye of India, as well as the Secretariat,
deserve our praise and thanks.

222. 1 should like to express the COUnCit’sappreciation to
the members of the Special Mission-the representatives of
Panama, Libya and India.

215. 1 was very heartened a moment ago as 1 listened to
the represclltative of the United States stating his Government’s position in connexion with mercenaries.

The

21

lneetirlg

rose

at 730

p.m.

lIOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Netions
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Inforniez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressex-vous
A : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas e&In en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidaras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Neciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00 {or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-March

1978-2,200
