2228th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING

9

W3.

SIXTH SPECIAL SESSION

Official Records

Tuesday, 30 April 1974,
at 3 p. m.
N E W

CONTENTS
Page
Agenda item 3:
Appointment of the Credentials Committee (continued)
Report of the Credentials Committee

1

Agenda item 7:
Study of the problems of raw materials and development
(continued)

j]

President: Mr. Leopoldo BENITES (Ecuador).

AGENDA ITEM 3
Appointment of the Credentials Committee (continued)*
REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
(A/9555)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
would refer representatives to document A/9555, which
contains the report of the Credentials Committee as
submitted by its Chairman, Mr. Carlos Giambruno of
Uruguay.
2. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): I should like to remind the General
Assembly of the terms of the amendment to the report of
the Credentials Committee adopted on 5 October 1973 by
an overwhelming majority of the General Assembly. It
reads:
"The General Assembly rejects the credentials of the
representatives of South Africa."1
3. In 1970, 1971 and 1972, at its twenty-fifth, twentysixth and twenty-seventh sessions, in its resolutions
2636 (XXV), 2862 (XXVI) and 2948 (XXVII), the General
Assembly also refused to accept the credentials of the
representative of South Africa. In adopting those reso­
lutions, the General Assembly decided that those who
claimed to represent South Africa were actually not the
true representatives of the people of that country.
4. May I remind the General Assembly that it has already
condemned apartheid as a crime against humanity, and
that, at its last session, in its resolution 3068 (XXVIII), it
adopted the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid. In its resolution
3151 G (XXVIII), the General Assembly condemned the
* Resumed from the 2207th meeting.
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/L700.

Y O R K

South African regime for its inhuman acts, its repeated acts
of aggression and its continued defiance of the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
5. In the light of the resolutions I have mentioned,
because of the persistence of the South African regime in
committing the crime of apartheid and its defiance of the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, and bearing in mind that the Credentials Com­
mittee has made no recommendation to the General
Assembly in this connexion, I have the honour to submit
draft resolution A/L.726 concerning the report of the
Credentials Committee [A/9555]. I request that this draft
resolution be voted upon by roll call.
6. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French): At
its 2141st plenary meeting, on 5 October last, the General
Assembly adopted an amendment to the first report of its
Credentials Committee, an amendment which rejected the
credentials of the delegation of South Africa. The Assembly
thus, for the third time, had taken the same decision on the
same issue. The President of the Assembly, in interpreting
that vote, said at the time:
. . the vote that has just taken place is tantamount to
a vehement condemnation of the policy followed by the
Government of South Africa. It is a new solemn warning
to that Government.. ."2
7. Unfortunately, it is quite clear that the South African
Government has taken no notice of this solemn warning
issued by the representative of the international com­
munity. Indeed, the Credentials Committee which you
appointed, Mr. President, in the course of the opening
meeting of the current session on 9 April [2207th
meeting], met on 25 April-that is to say, at a time when in
South Africa elections were being held. Now, those
elections were held on 24 and 25 April and they were for
the white South African population only. The white
population of South Africa, by an overwhelming majority,
renewed the mandate that had already been given to the
racist regime headed by Vorster. The press dispatches that
we read in recent days have told us that in the course of the
elections only some 1.7 million electors were called to the
polls-these are, of course, the white electorate-whereas
the 16 million persons of the black race were excluded
from the election. Thus, it is the representatives of this 1.7
million white men who come before us today to claim to
represent the 20 million South Africans, including 16
million of the black race.
8. The African representatives and their friends, during the
meetings of the Credentials Committee, urew the attention
2 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2141st meeting.

A/PV.2228

2

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

of the members of that Committee to these facts. They also
had occasion to draw the attention of the members of the
Committee to the fact that at the twenty-eighth session the
Assembly had taken a decision rejecting the credentials of
South Africa, and that since that time no political
development had occurred in that country which would
authorize any change whatsoever in the decision that the
Assembly took on 5 October last.

by South Africa, going beyond the mere technical, formal
consideration made by the Secretary-General. As members
have been able to read in the report submitted to the
Assembly, that is why the representatives of Africa and
their friends proposed to the Committee that we should
make the following recommendation to the Assembly:

9. After a discussion that covered two meetings, the
Credentials Committee, having been unable to reach a
common position, or even a majority position, then agreed
to refer the matter to the General Assembly for decision in
its wisdom.

"Accepts the credentials of all representatives of
Member States to the sixth special session of the General
Assembly with the exception of the credentials of the
representatives of South Africa." [A/9555, para. 32.J

10. Our position, as representatives of African countries, is
to abide by the decision that was taken at the twentyeighth session. By so doing we remain consistent with the
stand we have always taken, but we are also respecting the
position that was taken by the great majority, if not by the
unanimous decision, of the Assembly at the opening of this
session to the effect that all decisions which did not
concern the agenda of the session itself-that is to say, the
study of the problems of raw materials and developmentshould be taken on the basis of decisions emanating from
the twenty-eighth session.
11. During our discussions in the Credentials Committee,
those who did not share our viewpoint evoked in favour of
their position the provisions of rule 27 of the rules of
procedure. As a matter of fact, rule 27 of the rules of
procedure states:
"The credentials of representatives and the names of
members of a delegation shall be submitted to the
Secretary-General if possible not less than one week
before the opening of the session. The credentials shall be
issued either by the Head of the State or Government or
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs."
This relates to the technical, formal examination of
delegations' credentials. That is a matter for the SecretaryGeneral. He had examined the credentials submitted to him
on the basis of rule 27. But we also have rule 28, and that is
the rule which covers the work of the Credentials Com­
mittee, which is an off-shoot of the Assembly. Rule 28
reads:
"A Credentials Committee shall be appointed at the
beginning of each session. It shall consist of nine
members, who shall be appointed by the General Assem­
bly on the proposal of the President. The Committee shall
elect its own officers. It shall examine the credentials of
representatives and report without delay."
12. Hence, if the verification of credentials were confined
only to looking at them and noting the validity of the
signatures, there would have been no need to have the
General Assembly elect a Credentials Committee. There
would not have been any need to ask that Credentials
Committee to meet and elect a Chairman, and it would not
have been necessary to tell that Committee to look at the
credentials of the representatives and report without delay
to the General Assembly. That is why we asked the
Credentials Committee to look at the credentials submitted

"The Credentials Committee

13. That proposal of the African group was not accepted
by a majority of the Credentials Committee, but neither
was it rejected by a majority. The vote was 4 in favour,
4 against and 1 abstention. That is how the work of the
Credentials Committee took place, and that is why my
delegation, which was represented on that Credentials
Committee, comes forward to support strongly the draft
resolution just submitted by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic. In accepting his proposal the
Assembly would be remaining consistent with itself.
14. We would thus be abiding by our previous decisions,
and we would also be respecting the spirit of the Charter
and remaining faithful to the rules of morality and
international justice.
15. My delegation also made two comments in the
Credentials Committee. Those two comments led to no
suggestions of amendment, but, in deference to the truth, I
think I must recall very quickly what I said.
16. My delegation had examined the credentials of the
Portuguese Government. Those credentials were in accord­
ance with what we had asked of other delegations. We
noted that in the circumstances the Government of
Portugal had taken into account the warning given to it at
the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly. And
among the representatives of the Portuguese delegation
there was no one considered as representing what the
Lisbon Government called its "overseas provinces". That is
why, while reaffirming the reservations that we had
formulated during the course of the twenty-eighth session
to the effect that the Portuguese Government represented
only the territories of Portugal in its European dimensions,
we accept the credentials of the Portuguese delegation as
submitted during the course of this session.
17. My delegation also expressed its explicit reservations
concerning the credentials of the so-called Khmer Republic,
and it continues to think that, as do a great many members
of this Assembly, the only Government representing
Cambodia is the Royal Government of National Union,
presided over by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and that the
representatives of the Khmer Republic who are seated here
represent only themselves. Press releases have told us in
recent days that the Royal Government of National Union
is in the process of demonstrating its legitimacy and its
representative nature on the territory of Cambodia. That is
why my delegation wishes once again to reaffirm its formal
reservations with regard to the credentials of the delegation
of the Khmer Republic.

2228th meeting — 30 Apri] 1974

18. Mr. NA^O ( Alba nia) (interpretation from French): The
delegation of the People's Republic of Albania would like
to make the following brief statement on the report of the
Credentials Committee to explain its position on the
subject of the representation of Cambodia in the United
Nations.
19. The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania
would like once again to stress vigorously that the only
legitimate Government with all the necessary attributes to
represent the Cambodian people in international relations,
including the United Nations and other international
bodies, is the Royal Government, of National Union of
Cambodia, which has emerged from the National United
Front of Cambodia. The present situation in Cambodia
demonstrates clearly that it is precisely the Royal Govern­
ment of National Union of Cambodia which enjoys the
confidence and support of all the Cambodian people, is
organizing and directing the whole of the nation's life, and
is conducting the struggle of its people for the total
liberation of Cambodia from foreign invaders and traitors.
At the present time, 90 per cent of the territory,
comprising 5.5 million inhabitants out of a total population
of 7 million, is under the administration of the Royal
Government of National Union of Cambodia. In the
circumstances, the continuation of the usurpation of
Cambodia's seat in this Organization by the representatives
of the Lon Nol clique constitutes a flagrant violation of the
sovereign rights of the Cambodian people, of the Charter
and of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
20. This abnormal situation in the United Nations is the
direct consequence of the aggressive policy of the United
States of America, which fomented the treacherous coup
d'etat, illegally installed the Lon Nol clique in Phnom Penh,
launched armed aggression against Cambodia, and now
continues to support that clique by giving it all the
economic and military assistance, even including support in
the United Nations. The United States, alarmed about the
military and political crisis in which the puppet Phnom
Penh regime finds itself, makes open promises to give it the
fullest possible assistance. The purpose of the United States
is clear: by political ruses and aggression, it seeks to
maintain its domination of the corrupt Phnom Penh clique,
to bring the Cambodian people to its knees and to achieve
its neo-colonialist objectives in Cambodia and throughout
Indo-China. But this attempt is doomed to failure. The
Cambodian people, under the leadership of the National
United Front and Prince Norodom Sihanouk at the head of
the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia
—now installed within the country—and are now annihilat­
ing the aggressive plans of the United States in Cambodia
and are resolute in not making any compromise but in
waging the just struggle to the last. The Lon Nol clique,
cornered and encircled by the liberation forces, is now
living through its last moments. The striking successes of
the liberation struggle of the Cambodian people has also
thwarted the diabolical plans of the socio-imperialists and
revisionists who, in competition and collaboration with the
other super-Power, the United States, are plotting against
the Cambodian people and are maintaining, in a certain
form, relations with the Lon Nol clique. The valiant and
liberty-loving people of Cambodia is enjoying the sympathy
and support of all peoples* of the world, thanks to its
struggle for liberty and independence. The fact that the

3

Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia is
recognized by 60 States demonstrates the prestige and the
ever-increasing international authority it enjoys at present
in the world. Many countries Members of the United
Nations expressed themselves resolutely at the last session
in favour of the restoration of the lawful rights of the Royal
Government of National Union of Cambodia in the United
Nations and the expulsion of the representatives of the
Lon Nol group from the United Nations and from all organs
related to it. The peoples and peace-loving countries firmly
demand that an end be put to this abnormal situation in the
United Nations-which openly compromises the name of
our Organization-by excluding from the United Nations
the representatives of the Lon Nol clique, who are puppets
on the strings dangled by the United States in the service of
its policy of aggression and of war in South East Asia and
inviting the representatives of the Royal Government of
National Union of Cambodia, headed by its chief of State,
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, to take their proper place in
this Assembly.
21. On this occasion the delegation of the People's
Republic of Albania would like to announce that we
support the views of the delegations which have preceded
me with regard to the credentials of the racist regimes of
South Africa and Portugal, and which are also expressed in
the report of the Credentials Committee.
22. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): I have
asked to be allowed to speak in order to support the draft
resolution submitted by the Ambassador of the Syrian Arab
Republic and contained in document A/L.726. The posi­
tion of the delegation of Tanzania is clearly reflected in the
report of the Credentials Committee which is before the
Committee. That position has been further eloquently
elaborated by my brother and colleague, the Ambassador of
Senegal, and I have no desire to take more of the
Assembly's time in reiterating what is obvious, and partic­
ularly in reiterating what has just been explained by my
colleague from Senegal.
23. 1 should simply like to say that by adopting the draft
resolution presented by the Syrian Ambassador the Assem­
bly would simply be acting in a manner consistent with the
position that it took last year, the year before last and the
year before that. In rejecting the credentials of South
Africa the Assembly would be expressing its position in
unequivocal terms as to the lack of representativity of the
apartheid regime in South Africa. Furthermore, I think it is
the responsibility of this Organization to appear serious
before international public opinion. We cannot change our
position from one Assembly to another. Having taken the
decision that we took at last year's Assembly, I think we
should maintain that position. It is in that spirit that my
delegation worked very hard and painstakingly with my
brother from Senegal and with other like-minded dele­
gations in trying to have the Credentials Committee submit
to rhe Assembly a report that would reflect the decisions
previously taken by the Assembly. It is regrettable that we
were not able to do so, and it is because of that that the
Syrian Ambassador was compelled to propose the draft
resolution that is now before the Assembly.
24. Having said that, I should like to echo the remarks
made by the representative of Senegal with respect to the

4

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

credentials of Portugal. If we do not introduce any
amendment at this time and if we do not present any
specific draft resolution with respect to the credentials of
Portugal, it is because we are convinced that, pursuant to
the clear decision of the General Assembly last year, the
credentials of that delegation relate only to Portugal as it
exists in Europe. With that understanding we have no
difficulty in accepting the credentials of Portugal. Any
other interpretation or any other pretences would, of
course, compel us, as representatives of the African States,
to come before this Assembly and ask it to take the proper
decision.
25. Finally, my delegation echoes the views that have been
expressed by the Ambassador of Albania with respect to
the credentials of the representatives of the Lon Nol
regime. The Government and people of Tanzania support
and will continue to support the position that the Govern­
ment of Prince Sihanouk is the sole and legal authority of
Cambodia.
26. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China)(translation from Chinese):
At the twenty-eighth session of the United Nations General
Assembly, both in plenary meetings and in the Credentials
Committee, the Chinese delegation stated its position on
the question of the credentials of the Lon Nol clique3 and
the representatives of South Africa4 and Portugal.5 Now
when the report of the Credentials Committee of the sixth
special session of the General Assembly is under discussion,
we deem it necessary to reiterate our solemn stand on the
above questions.
27. The Royal Government of National Union of
Cambodia headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk is the sole
legal Government of the Cambodian people. It is now
exercising effective administrative jurisdiction over more
than 90 per cent of the national territory with a population
of 5.5 million and more. It has the firm backing of the
broad masses of the Cambodian people and enjoys wide
international recognition and support. It has established
diplomatic relations with an increasing number of
countries.
28. The traitorous Lon Nol clique is a product of United
States aggression and intervention in Cambodia, and has
been imposed on the Cambodian people by foreign forces.
From the very inception, it has met with the strong
opposition of the Cambodian people. It is now besieged in
Phnom Penh, eking out a precarious existence. Although
the United States is stepping up its military and economic
assistance to the traitorous Lon Nol clique, it cannot save
the latter from its inevitable doom.
29. The Chinese delegation maintains that it is entirely
illegal for the traitorous Lon Nol clique to usurp the seat of
Cambodia in the United Nations and that the credentials
issued by it are completely null and void. As the sixth
special session of the General Assembly is devoted to the
study of the problems of raw materials and development,
we shall take further action on the illegal usurpation of the
3 Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 2137th meeting, para. 22.
4 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, docu­
ment A/9179, para. 9.
5 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2200th meeting.

Cambodian seat in the United Nations by the Lon Nol
clique at the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
30. Furthermore, the Chinese delegation considers that
the white colonialist ruling authorities of South Africa are a
racist regime of the minority, which has been imposed on
the broad sections of the people of South Africa. It is not
at all qualified to represent the South African people. A
decision to reject the credentials of the South African
representatives was adopted at the twenty-eighth session of
the General Assembly. The Chinese delegation holds that
the current special session should reject the credentials of
the South African representatives, as was done at the
twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly, and take
note of the reservations made by the delegations concerned
on the credentials of the illegal representatives of the Lon
Nol clique.
31. Based on the above position, the Chinese delegation
supports the draft resolution submitted by the represen­
tatives of the Syrian Arab Republic.
32. With regard to the credentials of the Portuguese
representatives, the Chinese delegation already stated its
position at the Credentials Committee meeting. We fully
support the opinion of the representatives of the United
Republic of Tanzania and Senegal that Portugal has no right
at all to represent the people of Guinea-Bissau, Angola and
Mozambique.
33. Ms. WHITE (United States of America): The United
States opposes the proposal by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic by which the General Assembly
would reject the credentials of the, delegation of South
Africa. We share the strong feelings of many other countries
against the doctrine and practice of apartheid, but we do
not believe that revulsion against apartheid should take the
form of denying the validity of South Africa's credentials.
34. Until such time as the General Assembly changes its
rules of procedure, rule 27 stands. And rule 27 treats
questions concerning credentials as formal and procedural
matters only; it requires merely that credentials be issued
by the Head of State, Head of Government, or Minister for
Foreign Affairs.
35. The Secretary-General has informed us, through the
Credentials Committee, that the credentials are in order. No
one has suggested that they fail in some way to comply
with rule 27.
36. The Assembly has repeatedly denounced apartheid,
not least by means of resolutions adopted on reports of the
Special Political Committee, the Special Committee on
Apartheid and a number of other Assembly bodies. These,
not the credentials process, are the appropriate forums for
expressing such judgments.
37. We cannot share the view that the South African
delegation's credentials, having been issued by a Govern­
ment elected by a minority of the inhabitants of South
Africa, are invalid. There are a number of Governments
around the world whose representatives cannot fairly be
said to represent the majority of the peoples living in their
national territories, yet no one seriously suggests that their

2228th meeting - 30 April 1974

credentials should likewise be rejected. Doing so in the case
of South Africa is a dangerous precedent which tomorrow
could be turned against not a few in this Assembly.
38. The specified procedure has nothing to do with
approval or disapproval of the South African Government.
The credentials was never meant to deal with attitudes
towards Governments; hence acceptance of credentials
expresses no view whatever with regard to a credentialsissuing Government.
39. For these reasons, the United States will vote against
the proposal to reject the credentials of the South African
delegation.
40. Certain other matters have been raised this afternoon
on which I shall state the views of the United States
following the vote.
41. Mr. VON HIRSCHBERG (South Africa): The legal
and constitutional position relating to the examination of
credentials by the Credentials Committee and the General
Assembly has been stated and restated so often in recent
years that it should hardly be necessary to recite it again. If
I do so this afternoon it is only to ensure that the legal
position appears in the same Assembly record as the
statements we have so far heard in the course of this debate
so that those statements can be seen in proper perspective.
42. There is no better exposition of the legal and
constitutional position relating to the examination of
credentials than that provided by the highest legal authority
of this Organization, namely the Legal Counsel, in docu­
ment A/8160 of 11 November 1970. The Legal Counsel, in
this document, deals extensively with rule 27 of the rules of
procedure. "From this rule"—he states—"one may derive
three essential elements with respect to credentials to the
General Assembly". These are the following, and I am now
quoting from document A/8160:
"(a) 'Credentials' designate the representatives of the
Member State to the General Assembly;
"(b) They are to be submitted to the Secretary
General;
"(c) They are to be issued by the Head of the State or
Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
"Thus credentials for the General Assembly"-the Legal
Counsel continued-"may be defined as a document
issued by the Head of State or Government or by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of a State Member of the
United Nations submitted to the Secretary-General desig­
nating the persons entitled to represent that Member at a
given session of the General Assembly. Unlike the
acceptance of credentials in bilateral relations"-the Legal
Counsel argues further; and this is the most important
from the point of view of the statements made here
today—"the question of recognition of a Government of a
Member State is not involved, and substantive issues
concerning the status of Governments do not arise . . ."6
-except in certain instances which he then examines but
which he indicates do not apply to South Africa.
6 Ibid, Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document
A/8160, paras. 2 and 3.

5

43. This statement by the Legal Counsel has been en­
dorsed over the years by a large number of representatives
both in the Credentials Committee and in the General
Assembly, and it has never been convincingly refuted on
legal or constitutional grounds by those who have chal­
lenged South Africa's credentials. These challenges have
been based on political considerations. This is clear also
from the statements we have heard today, which have been
of a political nature almost exclusively.
44. We must decide what we want in this Organization. Do
we want the rule of law to apply or do we want political
expediency to apply? If the rule of law is to apply, then
the proposal with regard to South Africa's credentials
should be rejected, for it is patently illegal. If political
expediency is to apply, let it be in full recognition of the
fact that the credentials of other representatives will be
challenged tomorrow and when that happens there will be
no rule of law to protect their rights either.
45. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation would like to state for the record its full
support of draft resolution A/L.726 submitted at this
meeting by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
and supported by various other delegations.
46. We think that, indeed, this General Assembly, if it is
to be consistent with countless resolutions adopted year
after year on apartheid and the policy of the Government
of South Africa, should reject the credentials of the
representatives of this regime, for if we did not do this it
would imply that we were departing from the consistent
course of action of the Assembly and thus becoming
accomplices in the policy of a regime which in itself is a
negation of the representation of the vast majority of the
population of that territory.
47. We believe that while there is in the question of the
review of credentials a series of purely technical or
administrative aspects which must be considered by the
Secretary-General and later reviewed in the Credentials
Committee, no one can strictly deny the fact that this
General Assembly is primarily a political body made up of
sovereign States which has not only the power but also the
duty to go beyond the formal aspect of the issue of
credentials and take a position on what those documents
represent; for if they are signed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the apartheid regime, our receipt and acceptance
of them as such would be tantamount to our being
accomplices of a regime and of a policy which explicitly
deny the rights of the population of that territory and flout
the majority will of this Assembly.
48. 1 should also like to reaffirm my delegation's position
on the representation of Cambodia. Our position on the
report of the Credentials Committee could in no way be
interpreted as affecting or modifying our position of
principle on the point that the only legitimate represen­
tative of Cambodia in this Organization or anywhere else is
the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia.
49. Lastly, once again we should like to draw this
Assembly's attention to a paradox which has persisted year
after year and which apparently gives us a picture of a
Credentials Committee constituted in such a way that it

6

General Assembly — Sixth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

does not reflect the majority opinion of the members of
this Assembly. A reading of the report submitted by the
Credentials Committee and the results we evaluate every
year tell us that in the composition of that Committee
there is usually a distorted reflection of the picture
constantly displayed in plenary meetings of the General
Assembly.
50. My delegation would like to register this concern and
express the hope that by the forthcoming session the
Credentials Committee will be made up of members more
sensitive to the problems of colonialism and racism in the
world—members more in accord with the majority opinion
of this General Assembly.
51. Mrs. NHOUNG PENG (Khmer Republic) (inter­
pretation from French): My delegation did not intend to
make a statement on this item of the agenda, in the belief
that at this session, which is devoted to the harmonious
development of the whole of mankind, it would be
untimely to raise once again, for purely political reasons,
the question of the legitimacy of our representation, which
has already been dealt with by the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session.
52. In deciding on the convening of this special session,
care was taken to make clear its objective: the "Study of
the problems of raw materials and development," which
suggests clearly that questions of another nature would
simply be disregarded.
53. However, discordant voices have been raised-always
the same ones, the ones who have disturbed the harmonious
atmosphere of the last session-to discuss a problem which
has nothing to do with raw materials or development. In
their gratuitous insults they have not shown much orig­
inality or imagination, confining themselves to repeating
eternally the same worn-out charges and the same crude
exaggerations, such as "the traitorous clique in the service
of the imperialists", or the allegation that Sihanouk's
so-called Royal Government of National Union of
Kampuchea controls 90 per cent of the territory and 80 per
cent of the population of the country.
54. The Khmer delegation to the twenty-eighth session
repeatedly had occasion to deny categorically those false
assertions citing precise and easily verifiable facts. But that
has not prevented our adversaries at this session—which is
not, I repeat, supposed to deal with any political matterfrom making desperate verbal attacks against the Khmer
Republic.
55. Nevertheless, ever since the beginning of this year, our
troops have succeeded in inflicting staggering defeats on the
foreign aggressors and their local acolytes. Whether in such
provincial headquarters as Kompong Cham, Takeo or
Kampot, or in the capital of the country, Phnom Penh,
they have everywhere suffered humiliating defeats.
56. Driven back everywhere, in spite of their major
dry-season offensives, and unable to achieve any spectacular
successes, the foreign aggressors and their local acolytes
have now resorted to terrorist activities or are striking
individual blows to mask their defeats. Thus they launched
rocket bombardments against populous areas of Phnom

Penh, wounding several hundred people and leaving hun­
dreds homeless and more than another hundred dead.
Those bombardments, executed blindly and in hit-and-run
attacks, moreover, claimed only civilian victims.
57. After Phnom Penh, the foreign aggressors and their
local acolytes bombarded what was the peaceful farming
village of Oudong, If I speak in the past tense, it is because
they razed houses and massacred hundreds, including
women, children, old people and Buddhist monks—people
whose only crime was not to have welcomed them with
open arms as victors.
58. Contrary to what is alleged by certain propagandists, I
should like to declare solemnly here that the Khmer troops
are fighting only against the foreign aggressors, which, of
course, have been supported by Khmer Communists.
However that may be, our army has succeeded in gradually
expanding the security zones.
59. However, these Khmer elements, who are tired of the
crimes committed by foreign aggressors against their own
countrymen, have risen up in various places and rallied to
the support of the national Government. Thus in recent
months thousands of those Khmers have swelled the
Republicans ranks to fight against the foreign aggressors.
Among them have been military chiefs carefully trained in
Hanoi and North Viet-Nam.
60. Politically and socially speaking, the reaction of the
people is even more significant. The number of people who
have fled regions where insecurity reigned has in the last
few months alone reached 100,000, Kompong Thorn, the
provincial capital which has been beseiged since 1970, itself
has more than a 100,000 persons who have brought with
them everything they could-ploughs, cattle and harvestsin order to take refuge in the Government-controlled areas.
61. Seen from the air, these columns of refugees stretching
over several kilometres were really an impressive sight. This
is a stinging refutation of enemy propaganda, because this
massive exodus reduces to nothing the allegation of the
aggressors that they control 90 per cent of the area of the
country. If that control really existed, we could not explain
why these men, women and children have been able to
leave calmly these regions under their administration.
62. These movements of people who are fleeing terror
constitute, too, a "dramatic referendum"-as a distin­
guished member of a foreign Parliament has said—a refer­
endum showing that the Khmers reject both the ideology
and the regime which the foreign aggressors and the local
acolytes are attempting to impose on them by force.
63. There is another fact which shows that the so-called
control of 90 per cent of the territory by these aggressors
exists only in their imagination. In many parts of the
country, people can move around quite freely by day and
by night in boats and cars over hundreds of kilometres.
Recently members of our Government, diplomats and
international observers had some very conclusive experience
in this regard. The Government had no hesitation in holding
calmly a cabinet meeting in a remote province which is
supposed to be besieged by the enemy.

2228th meeting - 30 April 1974

64. The days of the Government of Khmer are not
numbered, as is claimed by certain representatives who are
ill-informed. On the contrary, the situation is gradually
improving. However, the Khmer Republic does not want to
prolong the horrors of war. All we want is that the foreign
aggressors withdraw in accordance with the provisions of
article 20 of the Paris Agreement of January 1973.7 We
want to rebuild our nation with all our children, including
those who have allowed themselves momentarily to be
misled by the foreign aggressors, who are seeking to
maintain our territory within their orbit in order to
facilitate their aggressive expansionism southwards.
65. What I am saying here is not meant for propaganda
purposes. It is just the truth. If any of the representatives
here would like to check what I am saying, my Government
will be very pleased to offer travel facilities and facilities for
staying in our country.
66. Come, and you will be treated as honoured guests and
you will see clearly whose side the Khmer people is on, that
is to say, whether it is the Government in exile of Sihanouk
or the legal Government which is installed in Phnom Penh.
67. Come, and you will see which of the two Governments
is the one which is struggling for the defence of the
independence and sovereignty of the nation and its inalien­
able rights, fighting alone against foreign aggression.
68. Lastly, you will see that the aggressors-unable to
crush the resistance of a people determined to oppose by
every possible means an ideology and an administration
contrary to its traditions and its Buddhism—are now
manoeuvring to see to it that our Organization gives it a
victory it is unable to win on the battlefield. It wants the
United Nations to intervene in the internal affairs of one of
its Members in order to restore the so-called lawful rights of
a so-called Government which has been established illegally
and unconstitutionally in foreign territory.
69. However, my delegation, confident of the wisdom and
the spirit of justice of the Member States, is convinced that
our Organization will be able to thwart this crude ma­
noeuvre, because to impose on a nation an illegal Govern­
ment without any popular foundation would be to violate
all moral and juridical principles and would only serve to
prolong the horrors of a war which foreign expansionism
has every interest in perpetuating.
70. Mr. 1NOZEMTSEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) (translation from Russian): The position of the
Soviet delegation with regard to the non-recognition of the
credentials of representatives of the racist regime in South
Africa at sessions of the General Assembly is well known.
This position has repeatedly been set forth by the Soviet
delegation at previous sessions of the Assembly, and it
remains unchanged. The Soviet delegation has also stated
this at a meeting of the Credentials Committee for this
special session of the Assembly.
71. The Soviet delegation supports the proposal by the
Syrian Arab Republic to reject the credentials of the
delegation of the Republic of South Africa. Our premise is
7 Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Viet-Nam,
signed in Paris on 27 January 1973.

7

that neither the delegation nor the Government of the
Republic of South Africa represents the indigenous African
population, which is the true master of that country.
72. As it did last year, the Soviet delegation supports the
reservation expressed by the African countries witli regard
to the credentials of the delegation of Portugal. Like the
African countries, we believe that these credentials extend
only to the delegation of Portugal proper and can in no way
be said to extend to the African Territories, which at
the present time are under the occupation and colonial
administration of Portugal.
73. The Soviet delegation would also like to recall that at
the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly it
supported the restoration of the lawful rights in the United
Nations of the Royal Government of National Union of
Cambodia, and in this regard the position of the Soviet
Union remains unchanged.
74. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): The question of
credentials not only has become a perennial matter; it has
even been raised, and rightly so, at this special session of
the General Assembly. 1 believe my colleague from Syria
was fully justified in expressing, not the high emotions, but
the sentiments related to the dignity of the human person
which we Asians, Africans, Latin Americans, and I am sure,
the free people of Europe, and, I would say, of any
continent deeply feel about tire exclusion of the native
population in a country that belongs to them, who are
being treated shabbily, or rather excluded from the
international community, when representatives of the other
colonial peoples sit here among us as brothers enjoying the
inalienable rights that belong to us all.
75. I have been involved in this question ever since one of
your predecessors, Sir, none other than our beloved
Mr. Hambro, played a laudable part in trying to find a
solution. However, he made it clear to South Africa-and
the phraseology was unequivocal-that matters could not go
on as they had done in the past. That happened during the
twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly. We are now
on the threshhold of the twenty-ninth session—leaving aside
this special session on raw materials.
76. We were disheartened to learn of the recent so-called
elections in the Republic of South Africa, which seems to
be a republic for the whites, excluding anyone who does
not have a white skin. It is a travesty of justice; it is unfair.
Of course, we know that the whites there are filled with the
fear that one day they may be overwhelmed if they open
the political and other gates to the indigenous people who
own the whole land. But who told them in the first place to
emigrate to Africa? Why did they not stay where they were
in Europe? But they did emigrate. A couple of millions or
so—I do not know how many—are there. But, at the same
time, they should realize that they are visitors if they act
like this, and only full-fledged citizens if they stand for the
dignity of the indigenous people.
77. What shall we do? Shall we turn this special session
into a political debate with every one of us trying to see
how the wind blows and stand on solidarity? This is not a
question of solidarity. This is a question of fairness and
justice.

8

General Assembly — Sixth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

78. I was moved when my brother and colleague from
Senegal spoke with deep emotion which he could not
suppress. I felt moved for, after all, those black and other
Coloured South Africans are not his brothers alone, but the
brothers of each one of us, for we are all brothers in
humanity. If one of us is reviled, the whole body of the
United Nations is treated with indignity.

That is not enough. There should be another paragraph, and
this is the last one:

79. I am going to make a suggestion-take it or leave it.
But 1 will acquit my conscience so that perhaps something
can be done to treat the situation in the best manner as it
obtains today. If some members of the Assembly evince
interest in a kind of draft resolution which I will read orally
to you, I shall say, "Put it to the vote". If others, because
of political considerations, want matters to go 100 per cent
their way, then I will wash my hands of the matter and
consider myself as having done my duty, as one who has
served in this Organization since its inception.

81. The phraseology could have been refined and im­
proved, but that forms the core of a suggested solution so
that we may not divide ourselves on the grounds of
solidarity, create acrimony and, worse than that, find
ourselves still confronted with this lassez-faire situation.

80. I do not think my text is perfect-far be it from me to
consider that any text can meet the desires and aspirations
of every one of us. I will read the text. I wrote it while I
was listening to the various speakers, taking into account
the points of view that were presented here. This would be
the text, Sir, or the basis for a solution, if in your wisdom
as our President, you wished to use it as a basis:
"The General Assembly,
"Considering that the Government of the Republic of
South Africa has so far consistently refused to allow the
indigenous black and other Coloured peoples of South
Africa to participate in the Government of their country,
"1. Takes note of the fact that the credentials sub­
mitted by the Republic of South Africa apply only to the
relatively small minority of the South African regime and
are invalid in so far as the large majority of the indigenous
and other Coloured peoples are concerned;
"2. Urges the white Government of South Africa"
—Remember, now, 1 call them "South Africa". I used to
call them "the Republic of South Africa" to keep the
form. But now I call them "South Africa", because of the
second paragraph—"to take the necessary steps to rectify
this anomalous situation in conformity with the basic
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and article 1, as spelt out in the two International
Covenants oil Human Rights."
Article 1-1 worked on that. It is identical in the inter­
national Covenants. I worked on it for eight years. It is the
article on self-determination. And now for the third
operative paragraph. Why is there a third? Because other­
wise it would be status quo, laissez-faire. South Africa
would say, "Let them talk from the podium of the United
Nations. My caravan is marching on. Let those people
bark." In my view, this is a very important operative
paragraph:
"3. Requests those States which have close political and
economic ties with the white regime of South Africa to
prevail on its leaders to take prompt action to put an end
to apartheid so that all the citizens may enjoy equal rights
and personal dignity".

"4. Warns the South African regime that the present
situation may not be allowed to continue and that the
United Nations would be fully justified to take drastic
measures vis-a-vis South Africa in the near future."8

82. With regard to Portugal, 1 am heartened by what lias
taken place in that land. Let us all entertain the hope that it
will not be long before Portugal will follow the example of
France and no longer speak of the so-called overseas
provinces of Portugal. We urge it to put an end to the
domination which in various parts of Africa under Portu­
guese rule is still the order of the day.
83. But I cannot keep silent about poor Cambodia, the
cheque- ooard of the major Powers, in which, as in another
region, they are playing their chess game, not with wooden
pieces, but with the destiny of the people. It is high time
perhaps that both parties—one of which has one part of the
Cambodian people or its leaders for a client, the other of
which has the other part for a client—used the United
Nations to bring them together. Perhaps the SecretaryGeneral and you, Mr. President, will stop that rampage, that
carnage.
84. Who is suffering? The leaders? The leaders are secure.
It is the Cambodian people that is suffering. It is high time
the United Nations played a role and brought the two
factions together, as I mentioned during the last session.
85. I beg your pardon, Mr. President, for having taken so
much time, and I thank my colleagues for having been
indulgent and having listened patiently to what I think
might be the basis for some solution.
86. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Before we proceed to the vote under rule 88 of the rules of
procedure, I shall call upon those representatives who wish
to explain their votes before the vote.
87. Mr. CAICEDO (Colombia) (interpretation from
Spanish): Despite its deep sympathy but adhering to the
criterion that the consideration of credentials calls only for
consideration of the external formalities of a document,
Colombia will abstain in the vote on draft resolution
A/L.726, submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic.
88. In addition, my delegation considers that, in accord­
ance with Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter, the
Assembly is specifically prohibited from intervening in
matters which are essentially within the domestic juris­
diction of any State. That does not by any stretch of the
imagination mean that Colombia is abandoning its anticolonialist, anti-racist policy or its continuing condem­
nation of apartheid as a hateful regime contrary to the most
8 Subsequently circulated as document A/L.727.

2228th meeting - 30 April 1974

elementary human rights and the self-determination of
peoples. But Colombia considers that the United Nations
has and can use other machinery to cope with the situation,
as provided in Article 5 of the Charter.
89. Actually, the time has come to seek the precise legal
means to prevent the repeated flouting of the many
resolutions that have been ignored by South Africa.
90. Mr. MEGALOKONOMOS (Greece) (interpretation
from French): The Greek delegation will not participate in
the vote on the proposal to reject the credentials of South
Africa. This position is in keeping with the one adopted by
our delegation at the two meetings of the Credentials
Committee. The objective was to establish a consensus, if
possible, among the members of that Committee and thus
to avoid any waste of valuable time at the special session of
the General Assembly, and also to promote the noble
objectives of this session. Since the Members of the United
Nations are the same as those at the twenty-eighth regular
session, and since the General Committee has been re­
elected, as well as the Credentials Committee, our delega­
tion felt that it was not appropriate to draft a new
resolution on credentials during the course of this special
session.
91. Mr. CAMPBELL (Australia): It had been our hope,
and indeed we tried to ensure, that the draft resolution
would be presented in a form which could have made this
intervention superfluous. As it is, the Australian delegation
will cast its vote on the constitutional basis of rule 27 of
the rules of procedure: namely, that we are at this time
concerned only with the evident and documentary validity
of credentials per se.
92. That having been said, I am sure it will be accepted as
superfluous for the Australian delegation to need to
proclaim again from this rostrum anything more specific
than its categoric rejection of the racist and colonialist
practices of South Africa and others. Our attitude to those
deplorable policies is not in any sense an issue in the vote
which is about to take place.
93. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from
Spanish):
Before we proceed to the vote, I should like to explain that
the Assembly will be voting on draft resolution A/L.726
submitted by the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic.
An oral proposal was also made by the representative of
Saudi Arabia, but we cannot vote on it now because the
text has not been distributed and normally such texts
should be voted on the next day. Therefore, since there is
no conflict between the two draft resolutions, we shall now
proceed to vote on draft resolution A/L.726. A roll-call
vote has been requested.

Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Cameroon,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Afghanistan, Albania,
Algeria, Bahrain, Bhutan, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Czecho­
slovakia, Dahomey, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica,
Jordan.
Against: Luxembourg, Malawi, Mexico, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, France,
Germany (Federal Republic of), Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy.
Abstaining: Nepal, New Zealand, Paraguay, Peru,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bolivia, Botswana, Colombia,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Japan.
The draft resolution was adopted by 86 votes to 26, with
15 abstentions (resolution 3200 (S-VI)).
94. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call
now on the representative of Senegal.
95. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, thank you for calling upon me so promptly,
but 1 should like to speak after you have set forth any
conclusions you may draw from the vote which has just
taken place.
96. Normally, after a vote such as the one just taken, the
President draws conclusions from the Assembly's decision,
and I should like to speak on behalf of the African group of
States on the conclusions you draw from this vote. Once
you have drawn those conclusions I should like to return to
the rostrum.

Kenya, having been drawn by lot by the President, was
called upon to vote first.

97. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to explain that the vote is a whole including
explanations of vote before the vote, the vote itself and
then explanations of vote after the vote. Only when that
process is completed is it possible for the President to make
an interpretation if he wishes to do so. Accordingly, in due
course I shall be very pleased to call on the representative
of Senegal. Meanwhile I shall call in turn on those
representatives who have indicated a desire to explain their
votes after the vote, beginning with the representative of
the United States.

In favour: Kenya, Khmer Republic, Kuwait, Laos,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi

98. Ms. WHITE (United States of America): In view of
what has been said by certain other delegations, the United
States delegation wishes to put on record its views with
regard to the credentials of the delegation of the Khmer
Republic. I begin by noting that the Secretary-General has

A vote was taken by roll call.

9

10

General Assembly - Sixth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

found the credentials submitted by the Khmer delegation
to be in order under rule 27, as is the case with the
credentials submitted by delegations representing other
Member States. Consequently, there is no basis whatever
for the polemical attack on the propriety of those cre­
dentials that has been heard from this platform.

here, my delegation would consequently also have voted
against retention of the last eight words of the draft
resolution had there been a separate vote on those words.

99. My delegation had hoped that all delegations would
avoid diverting this session from its urgent business, but
others have done so by injecting extraenous political
matters. 1 therefore now am compelled to stress that my
Government considers the Government of the Khmer
Republic to be the only legitimate governmental authority
of Cambodia.

109. As President I have not offered any interpretation of
the suggestions or motions that were made, but I should
like now to put forward a few ideas.

100. My delegation also categorically rejects the distor­
tions of historic fact, purveyed today from this podium,
regarding the activities of my Government. Such distortions
do not enhance or justify the pretensions of the nominal
leader of the so-called Royal Government of National
Union, nor do they contribute to the work of this session.
101. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanishj: I
call on the representative of Senegal on a point of order.
102. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French): 1
should like to remind the Assembly-as the President did a
few minutes ago-that the vote that has just been cast
concerns the draft resolution introduced by the delegation
of the Syrian Arab Republic and any explanations of vote
outside of matters involved in the resolution that has just
been adopted are out of order. 1 would therefore like to ask
the President to stop anyone who speaks on matters other
than the question of South Africa.

108. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
have heard the last explanation of vote after the vote.

110. With respect to the significance of the vote that we
have just taken, I should like to repeat in essence what I
said at the twenty-eighth session when the Assembly took a
similar decision at its 2141st plenary meeting.
111. After listening to the arguments in the debate, and
now that the Assembly has taken a decision on draft
resolution A/L.726, I would remind members of the
conclusion reached by my predecessors in the presidency,
that is to say, the President of the twenty-fifth session of
the General Assembly, Mr. Edvard Hambro, and the Presi­
dent of the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
Mr. Adam Malik. The interpretations that they gave on this
point are on record.
112. In the light of those precedents, I consider that the
vote that has just been cast is tantamount to a vehement
condemnation of the policy followed by the Government
of South Africa. It is a new solemn warning to that
Government, but it does not affect its rights as a Member of
the Organization or the rights of South Africa under the
Charter.
113. 1 call now on the representative of Senegal.

103. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Since this is a point of order, under the rules of procedure I
must rule immediately.
104. I should like to explain that a point of order is an
appeal to the President for a decision, not for an endorse­
ment of a decision taken previously. Therefore, I think that
the suggestion made by the representative of Senegal is
correct. Representatives should speak essentially on the
resolution that has just been adopted, but it is not possible
to prevent others from making tangential references to any
other subjects without dealing with them in depth, because
others have done this both before and after the vote.
105. Mr. PATRICIO (Portugal): Reference has been made
at today's meeting to the credentials of the Portuguese
delegation to this session of the General Assembly. I should
like to point out that my delegation has no doubt about
our credentials and is in no way bound by the interpreta­
tions presented in this forum.
106. Mr. BREITENSTEIN (Finland): The position of my
delegation on the policy of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa has been consistent and is therefore well
known.
107. Our position on the approval of duly issued creden­
tials of Member States of the United Nations has also been
consistent and is, I trust, likewise well known. In support­
ing the approval of the credentials of all the Member States

114. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French): I
should like first to express the appreciation of the African
delegations to the delegations that supported us in this hour
of truth. This is particularly heartfelt because the condem­
nation of apartheid cannot be confined to a mere profes­
sion of anti-racist faith. It must be manifested in facts, and
we consider that there was no better opportunity than the
one that just presented itself. With respect to those who
came to this rostrum to tell us that they are against racism
and that they condemn the policy of apartheid of South
Africa but subsequently voted for the credentials of that
delegation, we consider that their words are not in keeping
with their feelings.
115. For our part, I shall not talk about your interpre­
tation, Mr. President, because you said that you gave no
interpretation. But with regard to the conclusion that you
drew from our debate, we in the African group believe that at
the least it is curious. We reserve our right to revert to this
conclusion at a more timely moment.
116. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): My delegation has certain reservations to
express on the report of the Credentials Committee. These
reservations relate to the credentials of three members. At
this session, as at previous sessions, our first objection
concerns the representatives of Israel. We wish to raise
serious objections to the credentials of the representatives
of the Zionist authorities who represent nothing other than

11

2228th meeting - 30 April 1974

expansionist authorities and usurpers of territories and of
the national and legitimate rights of the Palestine people.
117. My second point concerns the credentials of the
Khmer delegation. My delegation is convinced that the Lon
Nol regime is only an illegal clique of usurpers, set up by
imperialism which is in power contrary to the will of the
Cambodian people.
118. My third point concerns the Portuguese delegation,
which has no right to represent the peoples of Mozambique,
Angola or Guinea-Bissau.
119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Saudi Arabia submitted an important
draft resolution. Under rule 78 of the rules of procedure it
will have to be distributed so that it can be studied and
examined by all representatives present. It will be con­
sidered and voted on at a subsequent point in the plenary
meetings of the sixth special session.
120. The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed
to speak, and I now call on him.
121. Mr. DORON (Israel): I should like to exercise my
right of reply in respect of the diatribe against Israel just
delivered by the representative of Syria. Even in these days
it is characteristic of the Government of Syria that it once

Litho in United Nations, New York

again has decided to demonstrate its blind, all-pervading
animosity towards my country and its stubborn refusal to
recognize our rights.

AGENDA ITEM 7
Study of the problems of raw materials and development
(continued)
122. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to make the following announcement. The
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Sixth Special
Session has informed me that he expects that the Com­
mittee will conclude its work tomorrow morning. In view
of the circumstances, and taking into account the time
necessary to prepare and publish the report of the/Id Hoc
Committee, it is practically impossible to examine the
question before tomorrow afternoon. Consequently, the
Assembly may wish to meet tomorrow afternoon, on the
understanding that if it is necessary the examination of the
item could continue until Thursday, 2 May. If there is no
objection, I shall take it that the General Assembly agrees
to that procedure.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

74-77052-February 1976-2,200
