TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
st

MEETING: 11 SEPTEMBER 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 145 1) . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8794);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8805);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8806) . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1451

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol $1. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Senmtity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

UNDRED

AND FIFTY-FIRST

Held in New York on Wednesday, 11 September
President: Mr. G. IGNATIEFF

(Canada).

MEETING
1968, at 11.50 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its examination of the question before it.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

3. Before calling on the first speaker on my list I should
like to invite the attention of the Council to a report
regarding the latest incidents in the Suez Canal sector
received from General Odd Bull [S/793O/Add.80].

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l451)

4. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): There are two elements in the
situation which is now under the Council’s consideration:
first, an incident on 26 August on the eastern bank of the
Suez Canal; second, the exchange of fire acrossthe Suez
Canal on 8 September. As regards the first, the Council
heard the statement of the representative of Israel [144&h
meeting], alleging that the United Arab Republic was
responsible for it. The Council then heard the statement of
the representative of the United Arab Republic [ibid.],
who categorically denied this allegation. Besides these two
statements, the Council had before it the report of the
Chief of Staff of UNTSO (5’/793O/Add. 741 which quoted
the statements of the two sides as far asthe substantive part
of the evidence was concerned. The Chief of Staff later
submitted another report [S/793O/Add, 761 which corroborated that no conclusive evidence was available on the
incident. The statements made thereafter and the informal
exchange of views amongst members of the Council
suggested only one conclusion, namely, that the Council
did not have an agreed version even of the basic facts of the
incident of 26 August 1968.

I. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8794);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8805);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8806);
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

5. As regards the exchange of fire acrossthe Suez Canal on
8 Skptember the evidence is comparatively fXer and
clearer. According to General Odd Bull’s report, the fire
was initiated by Israeli forces at 1325 hours GMT after
certain explosions had been observed on both sides of the
Canal. This seems to have led to sustained firing from both
sides until a cease-firewas arranged. The Council promptly
authorized its President to issue an appeal for the observance of the cease-fire (1448th meeting, para. 731, and we
hope that that appeal will be fully respected.

Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8794);
Letter dated 8 September 1988 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8805);
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8808)

6. It is not the first time that the Security Council has
considered an explosive turn of the situation in the Middle
East. The central fact of this situation is that certain Arab
territories are at present under Israeli military occupation.
We all bow that foreign occupation gives rise to resistance.
Episodes illustrating this historic fact are not lacking in the
life of any nation. Arab resistance to Israeli occupation is
therefore neither a peculiar nor an incomprehensible
phenomenon.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Israel and the United Arab Republic to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel)
and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) took places
at the Security Council table.

7. The issues involved in this situation should be clearly
identified. On the one hand, there are incidents which can
1

tne mission of Ambassador Gunnar Jarring. We believe that
in his successlies the best hope of restoring conditions eI
peace and stability in the area.

properly be called cease-fireviolations. On the other hand,
there are incidents which are the natural consequences of
foreign occupation.
I
8. As regards the former, the rights and obligations of the
parties concerned are clear. None of them has ever claimed
exception to the cease-fire. Indeed, in paragraph 7 of
document S/7930/Add.74, Lt. General Odd Bull reported
that he was assured on 28 August: “of the continued and
unqualified adherence of the United Arab Republic to the
cease-fire in the area, as required by the Security Council
and accepted by the parties, and also to the practical
arrangements of 27 July 1967, renewed on 27 August
1967, concerning the prohibition of movements of boats
and military activities in the Suez Canal.”

14. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French): I shall
make a very brief statement in the debate in which we have
been engaged for several days and which, I recall, ha
already been the subject of a solemn declaration by the
President of the Council [144&h meeting, para. 731.
15. I have read and reread very carefully the infonnatiea
which has been communicated to us by General Odd Bull,
through the Secretary-General, U Thant, to whom a special
tribute should be paid for his efforts to bring about ar,
honourable settlement of the present situation in the
Middle East.

9. We wish that Israel had also given a similar unqualified
assurance at that time. Instead, on 4 September we heard in
this Council a question: “Is Egypt ready to take all the
necessary measures to prevent, in the future, attacks of this
nature [1446th meeting, para. 5U/? ” Having put that
question, the representative of Israel said that the answer to
it was vital for the future maintenance of the cease-fire in
the area. Then on 8 September the cease-firebroke down.

16. The dossier we are now studying is, I regret to say,
lamentably devoid of evidence whereby the degree of
responsibility of either side can be determined. This lack of
evidence is not the result of any inertia or inaction on the
part of the United Nations observers. The observers, assoer~
as they were informed, did what they could,
whatever it
was materially possible for them to do; but they did nor
have at their disposal any concrete element on the basisal
which to establish irrefutably certain alleged facts. They did
not even have enough time to go to the places in question
or to check the existence of certain elements which were
apparently reported in one sector.

10. The grievous loss of life and damage to property to
which the people inhabiting the west bank of the Suez
Canal were subjected are a cause of deep sorrow for my
delegation.
11. As regards incidents of lesser magnitude arising from
Arab resistance we believe that in those incidents considerations of a different nature are involved. Legally as well as
morally those incidents are iu a classby themselves and can
hardly be put on a par with cease-fireviolations as such.
The inhabitants of occupied territories, oppressed by the
injustice of foreign occupation, are left with no alternative
but to struggle against it. Yet in respect of those incidents a
tragic confusion of issues takes place. An argument is
advanced that it is the failure of Arab Governments to
ensure suppression of Arab resistanceto Israeli occupation
that invites well-prepared and calculated attacks. In our
view that argument invokes the outlawed system of military
reprisal and is therefore not acceptable.

17. In these circumstances, the United Arab Republic
cannot by any means be held responsibIe for incidcnu
which occurred in sectors it no longer controls because they
have been illegally occupied as a result of large-scale
military operations.
18. My Government believes that genuine co-operatican
with Ambassador Jarring, on the basis of the strict
implementation
of all the provisions of resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, is the only way that can
lead to the establishment of a just and lasting peace. hfy
Government notes with satisfaction that the United Arab
Republic is quite prepared to implement that resolution.
We welcome this spirit of co-operation and sympathlze with
the people and Government of Egypt.

12. The Council can no more find fault with the agony of
the people of an occupied territory that it can allow the
cause of that agony to continue. No one can find
gratification in violence and death; but justice, in this
Council as well as outside, must take into account the
causal sequence which has led to those dreadful results.

19. We repeat that the only solution to this problem for
the time being is implementation of the resolution of 2:
November 1967. Neither air-raids nor the firing of guns,
rockets or cannon will settle this problem, nor will so-called
consensuses,which are in fact only ways of evading tha
solution of the problem.

13. Tension has once again caught the Middle East in its
grip. The question is: what should the Security Council do
to bring about a fair and a just and an honourable
solution? To this question the Council provided the fulI
and complete answer, not when it arranged the cease-firein
June 1967, which was a first step towards settlement, but
later on when it unanimously adopted resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which provides for the
withdrawal of Israeli armed forces together with other
principles of settlement. Indeed, several members of the
Council have already referred to the crucial importance of
the implementation of that resolution and of the successof

20. The fundamental problem is, first of all, the evacur
ation of the territories occupied by force and the cessatichn
of the shelling of towns. Then the Palestinian people mwl
be allowed to enjoy their natural rights and to live in petit
in the land of their ancestors.
21. Mr. BALL (United States of America): This Council,
which for many years has been seeking a way towar&
enduring peace in the Middle East, finds itself once again
distracted from that search by incidents which threaten 10
reignite the flames of war. Much as we deplore this
2

distraction, we must deal energetically with the larger
danger, or the long-range goals of peace will be more
remote than ever.

representative, Mr. Jarring, to whom the whole world looks
anxiously for a peaceful solution.
27. As I noted earlier, since these two incidents both
Governments concerned have indicated their continuing
intention to adhere scrupulously to the cease-fire.That is
their clear responsibility: to carry out these statements of
intention fully and without qualification or reservation. On
our side-on the side of the Council-it is our duty to insist
not only that both sides should adhere to the cease-firebut,
to that end, that they should issue strict orders to their
local
commanders against violations or unilateral actions
that may endanger the cease-fire and, finally, that the
nations concerned should urgently perfect their cooperation at all levels with IJNTSO. Even that, however,
does not mark the totality of the Council’s duty. In the
present conditions of the Middle East, a cease-fire is not
peace, and it would be a foolish deception to confuse it
with peace. It is merely a necessary condition to the
shaping and building of peace, and, until a just peace has
been shaped and has been accepted by the parties, it
remains a condition inherently unstable, a condition fragile
and implicitly explosive.

22, The cease-fire in the Suez sector, maintained in
reasonable quiet for nearly a year, has now been broken
twice within the space of a fortnight. In both casesthere
was lamentable 10~s of liFe. In the second instance, on
8 September, the tiring, with the resulting damage and
many casualties, took place along a wide front and on an
omir~ously large scale. What do these unhappy incidents
portend? The pattern of the future, it seems to me, can
only be dimly perceived. The most we can hope for is that
these incidents will prove only isolated violations, without
sequel. But that is being very sanguine indeed, for quite
possibly they may foreshadow a new and still more
dangerous situation, a situation in which the parties to the
cease-fire in the Suez sector will no longer show even that
measure ofrestraint and forbearance with respect to the
actions of their armed forces and other elements of their
populations than they have shown in recent months. We
dare not ignore that more sombre possibility. Indeed, we
must do all we c,anto avert it, because if such a situation
should come about it could gravely jeopardize not only the
cease-fire but the all too precarious pursuit of peace.

28. For all too long the parties have delayed in getting on
with the hard, dry, wearisome task of finding a just and
lasting reconciliation of their competing interests. They
have let far too much valuable time be lost in their
obsession with procedures and semantics and diversionary
efforts to gain temporaj and quite meaningless tactical
advantages.

23. In this situation it is my understanding that both the
Government of Israel and the Government of the United
Arab Republic intend to adhere scrupulously to the
cease-fire. That, however, requires not only a verbalized
intention. It requires not only a determination not to fire
first but also the avoiding of provocation, the avoiding of
actions that could lead to misunderstanding. The maintenance of a cease-fire requires, in other words, caution, care
and constant vigilance, and that has not been sufficiently
taken into account in recent weeks and months.

29. On 22 November last this Council, in its resolution
242 (1967) provided a skeleton of principles on which a
just peace could be erected. Yet Ambassador Jarring, armed
as he is with the unanimous mandate of the Security
Council, has, for all his skilful and tireless efforts, not yet
been able to translate these principles into perceptible
progress towards peace. Under these circumstances, the
members of the Council, should, I think, examine their own
hearts and their own consciences, to see what it is that we
can most usefully do.

24. Incidents such as those we are now confronting would,
of course, be deplorable at any time, but in the febrile
climate of the Middle East they offer the threat of greater
peril, for the obvious danger is that other and still more
destructive incidents will follow in a frightening escalation.

30. In his able speech yesterday (1449th meeting] our
colleague from Ethiopia, Ambassador Makonnen, brought
home to us, it seems to me, our sure responsibilities and in
doing so wisely put the present incidents in proper
perspective. I can think of no better statement of the
obligations of the Council than those which Ambassador
Makonnen has provided us with.

25. On 8 September that is precisely what happened. The
intensive and widespread exchanges of fire on that day took
a heavy toll of lives and property on both sides, and,
whatever differences of view members of this Council may
have concerning the origin of this second clash, there can be
no difference concerning its potential significance-and
even the representative of the Soviet Union, I am glad to
note, has admitted that it actually occurred, which for him
is a considerable concession.

31. The world today has more than enough instability,
more than enough violence, more than enough fanaticism.
Let the Security Council, in its most vexing problem at this
critical and dangerous moment, exert its timely influence
for a decisive turn away from war and towards an early, just
and honourable peace.

\ 26. It is only too apparent that the restraint to which both
sides are pledged under the cease-firewasshown in this case
by neither, and it is equally apparent that this outbreak has
heightened the danger of a greater conflagration. That is the
immediate danger to which this Council must now forthrightly address itself. That is the most urgent matter now
before the Council. We must make it emphatically clear
that the incidents of the past two weeks will remain
isolated exceptions to the cease-fire and not be repeated or
become part of a new spiral of increasing violence, further
endangering the devoted efforts of the United Nations

32. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Algeria in right of reply.
33. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): 1

shall be all the more brief because the Algerian delegation
has already had on several occasions,through its Permanent
3

Near East through acts of provocation by Israel against the
United Arab Republic. The scale of these acts and the
ensuing military operations organized by the aggressor are
increasing in a menacing way and are accompanied with
attempts by the Tel Aviv diplomats to conceal and
camouflage these acts of aggression by making obviously
propagandistic appeals to the Security Council and lodging
so-called complaints against the United Arab Republic.

Representative, the opportunity to rebut categorically the
baseless allegations of Mr. Tekoah. Mr. Tekoah’s flow of
words is proverbial and I do not intend to vie with him in
verbosity. The Algerian delegation still wonders whether
Mr. Tekoah really hopes to convince anyone in the Council,
including his own friends, and, personally, I doubt that he
will even succeedin convincing himself.
34. Whether he wishes or not, the problem before the
Council is not that of Algeria, a-country which has not
usurped any territory and is not responsible for the fact
that today thousands of refugees are still struggling wretchedly along the roads of Palestine in the cold and mud.
Perhaps you, Mr. President, could ask Mr. Tekoah what
reasons the Arab people could have to rejoice at the
presence of Israeli legions who have come from Europe and
elsewhere, or to be ruled with a rod of iron by some
gnuleiter friend of his in the occupied territories.

40. The representative of Israel obviously distorts the
facts, trying to make out that somebody objects to Israel
appealing to the Council.
41. That is not at all the case. In this connexion it must be
stressedwith the utmost firmness that nobody objects to
Israel coming to the Security Council and seeking here, and
not through military aggression, a settlement of Near East
problems. What we stand for-and we have repeatedly
stated this-is that Israel should come to the Security
Council and state clearly how and when exactly it intends
to implement resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

35. For twenty years, for the Arab peoples-and particularly for the Palestinian people-the word “Israel? has been
synonymous with bereavement, ruin, desolation and usurpation of their homeland. I would add that the altogether
unbelievable number of insults which Mr. Tekoah heaps
upon the Arabs in addressing the Council is such that it
deprives his statements of any credibility.

42. But Israel has done neither the one thing nor the
other. On the contrary, by appealing to the Security
Council it has used a tactic which has the same objective as
before, namely, to conceal the continuation of its policy of
aggressionand the preparation of further acts of aggression,

36. In conclusion, I would add that, in the present
situation, when Mr. Tekoah speaks repeatedly of peace, his
words inspire such confidence that the Arab States call
upon the inhabitants of their large towns to take cover. The
facts speak for themselves and I will say no more.
37. Mr. MALIK

43. It is for this reason that the Israeli representative has
to resort here to all sorts of legends and tales in order to
justify further acts of aggression which cannot be accounted for or justified by documents or factual evidence, and
still less by reference to the testimony of some deserter and
traitor.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): The events of 8 September in

44. On 4 September the Council was obliged to meet to
consider the first trumped-up complaint which Israel, the
aggressorState, addressed to the Security Council, accusing
the United Arab Republic, the victim of its aggression,
against which Israel had carried out an armed attack and
deprived it of part of its territory.

the cease-fire zone between the United Arab Republic and
Israel, in the Suez Canal sector, cannot fail to attract the
most serious attention of the Security Council. This new
provocation by the Israeli armed forces, the details of
which have been set forth so thoroughly and pertinently
both in the statement of the representative of the United
Arab Republic, Ambassador El Kony, and in the reports of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations based on
information received from United Nations observers,represents a new threat to peace in the Near East, a gross
violation of the decisions of the Security Council for a
cease-fire and the cessation of hostilities in that area.

45. The members of the Security Council will recall very
well that Israel did not even bother to support its
accusations against the United Arab Republic with the
evidence of the United Nations observers. Israel is taking
advantage of its appeal to the Council solely for the
purpose of engaging in unrestrained anti-Arab slander and
propaganda and making new threats against the Arab
States, particularly against the United Arab Republic.

38. At the 1448th meeting of the Council on 8 September
the Soviet delegation already drew the attention of the
members of the Council to the fact that the activities to
which Israel is resorting and which have provoked a new
and dangerous military incident in the cease-fire zone
between Israel and the United Arab Republic, in no way
tally with the declarations of Israeli leaders that Israel
intends to observe the cease&e decisions and is striving for
the maintenance of peace in the Near East.

46. What is more, the Israeli representative even tried to
present the Security Council with something like an
ultimatum, actually threatening that Israel would resort to
further actions if its demands were not met by the Security
Council.
47. The Soviet delegation, in its statements at meetings of
the Council, exposed the real meaning of Israel’s appeal to
the Council and the threats of the Israeli representative and
warned the Council that all this was a tactical manoeuvre
aimed at deluding world public opinion, at diverting
attention from Israel’s military preparations against the
Arab States and at fabricating a pretext for further acts of
aggressionagainst those countries.

39. The significance of what happened in the Suez Canal
area on 8 September goes far beyond a mere violation of
the cease-fire, This is not just a chance military incident.
The sequence of events, both military and political, shows
that in the past week the Security Council has had to do
with a deliberate policy of worsening the situation in the
4

L

48, The events of the subsequent days fully confirmed this
assessment.TWO days ago the Council again witnessed how
Israel passedfrom verbal threats against the Arab States to
deeds and on 8 September launched an armed attack on the
United Arab Republic, in the Suez Canal area, in violation
of the Security Council decision for a cease-fire and the
cessationof hostilities.
49. The Israeli representative is continuing his tactics in
the Security Council. He resorts to verbal acrobatics and
tries to distort the facts and to delude both the Security
Council and world public opinion. He strives with all his
might to shift the responsibility on to the victim of
aggression, the United Arab Republic. But facts are
obstinate things. Time after time they expose ever more
clearly the aggressor,his designs and aims.
50. Indeed, twice during the past week Israel has addressedto the Security Council its so-called complaints and
obviously trumped-up accusations against the United Arab
Republic, and both times those accusations have not been
supported by facts and the information supplied by the
United Nations observers in the Suez Canal area. On the
contrary, in both casesthe facts and the evidence supplied
by the United Nations observers exposed Israel’s false
versions and its acts of aggression against the United Arab
Republic.
51. In the first case the version alleged that two Israeli
soldiers had been killed and a third kidnapped. In support
of this version the Israeli Military Command wasunable to
supply the United Nations observers with any evidence
except three helmets damaged when and by whom nobody
knows, and some footprints in the sand left when and by
whom nobody knows, or deliberately planted there. But
many peoples have a proverb which says: “Do not build
your house on sand”. By way of paraphrase one can say:
“DO not build your case on sand”.
52. Israel puts forward all its so-called accusations against
the United Arab Republic solely on the basis of its own
assertions unverified and unconBrmed by anyone else. The
attempts by the observers to verify the first Israeli soldiers
had been killed were unsuccessful. The Israeli Command
refused, under an obviously artificial pretext, to give the
United Nations observers an opportunity to inspect the
bodies of the soldiers alleged to have been killed.
53. In such abnormal circumstances,, created by the
aggressorhimself, the only ones who can believe his version
are those who are compelled by imperialistic and internal
political considerations and reasons to support everything
that is done and everything that is said by the Israeli
side-that is said by Israel, which has been condemned
many times by the Security Council as the aggressorState.
That is how matters stand in regard to the first complaint.
54. In the second case, a new version was invented
according to which a mine was discovered and detonated.
But this version likewise has not been confirmed in the
reports of General Odd Bull, the Chief of Staff of the
United Nations observers.
5.5. From his reports it is clear-and this is easily confirmed by carefully perusing these two documents [S/

793O/Add.78 and 79J-that the first explosion, precisely
the first explosion, took place on the east side of the Suez
Canal occupied by Israel, at 1306 hours. The Israeli
representative also states that at this same time-according
to his version at 1300 hours-Israeli field engineers did in
fact detonate a mine. Consequently, this first explosion,
noted by the United Nations observers at 1306, hours on
the east side of the Canal, was not the result of shelling
from the United Arab Republic side. It wasthe explosion
of a mine carried out by the Israeli troops themselves.

56. How did the events develop afterwards?
57. From the information communicated by the United
Nations observers and submitted to the Council in the
report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations it is
quite clear that two minutes later, namely at 1308 hours,
explosions started on both sides of the Canal, that is, also
on the west bank controlled by the United Arab Republic.
58. What were these explosions on the Arab side? Could
it be that, in response to the demolition by Israeli field
engineers of a mine alleged to have been found on a track
on the east bank of the Canal, the Arab side also started, by
way of a “policy of mutual example”, to explode its own
mines on its own territory? No, these explosions werethe
result of the shelling of Arab territory from the Israeli side.
There remains, therefore, only one right conclusion,
namely, that the explosions on the west side of the Suez
Canal under United Arab Republic control, which started
two minutes after Israeli field engineers had detonated a
mine on the east bank, were in fact nothing else but the
result of the shelling of Arab positions and centres of
population in the United Arab Republic, which was
promptly started by the Israeli troops two minutes after the
provocative explosion and in violation of the cease-fire
decision of the Security Council.
59. Furthermore, it is clear from the report of the Chief of
Staff of the United Nations observers that ‘after several
explosions, noted by the United Nations observerson both
sides of the Canal, a lull set in. But who broke this lull, this
cessation of explosions? In the report contained in
document S/7390/Add.78 it is frankly stated that Israel
resumed firing. After, the lull, which continued for a few
minutes, the Israeli armed forces were the first to reopen
fire (at 1325 hours). This is stated in the official report of
General Odd Bull, But Israel’s guilt does not begin with
paragraph 5 of the report as the Israeli representative
insinuated in trying with simulated nai’vety to talk his way
out of it. The responsibility for beginning this new act of
aggression lies entirely on Israel. This responsibility is quite
clearly confirmed by the very first paragraphsof the report
and by the Israeli representative himself in his letter
addressed to the President of the Security Cowdl
(,S/8805J. From both these documents it is quite evident
that the Israeli side, when exploding a mine on the front
line in the cease-fire area, where both sides face each other
with their armed forces, did not bother to inform the
United Nations observers of the impending mine explosion.
60. All those who take a serious and responsible attitude
towards the strict implementation of the Security Council’s
cease-fire decision could not fail to have doubts

containing information from the United Nations observers
in the Suez Canal area, mentions any facts or data that
provide grounds for accusing the United Arab Republic of
being responsible for the incidents and violations of the
cease-fire.

immediately, at the very first meeting of the Security
Council when this question wasbeing discussed. why did
Israel fail to notify the United Nations observers of the
impending mine explosion? Why did it not warn the other
side-the United Arab Republic-through the United
Nations observers, that it intended to explode a mine? The
Security Council now has official confirmation that no such
notification or warning was given by the Israeli side. This
fact is fully confirmed in General Odd Bull’s second report
of 8 September [S/793O/Add. 791, which states that the
United Nations observerswerenot informed that the Israeli
armed forces intended to explode a mine. Hence the official
report of the Chief of Staff of the United Nations observers
does not confirm Israel’s accusation against the United
Arab Republic that the Arab side had started the incident.
On the contrary, it is clear from General Odd Bull’s official
report that immediately after the first explosion which,
according to the Israeli version wasthe explosion of a mine,
the Israeli side opened fire on the west bank of the Canal,
that is to say, on the United Arab Republic positions. All
this confirms documentarily, officially and accurately down
to the minute the incontestable fact that the initiator and
provoker of this incident was the Israeli side-the Israeli
armed forces and the Israeli Command. This fact had to be
partly admitted even by The New York Times to which the
Israeli representative refers so often and with so much
enthusiasm in his statements. To him that newspaper is a
very authoritative source of information. In today’s issue of
that newspaper it is stated in the first column on page 7
that it was a mine explosion that gave rise to a four-hour
exchange of barrages along the length of the Suez Canal. So
that the- Israeli ‘representative understands this quotation, I
shall read it in English: “a mine demolition Sunday that
triggered a four-hour exchange of barragesalong the length
of’the canal”.

64. The Security Council has heard repeated statements
by the official representative of the United Arab Republic
to the effect that the United Arab Republic is strictly
complying with the Security Council’s cease-fire decision,
65. The incidents involving the use of weapons,
deliberately provoked by Israel, along the Suez Canal lead
to increased tension in the Near East. They complicate the
situation still further. They prevent the restoration of peace
and a political settlement in that region.
66. The Security Council cannot fail to take notice of the
fact that the aggressor, having invaded the territory of the
United Arab Republic, blocked the Suez Canal and
disrupted international navigation along this most im.
portant waterway of world significance, is purposely and
deliberately engaged in bringing about a further worsening
of the situation in that region. In these circumstances the
United Arab Republic, whose vitally important centres and
densely populated areas were in direct danger, being within
the range of artillery fire and other means of attack by the
aggressor, could not help but take legitimate defence
measures to ward off any possible further acts of
provocation on the part of the Israeli armed forces.
67. Israel’s acts of aggression against the United Arab
Republic are creating an increasingly tense situation in the
Near East, already fraught with the danger of military
explosions as a result of the fact that the consequences of
Israeli aggression against the Arab countries have not yet
been eliminated.

61. Thus, on the basis of information received from the
United Nations observers-for the nth time-it is officially
confirmed that the initiator and, therefore, the instigator of
acts of aggression in the Near East was Israel this time
again. This time again, the whole of this second venture of
Israel in lodging a complaint against the United Arab
Republic is just as hypocritical and easily seen through as
the first one concerning the so-called incident of 26 August.
Hence this second appeal by Israel to the Security Council
is likewise nothing but a new spurious manoeuvre, an
attempt by Israel hurriedly to concoct a cover and a
justification for its new bloody crimes and to shift the
responsibility for the violation by Israel of the cease-fire
decision on to the United Arab Republic.

68. The Security Council cannot brook any further delay
in a political settlement in the Near East and the
implementation of Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967. It is essential to put an end to Israel’s
seizure of Arab lands and to demand the immediate
withdrawal of the aggressor’stroops from those lands.
69. As long as the aggressor holds on to the foreign lands
which it has taken from the Arab peoples and continues
defiantly to flout and sabotage the decisions of the United
Nations, tension will be maintained in the Near East and it
will be impossible to establish peace in that region.

62. Israel’s second complaint against the United Arab
Republic is just as unwarranted and devoid of any
foundation as the first. The responsibility for the new acts
of aggression and the violation of the Security Council’s
cease-fire decision lies entirely on Israel. It also bears the
responsibility for the numerous losses of human life,
material damage and destruction which have been causedto
the United Arab Republic by this new act of aggression
-the deliberately planned and carried-out shelling of Arab
territory.

70. It is the duty of the Security Council in this dangerous
situation to pronounce an emphatic condemnation of
Israel’s aggressive policy, to demand that it should cease
immediately its provocative acts of aggression against the
Arab countries and that it should carry out forthwith a
political settlement in the Near East in conformity with the
Security Council’s resolution of 22 November 1967 which,
as is well known, stipulates as a first principle of the
settlement the withdrawal of Israel’s armed forces from all
the territories seized by it as a result of its aggression in the
summer of 1967, and the return of those territories to their
lawful owners.

63. In this connexion it must be noted particularly that
none of the official documents submitted to the Council,

71. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

.

6

I call on the representative of

72. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I assure you, Sir, that I would
enjoy our daily constitutional verbal ping-pong games with
me Soviet representative were it not for the fact that his
statements, instead of contributing to the maintenance of
the cease-fire, try invariably to confuse, distort and
complicate the situation and the efforts to achieve a just
and lasting peace.

78. Also yesterday, an Israeli soldier was wounded in
Kantara by Egyptian fire from the west bank. This
morning, 1 I September, the United Arab Republic forcesin
the Port Tawiq area attacked Israeli positions at 0840,085O
and 0915 hours, local time,
79. In spite of these provocations, the Israeli forcesunder
attack refrained in each casefrom returning fire, as they did
yesterday.

73, The statement we have heard from him this morning
does not really require any comment; it is what one would
normally call, in the language of the distinguished
representative himself, just another Pravda editorial. I think
it should be treated accordingly.

80. These attacks are accompanied by official Egyptian
pronouncements and Egyptian presscommentaries that the
United Arab Republic has launched a policy of preventive
military operations.

74, I should like to say only one thing: the Soviet support
for Egyptian aggression is not surprising. On the world
scene Moscow and Cairo stand for the same policies, the
same violations of international law and international
conduct. It is strange that the representative of the USSR,
who has a weakness for Arab sources of information, has
this time avoided completely any reference to such sources.
Had he followed what the Egyptian Governor of Suez had
to say following the attack of 8 September and what
Egyptian official communiques stated on it, he would know
that Cairo has openly indicated that we face a new policy
of preventive military operations. What is extremely grave is
that the Soviet Union has in fact expressed today support
for this dangerous policy.

81. We reiterate our appeal to the Security Council to take
effective, equitable action to condemn the Egyptian
attacks, to call on Egypt to prevent their recurrence and to
return the Israeli soldier captured in the attack of 26
August.
82. The PRESIDENT:
United Arab Republic.

I call on the representative of the

83. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): My delegation
usually avoids being dragged into the polemics of
Mr. Tekoah. We therefore do not consider it fitting to
comment on every Israeli distortion. Although the Israelis
are masters in this field, I am sure that the members of the
Council are by now fully immune to these Israeli tactics
which discredit their authors and waste the time of the
Council-but without, I hope, ever misleading it.

75. I should like to make one brief observation on a
statement we heard this morning from the representative of
Algeria. I may not have convinced him concerning Algeria’s
policy of war, aggression and defiance of the United
Nations-a policy which is an insult to other members of
the Security Council in whose midst Algeria sits. However,
it seems that I have succeeded in persuading the President
of Algeria about the correctness of my statements. I should
like to quote two remarks made by President Boumedienne: “Nasser’s main error was his acceptance of the
cease-fire agreement. We reject the cease-fire, since its
meaning is a recognition of the defeat”; and, “The
liquidation of Israel is the only solution. Algeria will
never accept a solution that guarantees Israel’s existence.”

84. However, I must clarify a point which was raised
yesterday by the Israeli representative. He said that the
United Arab Republic had violated two cease-fireswhereas
Israel had abided by them. The report of General Odd Bull
clearly contradicts this Israeli allegation. Paragraphs 10 and
15 of the report contained in document S/7930/Add.78
confirm that the two cease-firesproposed by the United
Nations observers were accepted by the United Arab
Republic.
85. Yesterday [1449th meeting] I relied on paragraph 5
of that report to prove that it was Israel which clearly
initiated fire on 8 September. I should like to add that the
other parts of General Bull’s report to which I did not refer
do not deal with the initiation of fire. They are limited to
the reporting of explosions on the east side of the Canal,
but the relevant paragraph which definitely implicates Israel
is paragraph 5 which I mentioned in my intervention
yesterday.

76. I should also like to point out that the representative
of Algeria has failed to say anything on his Government’s
continued refusal to accept the cease-fire established by the
Security Council.
77. I should like to bring to the Security Council’s
attention the fact that Egyptian acts of aggression are
continuing. Yesterday morning a new Egyptian minelaying
incursion resulted in the wounding of one Israeli soldier,
whose half-track was blown up by a mine at a point
approximately ten kilometres north of Port Tawflq. The
site of that attack is only a few hundred metres from the
Egyptian military positions on the west bank of the Canal.
In the afternoon four new mines of the standard used in the
Egyptian Army were discovered near the site-of the mining
of the half-track. Footprints of the raiders who had laid
those mines led westward to the Canal, which is 170 metres
wide at that point. It appears that the mines had been laid
during the preceding night, 9110 September.

86. Mr. Tekoah also said that a further admission of mY
Government’s responsibility wasthat the Governor of Suez
had half an hour’s notice about the impending attack. The
fact is that the Governor has learned from bitter experience
that whenever there are unusual Israeli concentrations and
movements on the east side, as occurred on 8 September, it
is only a prelude to an imminent attack. I am sure that the
S&dty Council is glad to know that the Governor of Suez
had the opportunity of alerting the Civilian Population of
Suez and enabling them to escape the havoc and
destruction of the Israeli attack.
7

87. As to the preventive measures to which Mr. Tekoah
referred again today, I should like to state that the repeated
attacks of aggression have forced my Government to
declare that it will take all protective defensive measures
against the Israeli aggressors which direct their fire at
Egyptian populated civilian towns.

Republic Forces continued to fire, continued to attack for
another half an hour. He would have told us that the
official communiques which have been published in the last
few days in the Egyptian press and broadcast over the
Egyptian governmental radio made it no secret at all that
Egypt refused the cease-fireproposals.

88. Our attention was drawn to the supplemental
information contained in document S/7930/Add.80 regarding “one single rifle shot”. I wish to inform the Council
that I have not yet received any information from my
Government concerning this matter. However, according to
the report of General Odd Bull there was “one single . . .
shot fired”. But there is nothing in the report to
substantiate the Israeli allegation that a soldier was
wounded.

92. The representative of the United Arab Republic has
made some comments about the terminology used
concerning the new policy evolved by Cairo. It is strange
that Cairo, the Cairo newspapers, the Cairo radio, the press
all over the world should have the exact formulation and
exact translation of the newly proclaimed policy and that
everywhere, whether in the newspapers here or in the
Middle East, we find a clear reference to a new policy of
preventive military operations. With all the experience we
have had in the past of denials that come from the
representative of the United Arab Republic, I believe that
we should rest our caseat that.

89. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Israel
in exercise of his right of reply.
90. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have just one observation.
Unfortunately the weakness of the entire Egyptian policy
has been that it is at all times ready to accept, to agree, to
concede and to consent but never to honour the agreement
or the acceptance. The Egyptian Government has
repeatedly claimed that it accepts Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November, and yet it
continues to refuse to abandon the Khartoum decision’
which says ‘No peace, no negotiations, no recognition of
Israel”,

93. The PRESIDENT: There are no other speakerson my
list. I would draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the fact that, in addition to the report from
General Odd Bull contained in document S/7930/Add.80,
to which I have already made reference, supplemental
information has been received in accordance with General
Odd Bull’s indication that he would be sending such
information. It has been circulated since we began our
meeting in document S/7930/Add.8 1, dated 11 September

91. That Security Council resolution calls specifically for
agreement between Egypt and Israel, for a just and lasting
peace between Egypt and Israel-and so it is with the
cease-fire. I have no doubt at all that the representatives of
the Egyptian authorities have agreed to, accepted,
consented to and conceded every proposal put forward to
them by the United Nations military observers. However, if
the representative of the United Arab Republic had
continued reading to us from General Bull’s report from the
same paragraph which he cited, he would have told us that
this agreement was never kept and that the United Arab

94. If no other representative wishes to take the floor at
this stage I should like to suggest that, taking into account
the reports received today from General Bull indicating
continuing incidents in the Suez Canal zone, the meeting of
the Council should be adjourned now on the understanding
that the members of the Council will hold themsel.ves
available for consultation and for further consideration of
this item in the light of those consultations, at a time to be
agreed. If I hear no objection I shall take it that it is so
decided.

1968.

It wasso decided.
1 Resolution of the Arab Summit Conference held at Khartoum
from 29 August to 1 September 1967.

The meetingroseat 1.20 pm.

I
r

?
1

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

les

SE PROCURER

publications

des

ddpositaires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

HAK

IlOflY’itlTb

~h~~~llllll
ill'l'IIT~'Tll~S

wara:mc
LlpOJUiC

COMO

Ventor,

Nations,

New

Unies

Nuevo

PUBLICACIONES
de
del

York

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

sent

entier.
Informer-vous
der ventes, New York

M3AAHMfl

CONSEGUIR

York

Nations

be obtained
or write

en

vente,

throughout
New York

UNIES

dans

les

aup&
de votre
ou Genive.

OPrAHM3A~MM

O~~~illlll~l~l(llll
06Z~~llllClllll~lX
110 III'L'S ~Ml"lOll~S JIllpa.
11.m IIIII~TC
II0 aAprcy:
l[:l~~llnir,
IIfiH)-lJOllIi
Il.ln

Las publicociones
en todas portes

in United

PUBLICATIONS

Nations
publications
world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

the

Litho

NATIONS

librairies

libroirie

06bEAMHEHHblX

et
ou

ler

ogences

adrsssez*vou$

b;

HAL(Hfi

Ihl(llfi
IIUlOJ(llTC

~lOilillO
Iij'UIITh II lillllitilllrlS
IIB~il311lIQX
l'll~~llliH
06 Il:\~llllll~lX
ll Il~lll~Sf
IillllilillOY
Opramnaqurt
O~~,JIIII~IIIII~IX
IIa~[r~il. Cwiim

II

110

XCeuena.
DE LAS NACIONES

las Naciones
Unidos
eat&n
mundo.
Consulte
a su librero

UNIDAS

en venta en libreriar
y cosas dirtribuidorar
o dirijose
at Nociones
Unidas,
Secci6n

de

o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35792-October

1972-2,050
