114

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Considering that since its first session in 1949 the
International Law Commission has included the question of State responsibility in its agenda and that so far
it has received six reports from its first Special Rapporteur and four reports from its second Special
Rapporteur, in addition to various studies prepared
by the Secretariat of the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation ,that the United Nations
Office at Geneva organized, during the twenty-fourth
session of the International Law Commission, an eighth
session of the Seminar on International Law,

I
1. Takes note of the report of the International

Law Commission on the work of its twenty-fourth
session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work it accomplished at that
session;
3. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the v,iews and considerations referred to
in General Assembiy resolutions 1765 (XVII) of
20 November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November
1963 and 2400 (XXIII) of 11 December 1968, with
a view to the preparation of a first set of draft articles
on ,the topic;
( b) Proceed with further consideration on succession
of Sta,tes in respect of treaties in the light of comments
received from Member States on the present draft;
(c) Continue its work on succession of States in
respect of matters other than treaties, taking into
account the views and considerations referred to in
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
(d) Continue its study of the most-favoured-nation
clause;
(e) Continue its consideration of the question of
treaties concluded between States and ,international
organizations or between two or more international
organizations;
4. Approves the programme and organization of
work of the twenty-fifth session of the International
Law Commission, to be held in 1973, including the
decision to place on the provisional agenda of that
session an item entitled "Review of the Commission's
long-term programme of work: 'Survey of International
Law' prepared by the Secretary-General";
5. Notes that the International Law Commission
intends, in the discussion of its long-term programme
of work, to decide upon the priority to be given to
the topic of the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses, as requested by the General
Assembly in resolution 2780 (XXVI);
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, as
soon as possible, the study on the legal problems
relating to the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses requested by the General Assembly in
resolution 2669 (XXV) nf 8 December 1970, and to
present to the International Law Commission at its
twenty-fifth session an advance report on such study;
7. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with
future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of an increasing number
of jurists of developing countries;

8. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission the records of the
discussion on the report of the Commission at the
twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly;

H
l. Invites States and also the specialized agencies
and interested intergovernmental organizations to submit, as soon as possible, their written comments and
observations on the draft articles prepared by the
International Law Commission concerning the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic
agents and other internationally protected persons;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
comments and observations referred to in paragraph 1
above in order to facilitate consideration of the draft
articles by the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session in the light of those comments and observations;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session an item entitled "Draft convention on the prevention and punishment of crimes
against diplomatic agents and other internationally
protected persons" with a view to the final elaboration
of such a convention by the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session all
relevant documentation which may be required for the
discussion of that item.
2091st plenary meeting
28 Novemba 1972
2927 (XXVII). Twenty-fifth anniversary of the
International Law <:ommission

The General Assembly,
Recalling that on 21 November 1947 the General
Assembly adopted resolution 174 (11) by which it
established the International Law Commission and
approved the Statute of the Commission,
Noting that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the opening of the first session of the International Law Commission will be marked on 12 April 1974,
1. Commends the International Law Commission
and all the distinguished lawyers who have participated
in its work for the outstanding contribution made to
the codification and progressive development of international law;
2. Recommends that the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Law Commission should be observed in an appropriate manner by the General
Assembly during its twenty-eighth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the
present resolution to the attention of international
organizations concerned with questions of international
law.
2 091 st plenary meeting
28 November 1972
2928 (XXVII). Report of tlw Unit.-,l Nations
<:ommission on International Trml.- Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its fifth session, 5
6 Ibid., Supplement No.

17 (A '8717).

llS

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Further recalling its ,resolutions 2421 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968, 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November
1969, 2635 (XXV) of 12 November 1970 and 2766
(XXVI) of 17 November 1971 concerning the reports
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its firs.t, second, third and
fourth sessions,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to
universal economic co-operation among all peoples on
a basis of equality and, thereby, to their well-being.
Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board, at its twelfth session, 6 took note of the report
of the United Nation, Commission on foternational
Trade Law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of
its working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction the completion of draft
articles for a convention on prescription (limitation) in
the international sale of goods;7
4. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should·
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention
to the topics to which it has decided to give priority,
that is, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
( b) Accelerate its work on training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, with special
regard to developing countries;
( c) Continue to collaborate with international organizations active in the field of international trade
law;
(d) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
( e) Keep its programme of work and its worki-ng
methods under constant review;
5. Invites the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law to seek from Governments and
interested international organizations information relating to legal problems presented hy the different kinds
of multinational enterprises, and the implications
thereof for the unification and harmonization of international trade law, and to consider, in the light of this
information and the results of available studies, including those by the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Economic and Social Council, what
further steps would be appropriate in this regard;
6 Ibid., Supplement No.
15 (A/8715/Rev.1),
para. 239.
7 Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (A/8717), para. 21.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly on the Commission's report on the work of its fifth session.

2091st plenary meeting
28 November 1972

2929 (XXVII). United Nations Conference on
Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Good!-

The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter H of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifth session, 8 which contains
draft articles for a convention on prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
the object and terms of reference of .the Commission,
Noting that at its fourth and fifth sessions, held in
1971 and 1972, the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law, in the light of observations
and comments submitted by Governments, considered
and revised provisional draft articles on prescription
(limitation) in the international sale of goods that had
been prepared by the Commission's Working Group on
Time-Limits and Limitations (Prescription) in the International Sale of Goods, and that the Commission, at
its fifth sess,ion, approved the draft articles as set
forth in paragraph 21 of its report,
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law at its fifth session
recommended that the General Assembly should convene an international conference of plenipotentiaries to
conclude, on the basis of the draft articles adopted
by the Commission, a convention on prescription
(limitation) in the international sale of goods, 9
Convinced that conflicts and divergencies among the
existing national rules governing prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods constitute
obstacles to the development of world trade and that
the harmonization and unification of such rules would
promote the flow of world trade,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for its valuable
work on prescription in the international sale of goods;
2. Dedides that an international conference of
plenipotentiaries shall be convened in 1974, in New
York or at any other suitable place for which the
Secretary-General receives an invitation, to consider
the question of prescription (limitation) in the international sale of goods and to embody the results of
its work in an international convention and such other
imtrumcnts as it may deem appropriate;
3. Further derides to consider at its twenty-eighth
session any other matters requiring decision in connexion with the conference and to inolude in the
provisional agenda of that session an item entitled
"United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods";

part one,
H

//,id .. Supplemf'nt No. 17 (A/8717).
para. 20.

i, /hid.,
