S/2000/1105*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 November 2000
Original: English

Report of the Security Council Mission to East Timor
and Indonesia
(9-17 November 2000)

I. Introduction
1.
On 8 September 2000, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1319 (2000). In his letter dated 25
October 2000 (S/2000/1030), the President of the
Council informed the Secretary-General that the
members of the Council had agreed to dispatch a
Mission to East Timor and Indonesia from 9 to 18
November 2000. The terms of reference of the Mission
were as follows:
(a) In East Timor, to review the progress in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1272
(1999);
(b) In Indonesia, to review the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1319 (2000).
2.
Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, it was decided that the
composition of the Mission would be as follows:
Namibia (Ambassador Martin Andjaba, head of
the Mission);
Argentina (Minister Luis Enrique Cappagli);
Malaysia (Ambassador Hasmy Agam);
Tunisia (Ambassador Othman Jerandi);
Ukraine (Ambassador Valeri P. Kuchynski);
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland (Ambassador Stewart Eldon);
United States of America (Ambassador Nancy
Soderberg).
* Reissued for technical reasons.

00-75403* (E)
`````````

211100

II. Activities of the Mission
3.
Prior to the departure of the Mission, the
members of the Mission met informally with
representatives of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and of
Member States contributing military or civilian police
personnel to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and with
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, the East Timorese cabinet
member for foreign affairs. The purpose of these
meetings was to hear a broad range of views from other
interested parties before the Mission’s departure.
4.
The Mission left New York on 9 November, and
visited East Timor (12 and 13 November) at the
invitation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Transitional Administrator for
East Timor, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and West
Timor and Jakarta (14-17 November) at the invitation
of the Government of Indonesia. The members of the
Mission expressed their gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNTAET
officials, and to the Indonesian authorities, for
facilitating the visit, which allowed them to see at first
hand the situation in East Timor and the work of
UNTAET, as well as the refugee situation in Kupang
and Atambua.
5.
In East Timor, the Mission held extensive
discussions on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1319 (2000) with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
senior civilian and military personnel in UNTAET, the
Cabinet of the East Timor Transitional Administration,
the Armed Forces for the National Liberation of East

S/2000/1105

Timor (FALINTIL) Commander, ten diplomatic offices
in East Timor (Australia, Brazil, China, Indonesia,
Ireland, Japan, New Zealand, Portugal, the United
Kingdom and the United States), and East Timorese
non-governmental organizations, as well as leading
figures in East Timor, namely, Xanana Gusmao, Jose
Ramos-Horta and Mario Carrascalao. In Dili, the
Mission visited the site of the Santa Cruz massacre and
laid wreaths to mark the ninth anniversary of the
killings. Members of the Mission visited the district of
Suai in Sector West, and received extensive briefings
by UNTAET civilian and military personnel, met with
representatives of the community, and visited the site
of the 1999 Suai church massacre, and a hospital
rehabilitation project.
6.
In Kupang, the Mission met and had extensive
discussions with the Governor of East Nusa Tenggara,
which includes West Timor, Piet Tallo, the Udayana
Military Commander, Major-General Kiki Syahakri,
the Chief of Police of East Nusa Tenggara, BrigadierGeneral E Made Mangku Pastika, representatives of the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, and local government, as
well as non-governmental organizations. The Mission
visited the regional police office to witness the
destruction of a number of confiscated weapons, and
the Noelbaki refugee camp. In Atambua, the Mission
visited the Haliwen refugee camp as well as the
Umaklaran resettlement site, and held discussions with
representatives of civil society and non-governmental
organizations. Members of the Mission laid flowers at
the UNHCR office, in honour of those killed on 6
September 2000. They were briefed on the events
leading to the murders. In Jakarta, the Mission met
with Vice-President Megawati Sukarnoputri, and senior
government officials, including the Coordinating
Minister for Political, Social and Security Affairs,
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, the Speaker of the House
of Representatives (DPR), Akbar Tandjung, AttorneyGeneral Marzuki Darusman, and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Alwi Shihab, as well as with
representatives of the National Commission for Human
Rights (Komnas HAM), the diplomatic community,
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations.

2

III. Implementation of Security
Council resolution 1272 (1999)
A. Security and law and order
7.
The overall security situation in East Timor is
relatively stable, with remarkably little general crime.
Civilian police have now been deployed to all districts
and all but 10 subdistricts. Training of the Timor
Lorosae Police Service continues; however, budgetary
constraints mean that at the current rate of training, the
requisite force of 3,000 will not be realized until 2006.
Accordingly, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, has
recommended that a portion of the peacekeeping
assessed budget should be reallocated from the
international police presence to accelerate the training
of the East Timor national police force. Nonetheless, it
is likely that there will be a need for international
civilian police to remain beyond the date of
independence. The Mission recommends that this
should be factored into planning for the United
Nations presence that will follow UNTAET and also
recommends that the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and other relevant United
Nations
organizations
should
give
urgent
consideration to assisting in speeding up the
training of the Timor Lorosae Police Service.
8.
A vital element in developing an effective system
of law and order will be the establishment of a fully
functioning judicial system. This has proved
challenging in light of the total absence of local
capacity in this area and the other pressing priorities
placed on UNTAET at the beginning of its operations.
While UNTAET has made progress in developing a
court administration system, prosecution services,
public defender’s system and prison services, the
judicial sector remains seriously under-resourced.
Consequently, the current system cannot process those
suspects already in detention, some of whom have been
held for almost a year. Moreover, UNTAET is facing
significant difficulties in bringing to justice those
responsible for the serious violations of human rights
that occurred in East Timor in 1999. In these
circumstances, it is particularly important for
UNTAET to consider all available ways of
attracting the necessary resources and that
decisions on handling serious crimes investigations
should, to the extent possible, reflect East Timorese

S/2000/1105

expectations. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General informed the Mission that he
intended to conduct a review of the justice sector,
and would propose a solution to this pressing issue
including ways of addressing the shortage of
expertise and financial resources. The Mission
welcomed this timely initiative and urges the
Security Council to give it priority consideration.
9.
UNTAET has made substantial progress in
addressing the security threat posed by militia
infiltration from West Timor. Several months ago, up to
150 militia, in groups of 20 to 30, were operating in the
western and central sectors. The peacekeeping force
has taken robust and decisive action, greatly facilitated
by information provided by the local population, to
combat the militia. This has resulted in a reduction of
militia activity inside East Timor and the exfiltration of
a number of militia to West Timor. The Mission
supports UNTAET’s approach to this threat. However,
the continuation of the refugee crisis in West Timor,
the ongoing presence of militia elements in refugee
camps and the possibility of further large-scale returns,
which in all probability will include militia, continue to
constitute a source of instability throughout Timor
island. The East Timorese have expressed a desire to
have their own defence force on independence, along
the lines recommended in Option Three of the recent
study made by King’s College London. The
Transitional Cabinet of East Timor recently endorsed
the proposal for a 3,000-strong force as recommended.
The modalities for implementing this proposal will be
determined at a donors’ meeting to be held in Dili on
21 to 23 November. As with the police, however, it
seems highly likely that East Timor will require an
international military presence in some form for
some time after independence. This, too, should be
factored into planning for a United Nations followon presence.

vitally important that this readiness should be
maintained as a component of UNTAET’s refugee
return strategy.

C. An effective administration
11. UNTAET is now a mission in full swing. A
particularly positive and important development in
fulfilment of the mandate of capacity-building for selfgovernance has been the acceleration of the
“Timorization” of the administration. This is steadily
endowing the East Timorese with ownership of, and
responsibility for, their own decision-making. A
number of Timorese District or Deputy District
Administrators have been appointed, while legislative
responsibility is now exercised through the allTimorese National Council and executive powers by a
Transitional Cabinet comprising five Timorese and four
internationals, under the chairmanship of the
Transitional
Administrator.
Several
nongovernmental organizations conveyed the need for
Timorization to be actively taken forward at all
levels of the administration. The Mission endorses
UNTAET’s efforts in this regard, while emphasizing
the need for capacity-building among the East
Timorese.
12. It is foreseen that in the coming weeks, the
Transitional Administration, through the Cabinet and
National Council and in dialogue with the East
Timorese leadership, will develop a timetable and
mechanisms, inter alia, for the electoral process, to take
East Timor to full independence. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General expressed the
hope that the outcome of these discussions would be
presented at the forthcoming donors’ meeting in
Brussels.

D. Infrastructure
B. Humanitarian situation
10. The humanitarian situation has passed its most
pressing phase. However, East Timor will need
continued resources as people re-establish their
livelihoods and as long as the prospect of large
additional refugee returns remains. The Mission
learned that UNTAET, together with humanitarian
agencies, had put in place the necessary contingency
plans to cope with a significant refugee influx. It is

13. There has been major rehabilitation of public
buildings and utilities in Dili, the capital and
population centre of East Timor. The Mission was told
that the education system is functioning throughout
East Timor, together with a basic level of health care in
many areas. However, the overall state of East Timor’s
infrastructure remains devastated. Matters of particular
concern for the Mission were both the small amounts
so far expended on reconstruction and the uneven rate
of progress of the rest of the country compared with

3

S/2000/1105

Dili, particularly with regard to road reconstruction,
power supply and the reconstruction of buildings. The
Mission learned that while some funding was available
for outstanding infrastructure needs, implementation of
projects had been slow to materialize. This area
requires a priority focus. In this regard, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General highlighted the
need to have resources made immediately available for
some urgent work of reconstruction (for example, of
court buildings) and recommended that this be
provided from the assessed budget, given the broad
nature of UNTAET’s mandate. The Mission
recommends that consideration be given to
increased flexibility in the use of assessed resources
allocated to complex peacekeeping operations such
as UNTAET.

E. Concluding comments
14. The Mission, and particularly those members who
had visited East Timor during the last Security Council
Mission in the wake of the Popular Consultation, was
impressed by the progress made in implementing the
mandate given to UNTAET in little over one year.
However, this progress has not always been smooth.
The Mission does not underestimate either the current
difficulties in areas such as reconstruction and
administration of justice, or the enormity of the
challenges that remain in the lead-up to independence
projected for the latter half of 2001. The Mission
renewed its full support for the work of UNTAET. It
also noted that the Council will soon have to take a
decision on the extension of UNTAET’s mandate
through to independence. It further recognizes that in
all likelihood there will be a need for a strong
international commitment to East Timor after
independence, inter alia, through the provision of
financial, technical and security assistance, if the
aspirations of the East Timorese are to be fully
realized. Planning for this should begin as soon as
possible.
15.
The Mission would like to express appreciation
for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s invitation to the Security Council to visit
East Timor and see at first hand how UNTAET’s
mandate is being implemented. The Mission found this
to be a rewarding experience highlighting the
dedication of both international personnel and East
Timorese to working together to realize the aspirations

4

of the people of East Timor, in the face of many
challenges.

IV. Implementation of Security
Council resolution 1319 (2000)
16. Many of the hundreds of thousands of East
Timorese displaced in the violence following the
Popular Consultation have returned to East Timor to reestablish their place in the community. Indonesian
Ministers assured the Mission of their Government’s
commitment to resolving the refugee issue. Their
assurances are welcome. But more than one year later,
an estimated 120,000 remain in refugee camps in West
Timor. Indonesian Ministers assured the Mission of
their commitment to resolving the refugee issue.
International efforts to resolve this crisis were halted
by the murder of three UNHCR personnel in Atambua
on 6 September. In response to their tragic deaths, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1319 (2000) which
sought ways to bring about an immediate end to the
interrelated problems of the refugee crisis and the
security threat posed by the presence of militia. The
Council Mission was able to gain a good first-hand
appreciation of the complexity of the situation.

A. The refugee situation
17. In paragraph 4 of resolution 1319 (2000), the
Security Council called on the Indonesian authorities to
take immediate and effective measures to ensure the
safe return of the refugees who chose to go back to
East Timor. The situation of the refugees in the camps
in West Timor remains a cause of great concern. The
Mission received reports by returning refugees to East
Timor that militias continue to intimidate and spread
misinformation in the camps. Further reports indicated
that refugees were being made to hand over money and
livestock in order to be allowed to return to East Timor.
With a view to obtaining first-hand information, the
Mission visited two refugee camps: Noelbaki near
Kupang and Haliwen in Atambua. The Mission saw the
truly depressing conditions in which the refugees live.
18. The Mission was struck by the lack of
information on the conditions in East Timor, the extent
of misinformation inside the camps and the clear
potential for intimidation. Some of the refugees with
whom the Mission met were concerned about the safety

S/2000/1105

and security situation in East Timor and the reception
accorded to the returnees. The Mission sought to allay
concerns by reiterating to refugees and community
leaders that East Timorese leaders had given
assurances that there would be security and safety for
refugees upon their return, while emphasizing that
those who had committed crimes during the turmoil in
1999 and subsequently would have to face the East
Timorese legal system. Some refugees openly stated to
the Mission that they would go back to East Timor only
“with the red-and-white flag”, implying Indonesian
rule. The Mission suggests that the Government of
Indonesia work with UNTAET to develop and
implement an effective and impartial information
strategy to allow the refugees to make a voluntary
and informed decision about their futures and to
bring home to them that the result of the Popular
Consultation must be accepted.
19. The repatriation or relocation of refugees has
become a pressing issue, given the plight of refugees in
the dilapidated camps. The Mission noted that in order
to deal with the issue, the Government of Indonesia has
set up an inter-ministerial task force, which has already
begun pilot registration projects, and the establishment
of resettlement sites for those who choose to remain in
Indonesia. One of these sites was visited by the
Mission. The Mission expresses its strong view that
registration process should be apolitical thus
precluding any role for pro-integration groups. For
registration to be credible, there must be
involvement of
international
personnel,
in
particular from UNHCR and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), a view shared
by the Government of Indonesia. In accordance
with paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution
1319 (2000), the Mission reiterates that UNHCR
and other agencies will not be able to return to West
Timor until security can be guaranteed, including
real progress towards disarming and disbanding the
militia. The Mission recommends that a team of
security experts be dispatched by the United
Nations to West Timor in cooperation with the
Government of Indonesia to assess the security
situation and to establish contacts with the
Indonesian Armed Forces (TNI), the Indonesian
National Police (POLRI) and other relevant parties.
This would be in accordance with the usual
modalities employed by the Office of the United
Nations Security Coordinator to assess an area
prior to any rerating of its security level.

20. The Mission also underscores that all stages of
the return process must be carried out in safety and
security without harassment, intimidation or
extortion. It welcomes the intention of the
Government of Indonesia to begin discussions
shortly with the United Nations offices in Jakarta
on arrangements to facilitate an assessment by
United Nations security experts of the situation in
West Timor. Recognizing that the Government of
Indonesia will require financial assistance to resettle
those refugees who choose to stay in Indonesia, the
Mission welcomes the proposal that potential
international donors visit West Timor, once security
has been restored.
21. UNTAET, the Government of Indonesia,
UNHCR, IOM and the East Timorese leadership are
developing plans for a pilot programme for the return
of ex-TNI reservists from East Timor (MILSAS) and
their families. The success of this programme may
trigger others to follow suit. The Mission
recommends that UNTAET and the Government of
Indonesia should actively pursue the possibility of
other such ad hoc returns.
22. The Mission recommends that the outstanding
issue of payment of pensions to former civil
servants be resolved by Indonesia’s commitment to
honour outstanding pension obligations regardless
of whether the beneficiaries choose to reside in
Indonesia or East Timor. This would serve as a
catalyst to encourage their return to East Timor to
play a part in the Timorization of the
administration and reintegrate fully into society.

B. Security
23. Security Council resolution 1319 (2000) calls for
the Government of Indonesia to take immediate
additional steps, in fulfilment of its responsibilities, to
disarm and disband the militia, restore law and order in
the affected areas in West Timor, ensure safety and
security in the refugee camps and for humanitarian
workers, and prevent cross-border incursions into East
Timor. During its visit to West Timor, the Mission was
briefed on the efforts by the Government of Indonesia
to fulfil these requirements. Measures taken include the
deployment of additional security forces to conduct
operations to disarm and collect weapons. The Mission
witnessed the destruction of a number of these
weapons. It was also apprised of the continued

5

S/2000/1105

detention of Eurico Guterres and six individuals
allegedly involved in the UNHCR murders, and the
progress of the investigations into those killings. The
Mission strongly hopes that these and other
investigations of parties responsible for violent
attacks and intimidation in East and West Timor
will move swiftly through the Indonesian justice
system.

26. With the endorsement of the Mission, UNTAET
met recently with three of the four militia leaders who
have written two letters to the President of the Council
and who appear to be seeking to return unconditionally
to East Timor. The Mission encourages a dialogue to
facilitate their return, which could lead to
substantial returns, and welcomes the Government
of Indonesia’s efforts to facilitate this matter.

24. In a meeting with the Mission, Vice-President
Megawati Sukarnoputri, informed the Mission of the
Government of Indonesia’s commitment to work with
the United Nations to resolve residual issues that arise
during the transition period; Ministers had been
instructed to work with the Mission to give new
impetus to the relationship. Later the same day, the
Mission met with the Coordinating Minister for
Political, Social and Security Affairs, Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono, and other Indonesian Government
officials, who asserted that the militia had been
disbanded in the sense that they no longer trained or
operated in an organized fashion and that their
structures and organization (Pro-integration Armed
Forces P.P.I.) had been disabled in 1999. The Minister
acknowledged ongoing intimidation by militia, whom
he described as ex-militia elements, present in and
around the refugee camps. Minister Yudhoyono
stressed his commitment to focus on its eradication and
undertook to report to the Security Council on
Indonesia’s plans for action to secure this objective.
The Mission welcomes this commitment, encourages
further efforts and looks forward to the
Coordinating Minister’s report.

27. In both the immediate and long term,
arrangements for close cooperation between the
security services in both East and West Timor are
essential to manage and contain the security situation.
Useful relationships, both formal and informal, already
exist between the peacekeeping force and the
Indonesian military. The Mission recommends that
these relationships are further developed, and that a
system of information exchange be established
between the POLRI in West Timor and the
UNTAET civilian police and Office of Human
Rights Affairs, including taking action to follow up
on information provided by UNHCR and UNTAET
on alleged cases of intimidation. It welcomes efforts
made so far by the Indonesian security forces in
implementing its obligation to prevent cross-border
incursions into East Timor and emphasizes the need
for further efforts in this regard.

25. In the Mission’s opinion, based on the reports
from recent returnees to East Timor from West Timor,
and its discussions with refugees in the camps, the
continued presence of militia, in whatever form,
continues to be an impediment to the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1319 (2000). The
Mission stresses the need for decisive action to deal
with the remaining militias, in particular the
leaders, to put an end to their activities once and for
all, inter alia, through ongoing disarmament
operations, separation of militia leaders and those
engaging in intimidation from refugee communities,
and the expeditious prosecution of militia leaders
for the serious crimes they have committed. The
Mission encourages efforts by all parties to isolate
hard-line militia elements, in full accordance with
the law.

6

C. Justice and reconciliation
28. One of the Mission’s priorities was to focus on
efforts to bring to justice the perpetrators of serious
crimes committed in East Timor, as called for in
Security Council resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1319
(2000) and on many other occasions by the Council.
There are two parallel tracks, the first in East Timor
and the second in Indonesia.
29. The Mission has noted shortcomings in the
implementation of justice in East Timor (see above),
given the absence of any capacity in this field when
UNTAET started up. It urged that measures be
undertaken to address this problem in order to
respond sufficiently to the expectation of East
Timorese for justice. Failure to cope with this
challenge could have a negative impact on the
country’s ability to promote reconciliation and embrace
a national political culture based on respect for human
rights and accountability.

S/2000/1105

30. During the visit to Indonesia, the Mission
conveyed its concern over the slow pace of the process
in Indonesia to bring to justice the perpetrators of the
1999 campaign of violence in East Timor, including
those who had organized and directed the atrocities.
The Government of Indonesia reaffirmed its
commitment to pursuing the investigations and
prosecutions as a matter of priority. Attorney-General
Marzuki Darusman informed the Mission that he
expected the first trials to begin in January or February
2001. He confirmed that the trial of the pro-integration
militia leader, Eurico Guterres, and those charged with
the murder of the three UNHCR workers in Atambua,
would take place in Jakarta in the near future. He also
clarified that Guterres, inter alia, faced charges in
connection with the incitement of violence and the
violence committed in East Timor in 1999. The
Attorney-General, as well as the National Commission
for Human Rights (Komnas HAM), confirmed that the
necessary legislation for the establishment of a human
rights tribunal had been passed by the Parliament. The
Attorney-General expressed appreciation for the
technical assistance being provided by the United
Nations on the basis of the offer made by the
Secretary-General during his visit to Indonesia in
February 2000, as well as the bilateral assistance of
individual Governments. The Mission welcomes this
law and awaits the early establishment of the ad hoc
courts. Minister Darusman also indicated his intention
to work closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and to establish
a referral commission that included international
experts. The Mission welcomed this effort and
recommended consideration of his request for
international expertise. Both in West Timor and in
Jakarta, the Mission emphasized the need to pursue
and arrest those responsible for the deaths of
United Nations peacekeepers Privates Leonard
William Manning and Devi Ram Jaishi in East
Timor. The Mission is concerned over the lack of
progress in opening an investigation into the
murder of Private Jaishi. The Mission regrets that
thus far there has been no progress in bringing the
perpetrators to justice and conveys its strong
expectation that there should be progress soon.
31. Reconciliation among the East Timorese has
important implications for the return and reintegration
of refugees, long-term political and social harmony in
East Timor and good relations between East Timor and
Indonesia. The Mission was impressed by the persistent

effort being made by UNTAET to open the channels of
dialogue with pro-integration East Timorese in West
Timor. The Mission notes the efforts made by the
Government of Indonesia in this area. It is regrettable
that all these initiatives have not yet produced a
satisfactory response from the pro-integration camp.
32. In meetings in Dili with the National Council of
Timorese Resistance (CNRT) leadership, as well as
community leaders engaged in an effort to establish a
national reconciliation mechanism, the Mission was
assured of their readiness to reconcile with those on the
other side of the political divide while insisting that
persons who might have committed serious crimes in
East Timor should be brought to justice. The Mission
urges East Timorese political and community leaders to
continue their efforts to reassess pro-integration East
Timorese of their readiness to reconcile.
33. While in Kupang, some members of the Mission
met with representatives from UNTAS (Uni Timor
Aswain), a political organization supporting East
Timor’s integration with West Timor. While this
organization purports to represent the views of the
refugees, there is no evidence to suggest that this is the
case in reality. During this meeting, the representatives
renounced violence and condemned the murders of the
UNHCR workers. They continued, however, to reject
the outcome of the Popular Consultation. The
representatives of UNTAS stated to members of the
Mission their commitment to reconciliation but insisted
that this proceed without preconditions. In response,
members of the Mission underlined that the question of
justice for serious crimes and the results of the Popular
Consultation could not be ignored if there was to be a
lasting process of reconciliation. They also urged the
pro-integration group to accept the reality of the
independence of East Timor, thereby contributing to
the reconciliation process. The Mission encourages
the Government of Indonesia to assist in securing
public denunciations of violence as a means of
pursuing political goals, as well as acceptance of the
results of the Popular Consultation.
34. However, reconciliation should not be limited
only to political leaders. The delegation strongly
encouraged community leaders in East Timor and East
Timorese community leaders now in West Timor to
establish direct community-to-community contacts
with a view to building confidence and facilitating
wider reconciliation. In this regard, the recent joint
initiative of Bishop Basilio do Nascimento of

7

S/2000/1105

Baucau and Bishop Anton Ratu of Atambua to
facilitate contacts between East Timorese in East
Timor and refugee groups in West Timor is a
commendable effort that should be fully supported.

D. Relations between Indonesia, UNTAET
and East Timor
35. In its meetings in East Timor and Indonesia, the
Mission encouraged the reinvigoration of bilateral talks
between UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia on
the practical implementation of a number of issues
agreed to in the communiqué of 29 February 2000,
signed by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Foreign Affairs Minister Shihab. While
there has been welcome progress on a number of these
issues, the Mission is strongly of the view that the
establishment and effective functioning of bilateral
mechanisms are fundamental to fully normalizing
relations between Indonesia and East Timor. The
Mission also views as important the establishment
of a land corridor between the Oecussi enclave and
contiguous East Timor and urges the Government
of Indonesia to work with UNTAET towards
establishing an effective transit arrangement. It
hopes that future meetings of the Joint Border
Commission will contribute to achieving these
objectives.
36. The Mission offered to the Government of
Indonesia some elements designed to give new impetus
to various aspects of the complex relationship among
Indonesia, UNTAET and East Timor. In addition to
making a number of practical suggestions designed to
reinforce existing mechanisms for cooperation, the
elements covered a number of the main issues dealt
with elsewhere in the present report. The Government
of Indonesia agreed that a meeting of the Joint Border
Commission should take place in November with a
view to preparing for a subsequent meeting in
December. Discussions on modalities will now proceed
with UNTAET. They also indicated that they would
shortly initiate discussions with the United Nations
offices in Jakarta to facilitate an assessment by the
United Nations security experts of the situation in West
Timor. At the conclusion of the Mission, a joint press
conference was held in Jakarta on 17 November, at
which Foreign Affairs Minister Shihab and the head of
the Mission, Ambassador Andjaba, issued press
statements (see annexes I and II).

8

37. The Mission reiterates its thanks to UNTAET and
the Government of Indonesia for the hospitality
accorded to it throughout these visits.

S/2000/1105

Annex I
Statement to the press by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia on the visit of the Mission of the Security Council
(17 November 2000)
1.
I should like to begin by expressing my own personal, as well as the
Government of Indonesia’s satisfaction in receiving the visit by the Mission of the
Security Council over the past four days. Our invitation to the Mission and your
positive response testify to the positive line of communication between the Council
and the Government of Indonesia in dealing with issues of common concern relating
to the transition period in East Timor. Hence, it is to no one’s surprise that a genuine
spirit of friendship and cooperation has permeated throughout the Mission’s visit.
2.
Its two days of activities in Kupang and Atambua, followed by the past
two days in Jakarta, will no doubt have given the Security Council Mission ample
opportunity to witness first-hand the important strides that have been made by
Indonesia in responding to Council resolution 1319 (2000). During the Kupang and
Atambua phase of its visit, the Mission worked closely with, in addition to central
government representatives, the representatives of the local government, and police
as well as the Indonesian Armed Forces (TNI) regional command. In Jakarta, the
Mission met with government ministers, with high-ranking officials and also,
notably, with the Speaker of the House of Representatives (DPR). Just as important
were the intensive contacts with the members of the civil society and also the
meeting in Kupang with representatives of Uni Timor Aswain (UNTAS).
3.
Over the course of this visit, numerous issues of concern were discussed.
Permit me to highlight some areas of interest, namely:
(a) The need for sustained and enhanced efforts by the Government of
Indonesia, UNTAET and the international community to urgently and
comprehensively overcome the question of East Timorese refugees which has
brought complex ramifications;
(b) The need for renewed concerted efforts by all concerned to address the
various factors behind the East Timorese refugees issue, inter alia, security and
safety in the camps and uncertainty about the situation in East Timor. Indonesia for
its part will continue to take steps to further enhance the security conditions in the
camps. My Government also deems it important that better and more complete
information be provided to the refugees about the prevailing situation in East Timor
in order to address their expressed concerns about their future safety and security in
East Timor;
(c) The importance of cooperation between the Government of Indonesia and
relevant international humanitarian agencies in facilitating the registration of the
refugees as a way to determine whether their intention is to return to East Timor or
to remain in Indonesia based on the principle of freedom of choice. In the meantime,
Indonesia will continue to facilitate ad hoc (“spontaneous”) return of East Timorese
refugees. Since 6 September 2000, some 1,400 such refugees have returned to East
Timor;

9

S/2000/1105

(d) The need for the resumption of international assistance to the refugees to
supplement the efforts of the Government of Indonesia;
(e) The importance of the ongoing as well as any possible future legal
processes against those responsible for the killings of the three Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) staff as well as against those
who have committed serious crimes in the past in East Timor and those who have
carried out intimidation against the refugees;
(f) The need for continued and enhanced talks between the Government of
Indonesia and the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) on residual issues that arise during the transition period. This involves,
inter alia, putting into effect existing mechanisms for cooperation, including the
Joint Border Committee which plans to convene a director-level meeting in the last
week of November with a view to convening its first meeting during December;
(g) The need to intensively consider ways and means to facilitate and
promote reconciliation among East Timorese which is vital for the future peace and
stability of East Timor.
4.
Finally, I should like to once again reaffirm the commitment of my
Government to continuing this positive line of communication with the United
Nations Security Council as reflected by the visit of the Mission.

10

S/2000/1105

Annex II
Statement by Ambassador Martin Andjaba, leader of the
United Nations Security Council Mission to East Timor
and Indonesia
(Jakarta, 17 November 2000)
The Security Council Mission visited West Timor and Jakarta from 14 to
17 November 2000 at the invitation of the Government of Indonesia, following a
visit to East Timor. Members of the Mission expressed their gratitude to the
Indonesian authorities for facilitating the visit, which allowed them to see at first
hand the refugee situation in Kupang and Atambua. The discussions throughout
were productive and welcome.
The Mission welcomes the efforts the Government of Indonesia is making to
address the situation in West Timor. However, much remains to be done and the
international community is prepared to work in cooperation with Indonesia to meet
the remaining challenges.
In East Timor, the Mission was impressed by the progress made since 1999.
They commended the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira
de Mello, and the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) staff on the accomplishments of UNTAET, and it commends the people
of East Timor in their historic transition.
Over the past year, East Timor has begun rebuilding, over 170,000 refugees
have returned, and the process of reconciliation is beginning. The Mission
emphasizes that the twin tracks of justice and reconciliation are key to resolution of
the present situation.
The Mission noted the efforts of the Government of Indonesia to resolve the
refugee issue. It welcomed the steps taken by Indonesia towards the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1319 (2000), which calls, inter alia,
for the immediate disarmament and disbandment of the militia. It is clear that the
refugee problem raises complex issues. There is a pressing need to work together to
facilitate the earliest possible registration, repatriation and resettlement of all the
refugees, in conditions of safety and security.
The Mission was glad to hear that several hundred refugees had returned in
recent weeks. However, information from refugees returning to East Timor indicates
that intimidation is still present in the camps in West Timor. The intimidation must
be stopped. Many refugees are saying they are frightened that they still do not have
a free choice about their own future, and security in the camps remains uncertain.
Furthermore, decisive action is necessary to deal with the remaining militias. The
Mission welcomed the Government of Indonesia’s commitment to addressing the
problem of continued intimidation in the camps.
Members of the Mission expressed the hope that the cases of Eurico Guterres
and those responsible for the murders of three Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) staff would proceed quickly. It also
underscored the international community’s interest in speedy progress in bringing to

11

S/2000/1105

justice those responsible for the deaths of the three UNHCR staff and two United
Nations peacekeepers, and for the events of 1999.
The Mission took note of the request of the Indonesian Attorney-General,
Marzuki Darusman, for international assistance in ensuring adequate expertise in
bringing to justice those responsible for human rights violations. The Mission
welcomes the passage of the recent human rights law and awaits the early
establishment of the ad hoc courts. Mr. Darusman also indicated his intention to
work closely with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and to establish a referral commission that included international experts.
The Mission welcomed this effort and recommended consideration of his specific
request.
There was agreement on the high priority of resuming international assistance
to the refugees to supplement the efforts of the Government of Indonesia. For this to
happen, the security of international humanitarian workers will need to be assured.
The Government of Indonesia will be discussing with the United Nations offices in
Jakarta arrangements to facilitate an assessment by United Nations security experts
of the situation in West Timor, in cooperation with the police, the Indonesian Armed
Forces (TNI) and other responsible authorities.
The Mission underscored the importance of internationally observed
registration of the refugees, a view which is shared by the Government of Indonesia.
Those refugees who want to stay and those who want to return must be given fair
treatment and support. The Mission encouraged the Government to promulgate a
detailed plan for registration, return and resettlement. The Mission also encourages
continued discussions on this issue with UNHCR and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM).
The Mission believes that ad hoc returns, under international supervision, can
be an important factor in helping to creating the conditions necessary for resolving
the issue. In this context, it welcomes plans for the imminent return of the ex-TNI
reservists from East Timor (MILSAS) group.
The Mission welcomed the statements by East Timorese leaders that they were
anxious to welcome the refugees back and to pursue reconciliation. The Mission
emphasizes the importance of providing better information to the refugees, and of
supporting efforts by church and other communities to achieve this.
Both sides stressed the need for continued and enhanced talks between the
Government of Indonesia and UNTAET on residual issues that will arise during the
transition period. This involves, inter alia, putting into effect existing mechanisms
for cooperation, including the Joint Border Commission. The Mission welcomes the
Government of Indonesia’s willingness to hold a meeting of the Joint Border
Commission in November.
The Mission will be making its report to the Security Council on
20 November 2000.

12
