Resolutions adopted on the reports oí the Sixth Committee

99

preparation and execution of the items of the Programme for performance in 1%7 and 1968 and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee, to
submit recommendations regarding the execution of
the Programme in subsequent years ;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session an item entitled "United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation oí International Law".
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

Having in mind the responsibilities of the United
N ations Conference on Trade and Development in the
field of intemational trade,
Recalling that the Conference, in accordance with
its General Principie Six,9 has a particular interest in
promoting the establishment of rules furthering international trade as one of the most important factors in
economic development,
Recognizing that there is no existing United Nations
organ which is both familiar with this technical legal
subject and able to devote sufficient time to work in this
field,

2205 (XXI), Establishment of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

Decides to establish a United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (hereinafter referred to as
the Commission), which shall have for its object the
promotion of the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of international trade, in accordance
with the provisions set forth in section II below;

I

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2102 (XX) oí 20 December
1965, by which it requested the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session a comprehensive report on the progressive development oí the Iaw of international trade,
Having considered with appreciation the report oí
the Secretary-General on that subject, 8
Considering that international trade co-operation
among States is an important factor in the promotion
of friendly relations and, consequently, in the maintenance of peace and security,
Recalling its belief that the interests of ali peoples,
and particularly those of developing countries, demand
the betterment of conditions favouring the extensive
development of international trade,
Reaffirming its conviction that divergencies arising
from the Iaws of different States in matters relating
to international trade constitute one of the obstacles to
the development of world trade.
Having noted with appreciation the efforts made by
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
towards the progressive harmonization and unification
oí the law oí international trade by promoting the adoption of international conventions, uniform laws, standard contract provisions, general conditions of sale,
standard trade terms and other measures,
N oting at the same time that progress in this area
has not been commensurate with the importance and
urgency of the problem, owing to a number oí factors, in particular insufficient co-ordination and cooperation between the organizations concerned, their
limited membership or authority and the small degree
of participation in this field on the part of many developing countries,
Considering it desirable that the process of harmonization and unification oí the law of international trade
should be substantially co-ordinated, systematized and
accelerated and that a broader participation should be
secured in furthering progress in this area,
Convinced that it would therefore be desirable for
the United Nations to play a more active role towards
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade,
N oting that such action would be properly within the
scope and competence of the Organization under the
terms of Article 1, paragraph 3, and Article 13, and
of Chapters IX and X of the Charter of the United
Nations,
8 Jbid., agenda

ítem 88, documents A/6396 and Add.l and 2.

II
ÜRGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON lNTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW

l. The Commission shall consist of twenty-nine
States, elected by the General Assembly for a term of
six years, except as provided in paragraph 2 of the
present resolution. In electing the members of the
Commission, the Assembly shall observe the following
distribution of seats :
(a) Seven from African States ;
( b) Five from Asian States ;
( c) Four from Eastern European States;
( d) Five from Latin American States;
(e) Eight from Western European and other States.
The General Assembly shall also have due regard to
the adequate representation of the principal economic
and legal systems of the world, and of developed and
developing countries.
2. Oí the members elected at the first election, to
be held at the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly, the terms of fourteen members shall expire
at the end of three years. The President of the General
Assembly shall select these members within each of the
five groups oí States referred to in paragraph 1 above,
by drawing lots.
3. The members elected at the first election shall
take office on 1 January 1%8. Subsequently, the members shall take office on 1 J anuary of the year following
each election.
4. The representatives of members on the Commission shall be appointed by Member States in so far as
possible from among persons of eminence in the field of
the law of international trade.
S. Retiring members shall be eligible for re-election.
6. The Commission shall normally hold one regular
session a year. It shall, if there are no technical difficulties, meet alternately at United Nations Headquarters and at the United Nations Office at Geneva.
7. The Secretary-General shall make available to the
Commission the appropriate staff and facilities required
by the Commission to fulfil its task.
9 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Devrlopment, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.ll), annex A.I.l, p. 18.

100

General AHembly-Twenty-first Ses11ion

8. The Commission shall further the progressive
harmonization and unification of the law of international trade by :
(a) Co-ordinating the work of organizations active
in this field and encouraging co-operation among them ;
( b) Promoting wider participation in existing international conventions and wider acceptance of existing
model and uniform laws;
(e) Preparing or promoting the adoption of new international conventions, model laws and uniform laws
and promoting the codification and wider acceptance
of international trade terms, provisions, customs and
practices, in collaboration, where appropriate, with the
organizations operating in this field;
( d) Promoting ways and means of ensuring a unifonn interpretation and application of international conventions and · uniform laws in the field of the law
of international trade ;
(e) Collecting and disseminating information on national legislation and modern legal developments, including case law, in the field of the law of international
trade;
( f) Establishing and maintaining a close collaboration with the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development ;
(g) Maintaining liaison with other United Nations
organs and specialized agencies concerned with international trade ;
(h) Taking any other action it may deem useful to
fulfil its functions.
9. The Commission shall bear in mind the interests
of ali peoples, and particularly those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of international
trade.
10. The Commission shall submit an annual report,
including its recommendations, to the General Assembly, and the report shall be submitted simultaneously
to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development for comments. Any such comments or recommendations which the Conference or the Trade and
Development Board may wish to make, including suggestions on topics for inclusion in the work of the Com-

mission, shall .be transmitted to the General Assembly
in accordance with the revelant provisions of Asscmbly
resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964. Any
other recomtnendations relevant to the work of the
Commission which the Conference or the Board may
wish to make shall be similarly transmitted to the General Assembly.
11. The Commission may consult with or request
the services of any international or national organization, scientific imtitution and individual expert, on any
subject entrusted to it, if it considers such consultation
or services might assist it in the performance of its
functions.
12. The Commission may establish appropriate working relationships with intergovernmental organizations
and international non-governmental organizations concerned with the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of international trade.
III
l. Requests the Secretary-General, pending the
election of the Commission, to carry out the preparatory
work necessary for the organization of the work of the
Commission and, in particular :
(a) To invite Member States to submit in writing
before 1 July 1967, taking into account in particular
the report of the Secretary-General,10 comments on a
programme of work to be undertaken by the Commission in discharging its functions under paragraph 8 of
section II above ;
( b) To request similar comments from the organs
and organizations referred to in paragraph 8 (f) and
( g) and in paragraph 12 oí section II above;
2. Decides to include an ítem entitled "Election of
the members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law" in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
lO Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenly-first
Session, Annexes, agencia item 88, documents A/6396 and
Add.l and 2.
