UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

954

RECORDS

;‘5I

th

MEETING:

31 AUGUST

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
, . , . , . . . . ; . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . , . , , , . , , , . , . . . , , . , . . , . , . . , , . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . .

1

The situation, in Namibia . , . . . . . , , . . . , . , . , , . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

Provisi.onal agenda (S/Agenda/l954)

S/PV. 1954

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Sl~ppl~tn~t~ts of the Q~~ici~rl Recortls qf ihe Secrrritjl Corrwil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolrrtior~s tr~rd
Decishs
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1954th MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 31 August 1976, at 11. a.m.
p~~~~~itienr: Mr. Isao ABE (Japan).
~,.~~~,tf: The representatives
of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Unionof Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
,-,fGreatBritain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

3. I invite the representative of Madagascar to take
the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when it is his turn
to speak.

provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l954)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2, The situation in Namibia

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia
1, The PRESIDENT: I wish to recall that when the
Councilconsidered the question of the situation in
Namibiain January it decided in its resolution 385
(1976):
“to remain seized of the matter and to meet on OI
before31 August 1976 for the purpose of reviewing
South Africa’s compliance with the terms of the
present resolution aud, in the event of noncompliance by South Africa, for the purpose of
consideringthe appropriate measures to be taken
underthe Charter.”
ln accordancewith that resolution and after consultationswith the members of the Council, the Council
hasbeenconvened to consider the question inscribed
onthe agenda,
2. I have received a letter from the representative
of Madagascar, in his capacity
as Chairman of the
Group of African States for the month of August,
containinga request to be invited to participate in the
discussion
in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
Procedure.Accordingly, I propose, in conformity with
theus~alpractice and with the consent of the Council,
tOinvite the representative of Madagascar to participatein the discussion without the right to vote.

4. The PRESIDENT: I have also received a letter
dated 30 August from the Acting President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia containing a
request to be allowed to participate in the debate in
the Council on this item. It may be recalled that on
previous occasions, when the Council was considering
the situation in Namibia, it had extended invitations to
representatives of the United Nations Council for
Namibia-most recently at its 1880th meeting on
27 January 1976. Accordingly, I propose that the
Council extend an invitation pursuant to rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure to the Acting
Preside& and four members of the United Nations
Council for Namibia.

5. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Madagascar as Chairman of the African
Group. I ask him to take his place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
6. Mr, RASOLONDRAIBE
(Madagascar) (intwpwttrtion ji*om FWIW/I): I am particularly happy to
present to you, Mr. President, the warm congratulations of the African Group on your accession to the
lofty functions of President of rhe Council. The African
Group, which has always enjoyed your solicitude and
particular friendship and consideration, wishes you a
happy and successful end to your presidency, now
that your term of office as President of the Council
is alhost over. We are particularly happy that this
debate on the question of the situation in Namibia
is being held today under your presidency.
7. The debate which we are beginning today was
decided upon last January, and I know that the entire
world has awaited this debate with some anxiety and

a great deal of interest. There are many interests
involved, but in my statement I shall mention only
the base essentials.
8. When I spoke last week on the occasion
Namibia Day, this is what I said:

of

“That Namibia wishes to be reborn to international life and to resume all the attributes of
sovereignty
after several decades of German
colonization and South African exploitation under
the tr~~trtheitl regime, that its people is prepared for
this end to commit itself to a battle *where the
means used are too unequal, reflects but one
thing-the
futility of measures of oppression,
repression and suppression which, even though
applied with the frenzy of the South African
racists, cannot prevail over the profound aspirations
of a people for justice, freedom and national independence.“’
9. I take the liberty of repeating myself today in
order to indicate before this Council that the African
Group, of which I have the honour to be the spokesman, understands the struggle of the people of
Namibia, is in solidarity with it, gives it its entire
support and expresses its admiration for the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) which
leads it and for the fighters who wage the good fight.
10. It is an honour for the African Group, at the
beginning of the debate today, to be hble to participate at this stage of the struggle, whose objectives
are in accord with the broader battle that we are
waging wherever there is a challenge to the principles
of unconditional
national independence, respect for
territorial integrity, unreserved support for human
rights and the application of democratic rules.
1I. The self-determination of the Namibian people,
which cannot be distorted or confiscated by nonrepresentative groups or illegitimate
interests, is of
serious concern to us because we are all aware of the
difficulties of the problems manifested in the situation in southern Africa.
12. There are difficulties because the racist regime,
which we gladly label stupid when it proclaims itself
the guardian of Christian civilization in Africa, that
regime which we do not take seriously when it claims
to be the defender of the last bastion of the so-called
free world, that regime succeeds disconcertingly in
bargaining with the Western Powers because of its
unique geographical and strategic position.
13. There are difficulties because that regime, which
has created its power and wealth on the shameless
exploitation
of African populations, also brilliantly
exploits the greed of the imperialist,and neo-colonialist
interests with which it has a joint cause and which are
always prepared through it to pursue manoeuvres
which were carried out in the light of day during the
recent Angolan conflict.

14. There are difficulties because, in a world which
is greedy for raw materials, that regime which ]s
basically illegal manages to ensure for itself a clientele
made up of countries which, out of opportunism
refuse to side with the African majority and pretend ti
ignore the changes announced by the present upheavals
in southern Africa.
15. That regime, which knows it is being challenged,
which sees its political foundations crumbling and
trembles at the thought of losing power, seeks and
finds respite amongs allies which, not content with
granting it a semblance of legitimacy and strengthening
its economic, military and nuclear potential, alsO
carry out on its behalf a political and diplomatic
offensive which is as futile as it is desperate.
16. The surreptitiousness with which those countries
maintain
their position while making statements
contrary to their actions has made them lose in our
eyes all moral right to speak to us of their solution
for putting and end to minority regimes in southern
Africa. Gradualism has been proposed without any
concern for the urgency which the oppressed peoples
attach to their claims.
17. ’ A certain realism has been suggested to us when
there is a danger of alienating the Fascist Powers of
southern Africa. A dialogue has been suggested despite
the habitual bad faith of the Pretoria regime which,
furthermore, has the distinction of obstinately refusing
to hold dialogue with the genuine representatives of
Azania and Namibia, namely, the African National
Congress of South Africa the Pan Africanist Congress
of Apania and SWAPO. Can one think of a better
proposition than the Lusaka Manifesto,* based on
this more positive manner of conceiving a dialogue?
18. It appears that people are less and less inclined
to believe or hope that there will be a peaceful SOlUtion of the Namibian problem. Is it to be considered
an impossible objective?
19. To face the popular battle which is gaining
ground, the South African regime has been compelled
to introduce in to Namibia armed forces and a Police
force of 50,000 men, including mechanized infantry
battalions with complete armaments such as tanks and
helicopter squadrons. In addition it has built UP an
impressive system of fortifications there in the obvious
hope that what did not work in the jungles and ricefields of Viet-Nam could work on the more arid land of
Caprivi, Ovamboland and Okavango.
20. Such reactions from the racist South African
regime do not surprise us. It has always Placed the
boundaries of its national security far beyond its
physical boundaries; it has always dreamt of msin*
taining a protective barrier between South Africa and
the independent African States north of the Zamhezi
River.

2I That regime, which watched in horror
as the
Portuguese colonial empire frumbled,
which sought
to haIt decolonization
by its military intervention in
,4ngo121,which today has been fwxl~
to :lCCept
the
inevjt&]e in Zimbabwe; that regime, I maintain, is
capable of going to any extreme in a fit of despair.
Namibj;\, which has aiwnys been administered
as
the fifth South African province, is well worth the
efforts endured in Angola in a different legal context.

Namibia, there are some constant factors which emerge
from the action taken by the United Nations.
26. The first, which is undeniable, is the perseverance
of the Grganization in the political commitment entered
into with respect to the Namibian people, in recognizing the legitimacy of its struggle and in giving it
moral and material support. The second constant
factor is true at least with respect to the majority; it is
the will to go beyond symbolism and to exercise real
infIuence for the rapid solution of the Namibian question. The third constant factor concerns our division
with respect to the policy of sanctions, and this is of
particular interest to the Security .Council.

22, Faced with t&s escalation, the African countries
WiII not change their attitude because we know that the
South African regime is inSllfficientIy
armed against
our strategy based on the legitimate right of oppressed
popul&ns
and the solidarity of the nations of the
black continent with peace- ancljustice-loving
peoples
throughout the world. Since the Namibian people,
under the impetus of SWAPC), has become aware of
its rights and requirements for survival as a modern
nation, since it is prepared to face the battle, since it
knows that the enemy is not invincible and is daily
becoming more embroiled
in the mysteries of its
contradictions, its complexes and its blemishes, we
know that the conditions for final victory arc there.
The material means and superior weapons
of the South
Africans will not be a sufficient dissuasive force to
divert us from our struggle or to make us change OUI
strategy.

27. The African Group favours a policy of sanctions
against the Pretoria regime in the context of the
Namibian question as well as in that of the questions
of Southern Rhodesia and trpartheid. The African
Group considers that to belong to any organization
means that one is committed to complying with its
basic rules. As soon as one member violates those
rules in a flagrant and repeated manner, there is no
alternative other than to take appropriate sanctions
against it, which may go as far as expulsion, unless,
of course, the organization concerned denies its right
to do so thus signing its own death warrant.
28. Sanctions, in our opinion, can also play an
important role since they can bear witness to our
solidarity with those who for IO years have been
struggling to rid themselves of the domination of the
white minority in Namibia and to banish from their
country the trparthcid system and its degrading
practices, and to put an end to the imperialist exploitation of their labour and of the resources of their
country.

23. We know that despite its bravado, its dodging and
the insolent attitude it adopts to the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council the
South African regime is very much aware of the
danger in which it stands from the combined force of
the popular struggle and international
public opinion.
That is why we shall not fail into the trap ofminimizing
the role which the United Nations can play in the solution of the Namibian question.

29. Finally, we believe that sanctions can be useful
and can contribute to some extent to hastening the
cessation of criminal acts and even to redressing the
wrongs they have caused. If the effectiveness of
sanctions against Rhodesia has been seriously
hampered because of the criminal complicity between
Mr. Vorster and Ian Smith, that does not mean
(I priori that sanctions against South Africa would not
be crowned with success. We see rather in this situation an additional reason to show more firmness and
more unity in our ranks, provided we all remain
committed to the same objectives in southern Africa.

24. We must recognize that it was not without delays
and hesitations that the General Assembly arrived, in
1966, at the historic decision [rc.whtiou
2145 /Xx/)1
to terminate South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia.
The first corollary of that decision was to place that
Territory under the legal responsibility of the United
Nations; the second coroI]ary was that the International Court of Justice in 1971 rendered its advisory
opinion” whereby South Africa’s presence in Namibia
washenceforth illegal. The United Nations decision
involved for it the political commitment
to implement
the revocation of the Mandate and attain the effective
liberation of the Namibian people.

30. In resolution 385 (1976), the Security Council
called for the holding of free elections in Namibia
under United Nations supervision and control. The
resolution called on South Africa urgently to make a
solemn declaration indicating that it accepted the
principle of such elections, undertaking to comply
with the resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations and with the advisory opinion of the lnternationa] Court of Justice and recognizing the territorial
integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation. The resolution concluded by stating that the Council would take

25, Beyond the demands,
the appeals and the
cohdemnations which we have voiced; beyond the
disaPPointing experience of the aborted negotiations
between the Secretary-General
and the Pretoria
authorities; beyond the establishmentofseveral
institutions-the Council for Namibia,
the United Nations
P”nd for Namibia
and now the United Nations
‘nstitute for Namibia-and
beyond the decision to
‘PPoint a United Nations High Commissioner
for
3

34. First, we are aware of the tragedy through
which the Namibian people is passing and the least of
its probleIln is not the deViSiVe
InanoZuvres undertaken by the South African rigime,
That rigime
seeks to place the tribes in opposition to each other
and to set the fighters of SWAP0 against the rest of
the population. Without overlooking what the United
Nations has done so far to help the Namibian people
to liberate its territory, it seems to US that our solidarity
with the Namibian people must be reflected in the
constant defence of its national unity and its terri.
torial integrity. Only the organization of free elections
under United Nations supervision and control can
achieve these objectives, and the South African rCgime
must be compelled to abandon the formula now
proposed, which at best would assure for the Namibian
people only a doubtful representation
in the future
entity which will govern the country.

appropriate measures in the event of non-compliance
by South Africa with the relevant provisions of the
resolution.
3 1. The only reply was a communiqut
dated
18 August [S/12/80, WW.~] published at Windh,oek
by a committee of the so-called South West African
Constitutional
Conference. Like SWAPO, the United
Nations Council for Namibia lost no time in rejecting
the communiquC, and published a statement on the
same day which, in part, reads as follows:
“The
United Nations Council for Namibia
strongly condemns the latest ill-advised strategem of
the South African administration
in Windhoek as
totally lacking in legitimacy, ambiguous and equivocal. The proposals of the so-called Constitutional
Conference do not even approach any of the
genuine
self-determination
for
requirements
and independence
laid down by the United
Nations. These proposals make no mention of the
elimination
of trpnrtheid legislation. They merely
seek to perpetuate the homelands (bantustan)
policies with all their deleterious effects on the
integrity and unity of the Namibian people. They
are also silent about free elections under United
Nations supervision and control. They totally ignore
SWAPO, which has been recognized by the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations
as the authentic representative of the Namibian
people. There is no undertaking to release political
prisoners or to allow the return of political exiles.
The date suggested, that is, 31 December 1978,
constitutes an unjustifiable prolongation
of the
illegal South African occupation. The reference to
unity is couched in ambiguous terms without
specifically
recognizing the territorial
integrity
of Namibia as a unitary State. The references to
the rejection of any attempt to solve the problems
of Namibia by force are, to say the least, paradoxical
in the light of the institutionalized
brutality under
the Repression of Terrorism Act and other rules and
regulations, which give a free reign to the most
blatant and ruthless violation of all principles of
human rights and freedoms as proclaimed by the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.” [S//2/85, u~7~7ex,
prrrtr.

35. Secondly, South Africa, as we have said, is
waging a real war in Namibia in contravention of the
preamble to the Definition of Aggression annexed to
resolution 3314 (XXIX), which reaffirms the duty of
States not to use armed force to deprive peoples of
their right to self-determination,
freedom and independence, or to disrupt territorial integrity. In the case
of Namibia, this fact is aggravated, on the one hand,
by the fact that South African troops are acting in a
territory over which South Africa holds no title and,on
the other, because of the fact that the territory of
Namibia has repeatedly been used as a base for aggression against neighbouring independent countries. We
have no doubt of the applicability
to this situation
of resolution 3314 (XXIX) and, accordingly, of the
applicability of Chapter VII of the Charter.
36. On the basis of narrow juridical concepts, some
in our Organization refuse to admit that the problems
of Namibia, Southern Rhodesia and South Africa from
the same root, the same refusal to allow the African
majority to assume power, People refuse to recognise
that these problems therefore require the same
solution; the three situations have evolved similarly
this year, in that they have become more serious,
while and offensive is being aimed at separating the
problems and at concentrating diplomatic and other
efforts on Rhodesia rather than elsewhere.

h].

37. By virtue of what criteria has the decision been
arrived at to consider that one problem has priority
in respect of another‘? At what cost was the understanding arrived at whereby one would first of all
attack the peripheral problem of Rhodesia, which is
already at an advanced stage of deterioration, instead
of striking directly at the core, the Pretoria r%me?
Indeed, it is from there that all the nefarious influences
which are poisoning the whole of southern Africa
emanate. The unholy alliance with the former Portuguese rkgime, the sabotage of sanctions against Rhodesia, military interventions against Angola and Zamblag
the manoeuvre for division with regard to the problems
of dialogues, the exporting of the qmhcitl
system to

32. The African Group endorses the observations
of the United Nations Council for Namibia. We
conclude that South Africa has not complied with the
provisions of resolution 385 (1976) and that the Council
today finds itself under the obligation to take the
appropriate measures mentioned in paragraph 12 of
that resolution.
33. At a time when the Council is about to debate
the nature and scope of these measures, I should like,
on behalf of the African Group, to offer the two
following comments.
,
4

Namibia and the Vietnamization
of that country-only
one brain has conceived and executed all these crimes,
which are but the ramifications of the policy of~~~~~/l*t/&, It is the fundamental unity of the three problems
that are in abeyance which we must recognize, and,
strategically, one could not claim to find a final solution for one or the other without first destroying the
keystone.
38. There is an opportunity before the Council today
which is derived from this unity, and that is to vote
sanctions within the framework of the Namibian
question which WOU]~ directly affect the South African
rtgime as though they had been voted on within the
framework of the uprlrfhcit/
question,
Such a
decision from the Council at this stage would contribute to refocusing the debate instead of diffusing
it, as some have now proposed doing with unseemly
pride. Not only the Namibians,
but all those who
aspire to the genuine liberation of the African continent would be grateful to the Council.

40. Mr. President, I believe that I have already
informed you of our desire at this stage to suspend the
debate until some subsequent date to be determined
by your successor.
41. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will take note of
,the message transmitted to us by the representative
of Madagascar.
42. There are no further names on the list of speakers
for this morning’s meeting. If no member wishes to
speak, I shall adjourn the meeting. Before adjourning,
however, I should like to say a few words.
43. Today, 31 August, is the last day of my presidency
of the Council and tomorrow the presidency will be
turned over to our colleague from the Libyan Arab
Republic, Ambassador Kikhia. I should like to express
my gratitude to the members of the Council and thei
delegations, the Secretary-General and the Secretariat
for their help and co-operation in the fulfilment of my
duties as President.

39. Having concluded my statement, I should like
nowto read out the text of a cable we have just received
from Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO, which
confirms a decision taken previously by the African
Group with the co-operation of‘ the local representatives of SWAPO:
“Suggest Security Council meeting held midSeptember to enable full pnr’ticipation
Foreign
Ministers attending General Assembly as agreed
OAU Mauritius
and non-aligned
meeting Colombo.“:‘:
+ Quoted

in English

by the spcukcr’.

NOIPS
I This
Nations
nublishcd

statement
was made at the 236th meetine
Council
for Namibia,
the official
record;
in Summmv
form. See A/AC.13 lLSR.236.

of the United
of which are
