S/PV.8423

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8423rd meeting

Thursday, 13 December 2018, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Blok
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/1104)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43755 (E)
*1843755*

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.

Consequently, Sweden and Kuwait have presented to the
Council what they believe to be a purely humanitarian
and balanced draft resolution, which renews crossborder humanitarian operations for 12 months, in line
with the Secretary-General’s recommendation.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018)
(S/2018/1104)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

13/12/2018

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/1110, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Kuwait and Sweden.

The cross-border assistance authorized by
the Security Council remains a vital part of the
humanitarian response. In November alone, life-saving
cross-border humanitarian assistance was provided to
more than 600,000 people, including food assistance to
nearly 500,000. The number of those who are still in
need of humanitarian assistance in Syria is 13 million,
which is a very significant number.
The renewal of the resolution would allow the
Security Council to continue to help ease the human
suffering of the people and ensure delivery by the
shortest route to humanitarian assistance to those in
Syria who need it. Such cross-border humanitarian
assistance continues to complement other mechanisms
of humanitarian response in Syria, where millions of
people depend on cross-border humanitarian assistance
to survive. That is why we call on all Council members
to support the draft resolution and vote in favour of it.
The President (spoke in French): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

I draw the attention of the members of the Council
to document S/2018/1104, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and
2401 (2018).

In favour
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.

Against
None

I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.

Abstaining
China, Russian Federation

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Over the
past two weeks, Sweden and Kuwait, as penholders for
the humanitarian aspect of the Council’s work on Syria,
have conducted broad consultations with members of
the Security Council and other relevant parties in order
to renew the resolution on humanitarian access to Syria,
including the fundamental provisions of resolution 2165
(2014). Those negotiations and consultations have been
fruitful and helpful. We thank all Council members
for their constructive engagement in the consultations.

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 13 votes in favour, none against and
2 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2449 (2018).

2/22

I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Let me begin today by thanking
Council members for their decision just now to adopt
resolution 2449 (2018). Cross-border aid provides a
critical lifeline to millions of Syrians who cannot be
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

supported through any other means. The Council has
done its part; we will now do ours to sustain aid in a
way that is as effective and accountable as possible.
The situation in the north-west of Syria, where some
3 million people remain dependent on humanitarian
cross-border operations, is very challenging. While a
pause in air strikes has had a meaningful impact on the
lives of people there, shelling and fighting in the areas in
and around the demilitarized zone continue to result in
civilian death and injury and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure. In late November, a mortar struck a
primary school in Jarjanaz town just as students were
leaving, killing four boys and two girls and injuring
ten other children. Insecurity continues and incidents
affecting civilians continue to be reported every day.
The recent hostilities have reportedly forced nearly
15,000 people to flee their homes for neighbouring
villages, with many people living in the open, without
adequate shelter, during the cold winter months. They
join the many thousands already living in tents or under
plastic sheeting.
The United Nations and non-governmental
organizations continue to respond to ensure that those
in need get help, but fighting and displacement make
the situation more difficult and the population more
vulnerable. Idlib remains on the edge of a humanitarian
disaster. Should there be a further escalation of violence,
the needs would quickly overwhelm the ability of
humanitarian agencies to respond. The parties to the
conflict must take care to spare the civilian population,
while at the same time taking all possible measures
to see that the violence in Idlib ends and that the
humanitarian catastrophe the Secretary-General has
warned of does not come to pass.
Humanitarian organizations estimate that up to
6,000 people remain trapped in areas under the control
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, east of
the Euphrates, in Deir ez-Zor governorate. Civilians
continue to suffer, as a result of both ground fighting and
air strikes. On 29 November, air strikes reportedly hit a
field hospital in the area, killing and injuring scores of
civilians, including women, children and medical staff.
Freedom of movement is heavily restricted. Some 9,000
people have been able to flee since September, but they
continue to find themselves in harm’s way, living in
difficult conditions and with extremely limited access
to basic assistance and services.

S/PV. 8423

The most recent aid to reach displaced people in
the area was in October. The most recent humanitarian
mission to the area had to turn back when its vehicles
came under attack and one aid worker was shot. After
receiving treatment, he is now in stable condition, but the
civilians in the area continue to suffer without the basic
support that they need. I also remain very concerned
about the more than 40,000 people in Rukban, where
we continue to receive reports of civilian suffering
and death.
The deployment of our convoy in early November
has shown that where there is a political will,
humanitarian organizations can mobilize quickly and
provide help to those in need. I once again thank all
who were involved in that. We need to build on that
first delivery with a second convoy later this month to
provide food, water, hygiene and sanitation support,
and medical and nutrition items, as well as blankets,
mattresses and other essential non-food items to help
protect people during the winter. A second convoy
will also allow us to carry out further vaccinations and
speak to people about their plans as we look towards
more sustainable solutions.
I want to assure the Council that the first delivery
was effective. We monitored the delivery of aid inside
the camp for three days. We will make additional efforts
to strengthen the monitoring of the distribution in the
next convoy. We will send a bigger team, and we plan to
accompany the assistance from the offloading point to
the distribution points inside the makeshift settlement
to oversee the actual distributions and to conduct postdistribution monitoring. My message to all concerned
parties is therefore simple. I ask them to provide the
authorizations, facilitation letters and all the necessary
security guarantees for the convoy to proceed without
delay or impediment.
Sustaining and scaling up the response is also
critical in other parts of the country, including in
areas under the control of the Government, where we
now estimate that 8.7 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance. From January to September,
humanitarian organizations operating from inside Syria
have been reaching an average of 3.2 million people
every month. A key priority has been addressing the
needs of the most vulnerable in locations that have seen
shifts in control. Some 1.6 million people live in areas
that have changed control since the beginning of the
year. Some areas have suffered for years under siege,
have been impacted by intense military activity prior

18-437553/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

to changing control or have seen no resumption of basic
services since changing control. Up to one-third of those
people are living in areas categorized by the United
Nations as hard-to-reach, where the United Nations and
its partners do not have a sustained presence and, as a
result, humanitarian needs are particularly severe. Aid
has reached 40 per cent of those locations, including
through a blanket agreement for access to northern
rural Homs and southern Hama. However, sustained
access to too many areas remains limited and some
areas are still not accessible at all.
Improving our response is not only about reaching
more people, although that is part of it. We are also
increasingly focused on further improving the quality
of our access and programming. What do we mean by
quality in humanitarian assistance? First, assistance
must be based on an assessment of needs. Secondly, it
means being able to monitor and evaluate our impact,
including by directly engaging with the people we are
trying to help. Thirdly, it involves ensuring protection
for the most vulnerable and sustaining our reach month
after month, based on the needs identified. We are
making progress in many of those areas. The United
Nations is reaching many places, with more than 550
missions over the past three months to assess, deliver or
monitor the delivery of assistance. We are also working
on expanding our field presence in governorates
outside Damascus to enhance our ability to engage
with communities, assess needs, deliver assistance and
monitor impact. We continue to engage with all parties
to the conflict, including the Government of Syria,
at multiple levels to negotiate access and ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches those most in need. I
will report to the Council on our progress in improving
access in the months ahead.
Let me conclude by recalling the five requests I
made to the Council two months ago (see S/PV.8384).
The full implementation of those requests will remain
an important focus of our work as we move into 2019,
recognizing that other issues may also arise as the
situation evolves.
First, with the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018),
important progress has been made, but we must see
access continue without impediment. Secondly, while
we have seen the continued implementation of the
agreement between Russia and Turkey in the northwest, it is critical that it be sustained with respect for
civilians and civilian infrastructure, and that there be an
end to the current hostilities. A full military onslaught
4/22

13/12/2018

on Idlib and the surrounding areas must be avoided at
all costs. Thirdly, there must be support to ensure that
approval for the next humanitarian convoy to Rukban is
immediately granted and that secure access is provided
to the makeshift settlement. Fourthly, we must be
able to enjoy the Council’s ongoing support so we can
further build on our efforts to ensure quality access,
through which we can carry out additional needs
assessments, deliver to all areas where needs are most
severe, and monitor the impact of our interventions.
Fifthly, we must provide financing for our current
humanitarian response plan. Donors have provided
more than $2.1 billion this year, but the plan remains
only two-thirds funded.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I will say a few words on
behalf of the co-penholders, Sweden and Kuwait, and
follow up with a few remarks in my national capacity
as the representative of Sweden.
With the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018) today,
the Security Council has upheld its obligation to millions
of people in Syria. On behalf of the co-penholders,
Kuwait and Sweden, I strongly welcome this decision.
The renewal of the modalities of resolution 2165 (2015)
for an additional 12 months will continue to save lives
and alleviate suffering every day in Syria. The United
Nations does not have an alternative route for reaching
those people in need. It is an existential lifeline.
While the situation on the ground has changed much
over the past year, the humanitarian needs unfortunately
remain enormous. There are millions of people who still
depend on humanitarian assistance. This resolution is
about ensuring that they receive assistance through the
most direct routes and that the relief reaches as many
people as possible throughout the country. The United
Nations cross-border operations, based on resolution
2165 (2015), are necessary as long as the humanitarian
needs remain and humanitarian access from within the
country is impeded.
As a co-penholder together with Kuwait, our
compass has been defined by the humanitarian
imperative to act. Over the past weeks, we have
consulted all members of the Council and other
stakeholders, including Syria and the neighbouring
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

countries. We have been committed to facilitating a
fair, impartial and transparent negotiations process. It
is well known that there are different perspectives on
the Syrian conflict in the Council and that discussions
can sometimes be heated. The adoption of today’s
resolution demonstrates, however, that in the face of
urgent needs Council members can come together to
shoulder a collective responsibility.
On behalf of the co-penholders, I would like to
thank the representatives of all delegations for their
constructive engagement during the negotiations
on resolution 2449 (2018). I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and his team here
in New York for their support. Most important, I would
like to pay tribute to the staff of the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners
for their tireless efforts to help the Syrian people.
At this point, I would like to say a few words in
my capacity as the representative of Sweden. The
Charter of the United Nations places the people at the
forefront, but, far too often, the people are forgotten
or neglected during our deliberations in the Council.
Our meetings on the humanitarian situation in Syria
serve as a reminder that the Syrian conflict needs to
be first and foremost about the Syrian people. The
conflict in Syria has led to a humanitarian disaster,
with consequences far beyond Syria’s borders. As the
conflict enters its eighth winter, 13 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance and more than
5 million of them are children. Six million people
are displaced within Syria, many of whom have been
forced to flee more than once, and a further 5 million
have fled to neighbouring countries. Without a doubt,
a very heavy responsibility for this disaster inevitably
rests with the Government of Syria — something that
the international community will not forget.
For years, the Council has dealt with one crisis after
another in Syria — each a humanitarian catastrophe
in its own right. The conflict has been characterized
throughout by a blatant disregard for human dignity.
Homs, Aleppo and eastern Ghouta will not be forgotten.
Idlib, where 3 million civilians are trapped with no
safe place to flee, could yet be added to that list. It
is key to uphold the fragile ceasefire in Idlib, where
a military offensive would most likely result in a new
humanitarian disaster of unimaginable proportions.
We urge the Astana guarantors — Russia, Turkey and
Iran — to ensure that the ceasefire is upheld and that
civilians are protected.

S/PV. 8423

The Council has on numerous occasions called on the
parties — in particular the Syrian authorities — to allow
safe, sustained and unhindered humanitarian access.
Yet substantial and arbitrary obstacles remain, which
are hindering the delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout Syria. That includes areas that have
recently been retaken by Government forces and their
allies. Even if an occasional humanitarian convoy is
allowed to reach those most in need, the fact is that
the humanitarian actors do not have the access that the
Council has repeatedly demanded.
Syria is a clear case in point in which the international
legal order — built over decades to protect the most
vulnerable in times of conflict — has come under
threat. We have witnessed frequent violations of the
rules and principles of international humanitarian law.
We have witnessed indiscriminate attacks in densely
populated areas. We have witnessed the deliberate
targeting of schools and hospitals, as well as attacks
on humanitarian workers and medical personnel. And
we have witnessed, over and over again, the refusal
to grant humanitarian access to people in need of
assistance. The integrity of the international legal order
depends on our continuing to seek ways to ensure that
those responsible for those crimes are brought to justice
and held accountable.
During its two years on the Council, Sweden has
repeatedly underlined the importance of upholding
international law, including international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
refugee law, whether in Syria, Yemen or South Sudan.
Upholding the international rules-based order is pivotal
both to preventing and terminating conflict. The rules
and principles of international humanitarian law aim
to limit the suffering and effects of war. We call on all
parties to the conflict to comply with their obligations
to ensure the protection of civilians and humanitarian
and medical personnel, and to respect and protect
civilian objects, hospitals and medical facilities.
When taking up the co-penholdership for Syria
and the humanitarian track, Sweden clearly stated
that its commitment would be to the Syrian people
and humanitarian principles. We have sought to
depoliticize humanitarian matters and focus on the
humanitarian imperative to act. Nevertheless, we will
leave the Council with a strong sense of frustration. We
fully understand those who claim that the international
community has time and time again failed the Syrian
people. Yet, today’s adoption of resolution 2449 (2018)

18-437555/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

13/12/2018

proves that when there is political will, the Security
Council can make a real difference on the ground for
millions of people.

We reiterate our support for all humanitarian actors
and medical staff on the ground and commend their
efforts to reduce the humanitarian suffering in Syria.

I wish to pay tribute to Kuwait, our co-penholder,
for its excellent cooperation and, of course, to Egypt
and Japan, with whom we shared penholdership in
2017. I take this opportunity to affirm Sweden’s full
commitment to continuing its strong and whole-hearted
engagement to alleviate the humanitarian suffering
in Syria and our support for neighbouring countries
affected by the crisis. The humanitarian community
has undertaken a Herculean task and we commend the
courageous and selfless efforts of all humanitarian
workers on the ground. Too many have paid with
their lives throughout the conflict. The humanitarian
appeal for Syria remains significantly underfunded,
as we have just heard. This year alone, Sweden has
contributed more than $50 million to the response in
Syria. We must all do our share in making sure that the
humanitarian agencies can continue to carry out their
critical work to help the Syrian people.

The Council has just adopted resolution 2449 (2018),
which renews the mandate of the mechanism to deliver
cross-border humanitarian aid for an additional year.
The resolution is the result of weeks of discussions and
consultations, during which we listened to the opinions
of all members of the Council and relevant parties. We
thank all States that voted in favour of the resolution.

Finally, we express our full support for the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and its assessment that the conditions for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of refugees are not yet
in place. It falls to the Syrian authorities to ensure
that those conditions are created. We also reiterate our
concern that the humanitarian situation will continue
to deteriorate in the absence of a political solution in
line with resolution 2254 (2015), which must be Syrianowned and Syrian-led, including the full and effective
representation of women. That is the only path to
sustainable peace and stability. We look forward to
hearing from Mr. Staffan de Mistura on that point next
week.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I welcome the presence among us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. We also thank the Under SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his valuable
briefing on the latest developments concerning the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
We fully associate ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden, which was
also made on our behalf, and I wish to make a few
additional remarks in our national capacity.
6/22

The adoption of this humanitarian resolution
represents an extremely important step in ensuring
the direct delivery of humanitarian aid to millions of
Syrians in need. The Council has therefore responded
to the international community’s calls by renewing this
mechanism, which is a clear signal that the international
community attaches great importance to the swift and
unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid to those in
need.
Regrettably, this year has seen an increase in the
humanitarian suffering in Syria. The conflict continues,
threatening regional and international peace and
security, while the Council remains unable to resolve
the crisis. We are concerned by the recent escalation of
the situation in various parts of the country, including
Deir ez-Zor, Idlib and Aleppo. The current security
situation in Syria demonstrates that it is still fragile and
could lead to a military escalation, in particular in Idlib,
where some 3 million people live. In that regard, we
reaffirm the importance of maintaining the agreement
reached between Russia and Turkey on Idlib in order to
prevent a further humanitarian catastrophe there.
We also reaffirm that all parties must honour
their commitments under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We reiterate
the importance of holding accountable all those who
have committed violations of international law and
international humanitarian law. We must also ensure
the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, according to international
criteria. The Council must therefore redouble its efforts
and work collectively in order to resolve the crisis.
The humanitarian situation will keep deteriorating if
a political solution of the Syrian crisis is not reached
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
In conclusion, since this meeting is the last
scheduled on the humanitarian situation in Syria for
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

this year, I take this opportunity to thank the delegation
of Sweden, especially Ambassador Olof Skoog and his
team, for their cooperation on the humanitarian file
of a dear Arab State that should enjoy security and
stability. We commend the marvellous performance
of the delegation of Sweden, which was admired by
everyone in the Council. After we closely worked
with it on this and other dossiers, I can honestly say
that the delegation of Sweden has enjoyed the great
confidence of all members of the Council because of its
demonstrated professionalism, credibility and integrity
in upholding and staunchly defending the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. We therefore
again congratulate the Ambassador and the delegation
of Sweden on their efforts and achievements, and look
forward to working with the delegations of Germany
and Belgium on the Syrian humanitarian dossier
starting in January 2019.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands.
Mr. Blok (Netherlands): I would like to thank
Mr. Lowcock for his sobering briefing.
In March, I had the honour to speak in this Chamber
for the first time (see S/PV.8217). The same topic
was on the agenda: the humanitarian crisis in Syria.
I am addressing the Security Council today in the
knowledge that this situation will remain on the agenda
for the foreseeable future. Millions of Syrians continue
to suffer. Back in March, the Syrian regime and their
allies were bombing civilians in eastern Ghouta. The
delivery of humanitarian aid was obstructed and longestablished norms of international humanitarian law
were gravely violated.
Today, nine months later, the air strikes on eastern
Ghouta have stopped. But as we all know, that did not
mean an end to the horror for Syrians. Humanitarian
workers continue to have very limited access. Many
refugees and internally displaced persons cannot go
back; they fear for their safety. The conditions set for
their safe return by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) have not
been met.
After years of terror and starvation, children,
women and men in former opposition-held territory still
lack access to food, medical care and schooling. Access
to those basic necessities is being blocked. Furthermore,
those people now live in fear of retribution, persecution

S/PV. 8423

and detention by Al-Assad’s security services. There is
a complete lack of security. After seven years of war,
more than 6 million Syrians are internally displaced,
including the incredible number of 2.5 million children.
After seven years of war, those people should be free
to choose to go back to their homes. Instead, they are
faced with discriminatory legislation that undermines
their housing, land and property rights. After seven
years of war, countless Syrians have had no news of
the whereabouts of their loved ones. Is there still hope,
or were their family members, neighbours and friends
arrested, detained and tortured — or even killed — in
regime-run prisons?
We have held a seat on the Security Council for
one year. Many times, the situation in Syria has been
on the agenda. Many times, progress has been blocked
by the lack of implementation of Security Council
resolutions. For how many more years will Syria
remain on the agenda of the Security Council? For how
many more years should we allow the Syrian regime’s
systematic human rights abuse and institutionalized
violence to continue? It is clear that the situation must
not be allowed to continue. Syrians are in dire need of
progress. There are four points I would like to make.
First, humanitarian actors should have unimpeded
access to all civilians in need, all over Syria. I that
regard, I welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
cross-border aid mechanism for 12 months so that no
one is left behind. I commend Sweden and Kuwait,
as co-penholders, for their excellent work. It is also
imperative that access from within Syria to areas under
control of the regime be granted without delay.
Secondly, we need a sustainable solution for
the fragile ceasefire in Idlib. I call on all parties
involved to refrain from hostilities, which would
lead to a humanitarian catastrophe with grave
international implications.
Thirdly, with the help of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and UNHCR we have to uncover the
fate of all those Syrians who have disappeared, list the
names of those detained and investigate and prosecute
human rights violators.
Finally, we fully support the Special Envoy’s
convening of a constitutional committee before the end
of the year. The United Nations has a central role to
play in that process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Sochi communiqué. Let me also underline that
the European Union will not begin development and

18-437557/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

reconstruction efforts before a comprehensive, genuine
and inclusive political transition is firmly under way.
For my Government, it is inconceivable to finance a
regime responsible for crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
Let me say something about those crimes. Some
of the darkest crimes of modern time have taken place
during the Syrian conflict — and are still taking place.
There will be no stability until the perpetrators of those
crimes are brought to justice. To me it is clear that
accountability is about upholding our human dignity,
but what we see is impunity becoming the new normal.
That must end. We must not allow this immense
human tragedy to become a travesty of international
law. It would be a terrible crisis of credibility for the
international community. The perpetrators of shocking
crimes, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and Al-Qaida, will be found.
I urge all States to increase their support for the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria. Its aim is simple and clear: to ensure
that information about serious crimes is collected,
analysed and preserved for the future. I call on all
Council members to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
Finally, ISIS fighters have committed gruesome
crimes that, in the case of the crimes against Yazidis,
may amount to genocide. I call on all members of the
Council to work together to achieve recognition by the
Council of those grave crimes, including genocide,
so that we can make sure such heinous crimes are
not repeated.
This will be the last time I speak about Syria here,
but I am sure that I will not be the last person to speak
about Syria. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to fight for justice, peace and accountability
for Syria and others — at the Council, in The Hague
and beyond.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will soon end its
term on the Security Council. On a more personal note,
if I may, it has been an honour to speak on behalf of my
country in this seat and in this Chamber. I know that
discussions, debates and decisions in the Council are
not always easy. However, that is no reason to despair.
According to the writings of Tolstoy, for every situation,
no matter how difficult, there will be a solution. It all
comes down to making a decision.
8/22

13/12/2018

Mr. Delattre (spoke in French): First and foremost,
on behalf of France, I would like to welcome the
adoption of resolution 2449 (2018). This resolution is
vital, in the literal sense of the word, as cross-border
humanitarian assistance is a matter of life or death for
millions of Syrians. We are pleased by the spirit of
responsibility within the Security Council, which has
served to give priority to the humanitarian imperative
over political considerations. On behalf of France as
well, I would like to express our profound thanks to
the Permanent Missions of Sweden and Kuwait and
to my colleagues — the Permanent Representatives
of those two delegations — personally for their truly
outstanding work.
Allow me to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
briefing, which was, as always, meticulous and most
enlightening. We reiterate our admiration for his
work and the work of his teams in responding to the
humanitarian emergency in Syria. I also welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, Mr. Stephanus Blok,
among us today.
As Mr. Lowcock has already recalled to us, the
situation in Syria continues to be a source of extreme
concern. In the Idlib region in particular, ceasefire
violations are on the rise and the risk of a humanitarian
disaster still cannot be ruled out. We must therefore
remain fully mobilized around three key priorities:
the need to protect civilians, the need to guarantee
humanitarian access and the need for a lasting political
solution in Syria.
First, on the need to protect civilians, as highlighted
by Mr. Lowcock, the situation in Idlib remains
exceedingly fragile. The cessation of hostilities should
not be a temporary solution, but should provide for the
lasting stabilization of the situation in Idlib in line with
the commitments made at the quadripartite summit
held in Istanbul for a sustainable ceasefire in northwest Syria. That is the only way to protect civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel. It must
be a top priority for all stakeholders. All parties must
respect their obligations as stipulated by international
humanitarian law. That imperative is non-negotiable.
The second priority is to ensure humanitarian
access. It is imperative that the 13 million people in
need receive humanitarian assistance. It is unacceptable
for the regime to continue to block convoys to hardto-reach areas. We reiterate our call to the actors with
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

influence over the regime to ensure safe, full and
unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syrian
territory, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international humanitarian
law. In Rukban camp in particular, it is essential that
the United Nations be able to quickly dispatch a new
convoy to deliver aid to the tens of thousands of people
trapped in the camp and living in dire conditions.
While the Council has just adopted resolution 2449
(2018), which renews the mechanism established by
resolution 2165 (2014), I would like to recall that there
is no alternative to cross-border aid for the effective and
impartial delivery of assistance to millions of people
in need, including in Idlib, while the regime continues
to use humanitarian aid for political purposes. That
mechanism provides several hundred thousand people
with crucial assistance every day.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate that there will be
no lasting humanitarian solution without a credible
political process. It is essential for everyone to assume
their responsibilities and allow the United Nations
to convene the first meeting of the constitutional
committee before the end of the year, in accordance
with the commitments made in Istanbul on 27 October.
Provided that its composition is credible and balanced,
the committee would be a positive first step in a
political process to be conducted under the supervision
of the United Nations, within the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015). Such political progress should,
in turn, facilitate the improvement of the humanitarian
situation, with the goal of kick-starting a virtuous circle.
It is all the more urgent to recall this in a
humanitarian briefing: humanitarian aid is an immediate
need, subject to the conditions of strict neutrality,
impartiality and independence. It is to be differentiated
from reconstruction, which will be possible only once
a credible, inclusive and irreversible political transition
has begun.
Let us not be fooled by the regime’s fable. The reality
of the statistics clearly shows that it is not the absence
of reconstruction that prevents the voluntary and safe
return of refugees; it is the absence of guarantees against
arbitrary arrests, forced expropriations, dispossession
of identity documents, forced conscription and, more
broadly, the lack of credible progress in the political
process. The conditions for the return of refugees are
freedom and security. We are committed to enabling
such a safe and dignified return of refugees to their

S/PV. 8423

homes and properties. But that collectively implies
creating the conditions for that return to be possible,
within the framework guaranteed by international law.
France will continue to spare no effort to respond
to the humanitarian situation in Syria and promote a
credible political solution.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
Once again, we commend the very important work the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and its humanitarian partners do on a daily basis to help
the Syrian people. Mr. Lowcock’s briefings shed light
on the facts regarding Syrians in need of help and the
humanitarian system’s ability to reach them, and that
helps us make decisions in the Security Council based
on the realities on the ground and not on political spin.
The United States is proud to have voted in favour
of resolution 2449 (2018), which renews resolution 2165
(2014) for another 12 months. I would like to commend
Sweden and Kuwait for their stewardship over the
negotiations to ensure that the Council’s deliberations
on the continuation of the United Nation’s vital crossborder humanitarian aid mechanism remained focused
on the needs of the Syrian people, millions of whom
have received life-sustaining aid from the humanitarian
aid mechanism established under resolution 2165 (2014)
since the mandate was first adopted by the Council,
four years ago.
Today’s vote to continue the cross-border
humanitarian deliveries will ensure that food, clothing,
shelter and medical supplies reach, on average, 1 million
people in Syria each month. The United Nations crossborder mechanism is transparent, effective and essential
for improving humanitarian conditions inside Syria.
In the face of that astounding humanitarian
need, the United States remains the single-largest
humanitarian donor to the Syria crisis, having provided
over $9 billion in humanitarian aid to those most in
need since the start of the conflict. We are proud of our
unwavering commitment to support the Syrian people,
and we will continue it. But we need to be clear that
conditions in Syria are not changing for the better, even
though some would like us to think that they are.
In 2018 the Al-Assad regime attacked civilian
populations using chemical weapons, air strikes and
barrel bombs to reassert control over half the territory.
Even as the regime has seized more territory, the truth

18-437559/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

13/12/2018

is that humanitarian needs are getting worse. In Syria
today, there are 13 million people, over 70 per cent
of the country’s population, in need of humanitarian
assistance. And, by far, most of the people who need
assistance are in areas controlled by the regime. That
is because, as always, the Al-Assad regime seeks to
punish the Syrian people, not to help them.

Unfortunately, the risks of even greater humanitarian
suffering in Syria remain high, absent tangible progress
towards a political solution through the formation of a
constitutional committee and due to troubling reports
and indications of a potential military escalation in
Idlib, despite the fragile ceasefire, held together by the
Turkey-Russia brokered demilitarized zone.

When we look at the significant gaps in humanitarian
access in eastern Ghouta, Idlib and Rukban, and we
look at the ongoing instability of the security situation
and the hundreds of thousands who remain arbitrarily
detained in regime prisons, it is clear that the conditions
in Syria are still very dire, and for many Syrians they
remain very dangerous. Those conditions are not
conducive to the facilitation of large-scale returns of
refugees, and now is not the time to be pushing Syrians
to return home.

Let me repeat that any military escalation in
Idlib would be catastrophic for the millions of
non-combatants there and for the stability of Syria’s
neighbours. Last week, my Government made public
our analysis that pro-regime forces likely used tear
gas against civilians in Aleppo on 24 November, and
then the Al-Assad regime and Russia falsely accused
the opposition and extremist groups of conducting a
chlorine attack. We believe that the intention behind
Damascus and Moscow’s disinformation campaign was
to use the alleged attack to undermine confidence in the
ceasefire in Idlib.

Until the Al-Assad regime lives up to its
commitments to provide regular, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access and fully engage in a political
transition, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), the
United States and our partners will not consider
providing reconstruction funds for Syria, absent an
irreversible political process.
It is a sad reality of the Syrian conflict that
the Al-Assad regime remains committed to using
humanitarian access and aid as a political tool. To this
day Damascus has not approved United Nations aid
convoys to access Idlib, where 3 million people can be
reached only through the cross-border mechanism. The
people of Rukban are once again waiting on the regime
to facilitate a second aid convoy. The uncertainty around
humanitarian access and the regime’s unwillingness to
uphold humanitarian principles are why a 12-month
renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) was so critical.
Make no mistake that the United States looks
forward to the day when this mandate is no longer
needed — first, because there will be no risk of further
military escalation by the regime or its allies, and,
secondly, because we will see tangible improvements
in unhindered and sustained access throughout Syria.
However, it is clear from Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock’s briefing today that the humanitarian
conditions in Syria remain dire. Security conditions are
fragile, and in some areas they remain very dangerous.
Cross-line and cross-border access remains vital for
millions of Syrian civilians who rely on the continuation
of this resolution’s mechanism for life-sustaining aid.
10/22

Given the grave humanitarian consequences
of a break in the Idlib ceasefire, it is important that
Council members do all they can to ensure that the
ceasefire holds. Efforts must move forward to form
the constitutional committee as quickly as possible.
Russia’s promises to actively support the United
Nations efforts to convene the committee have yet to
be fulfilled, and the 30 December deadline, laid out in
the Istanbul summit statement, is rapidly approaching.
Few places exemplify humanitarian need as much
as Rukban, where once again a United Nations shipment
of assistance is delayed. The United States is gravely
concerned by the humanitarian conditions in Rukban
and calls on the Al-Assad regime and the Russian
Federation to take all the necessary steps to urgently
facilitate the next aid convoy. The United Nations has
underscored the need to move with a sense of urgency.
Winterization supplies are urgently needed in the camp
and UNICEF stands ready to conduct another round of
critical children’s immunizations. It should be noted
that those vaccinations are time-sensitive.
This should not be a complicated or contentious
process. The United States and Russia have worked
successfully together to make a humanitarian delivery
possible in November. It is important that we — the
United States and Russia — work together with the
United Nations again now to secure a second delivery
to Rukban this month, as agreed.
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Progress is possible. Let us spare no effort to
facilitate an immediate delivery. There is no time for
further delays. The United States is ready to move
forward with the second delivery to Rukban immediately,
and with the convening of the constitutional committee
immediately. The Syrian people are still counting on the
Council. We call on our fellow Council members and
the Syrian regime and its allies to join in our sense of
urgency and resolve these issues without further delay.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for being at this meeting,
for his briefing and for all the work that his team is
doing on the ground to help the people of Syria.
The United Kingdom joins other colleagues in
welcoming the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018). This
ensures that aid can continue to move across borders
to reach those people who depend on its arrival. We
thank the co-penholders, Sweden and Kuwait, for their
sustained efforts to make agreement today possible.
As others have noted, this resolution keeps open
routes for humanitarian aid that offer a lifeline to
millions of Syrians, including those in hard-to-reach
areas and those who could not otherwise receive the
support they need. The United Nations has stated that
2.6 million people are accessible only through these
cross-border routes.
The decision to renew resolution 2165 (2014) by
way of today’s adoption is therefore positive, but it is
no cause for celebration, as the need for its renewal
is the result solely of the dire situation on the ground.
Approximately 13 million people in Syria need
humanitarian assistance, and 5.2 million of them are
considered to be in acute need.
As the Dutch Minister reminded us, every month we
come to the Council, we hear a briefing from the UnderSecretary-General and we say the same things. Every
month there is a list from Under-Secretary-General of
requests that the United Nations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) have
made for access for humanitarian assistance, and every
month, very sadly and almost criminally negligently,
the Syrian Government does not grant the request of
the United Nations humanitarian wing. I think we all
need to demand a really comprehensive answer as to
why the requests from OCHA are not being met when
so many people depend on humanitarian assistance
for their survival. I really would appeal through
you, Mr. President, to both the Russian and Syrian

S/PV. 8423

representatives in the Chamber today to let us have a
proper explanation or, better, to grant the requests of
OCHA so that those people can get the help they need.
We want to look forward to a time when
humanitarian aid is no longer necessary, when we can
offer help in rebuilding and reconstruction and when
conditions allow the Syrians who have had to flee to
return to their homes voluntarily, in safety and dignity
and in line with international humanitarian law. But we
need to be crystal clear that we are not there yet; Syria
is not there yet. This resolution, as both my French
and American colleagues noted, is emphatically not a
call for refugee return. It is for the Syrian parties to
create conditions that are conducive to their safe and
voluntary return. That is a critical distinction. The
Al-Assad regime, supported by its backers, has not
only created an environment that makes humanitarian
aid essential for millions of Syrians, but it continues
to use aid as a weapon of war. We therefore call on the
Syrian authorities to cease doing that respond to the
requests of the United Nations and engage with the
political process to pursue a credible, balanced political
settlement, which provides the only foreseeable way out
of the conflict. We look to Russia to use its influence
with the Syrian authorities to press them to do that,
maintain the ceasefire in Idlib, in accordance with the
Sochi agreement, and ensure that humanitarian access
continues for as long as it is necessary.
I also want to echo that reconstruction money will not
be available from my Government or from our partners
until there is a viable and lasting political process.
Adopting today’s resolution sends a clear message
from the international community that we remain
committed to supporting the people of Syria. At the
same time, it also sends a very clear message that aid
should never be use as a weapon and must reach those
who need it without impediment. It is also an important
reminder that, notwithstanding our differences, as
the Dutch Minister further reminded us, the Council
can — and should — act on Syria.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
comprehensive briefing. Allow me to also praise our
colleagues from Kuwait and Sweden for their efforts
and their leadership in leading the process of very
difficult negotiations. I am very pleased to see the
result, and I congratulate them again on their work.

18-4375511/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

We welcome the outcome of today’s vote on
resolution 2449 (2018), which renews the crossborder deliveries mechanism. We have underlined our
strong support for that renewal many times. It enables
humanitarian supplies to cross into Syria, provides aid
to those in urgent need and supports the delivery of
basic services.
The conflict in Syria has caused violence and
violations of the international law, including human
rights law, and has brought suffering to the civilian
population of Syria. The continuing impunity for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
remains for us a grave concern.
After a period of relative calm over the past
two months, we are alarmed by the recent negative
impact of armed conflict on civilians in many parts
of Syria: the north-west and north-east of the country
in particular. Any military operations should take all
feasible precautions to avoid harm to the thousands of
civilians who are trapped in the middle of the fighting
on the ground.
We again see a risk of humanitarian catastrophe in
Idlib governorate and the surrounding areas. Civilians
across Idlib and the surrounding areas have continued
to face a range of security threats, while massive
humanitarian needs have persisted. We consider the
agreement between Russia and Turkey on the Idlib
de-escalation zone a right move towards avoiding a
humanitarian catastrophe. But, at the same time, we
again stress that all parties to the conflict should ensure
the full implementation of the agreement.
While underlining the obligation of all the
parties to the conflict to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure, we insist on practical measures to
alleviate civilian suffering. That is why we strongly
believe that cross-border assistance remains a vital
component of this major humanitarian response, which
reaches millions of Syrians each month. It has to be
noted that, according to humanitarian workers, one
third of the people in need of humanitarian assistance
are in areas that cannot be accessed from inside Syria,
including nearly to 2 million internally displaced
people in the Idlib de-escalation zone. Aid delivered
from Turkey and Iraq continues to save lives.
Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement remains the only way towards peace. That
requires a genuine political transition in line with
12/22

13/12/2018

resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). In that context, I want to express
our regret that no tangible progress was made during
the last meeting in Astana in overcoming the stalemate
on the composition of the constitutional committee. The
efforts of the Special Envoy to establish a legitimate,
credible and balanced constitutional committee in his
remaining time in office have our full support.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Lowcock for his
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
We would first like to comment on the Council’s
adoption just now of resolution 2449 (2018),
extending the mandate for the cross-border delivery
of humanitarian assistance into Syria. Our position on
that non-transparent — to put it mildly — mechanism
is well known. The new realities in the Syrian Arab
Republic demand that it be rejigged with the ultimate
goal of being gradually but inevitably removed. That
fact that that view was not reflected in the resolution
determined our position on the vote. We were not
about to block it altogether, owing to humanitarian
considerations and appeals from our partners in the
region. However, we want to point out that its text is
divorced from reality and is based on four-year-old
formulas. For example, why keep the Dar’a-Ramtha
cross-border checkpoint on the list when the Syrian
authorities have been controlling it from the Syrian side
for a long time now? In the next few months we intend
to monitor the supply of humanitarian assistance under
the cross-border mechanism carefully and demand
proper transparency and accountability.
The Secretariat’s methods for preparing its reports
on the humanitarian situation in Syria should also be
carefully reviewed. The current report (S/2018/1104)
does not cover such important points as assistance in
rebuilding infrastructure, the trends in the return of
refugees, the impact of unilateral sanctions on people’s
lives and mine-clearance issues. We urge our colleagues
to reconsider the inflexibility of their approaches,
which have little to do with the current situation in
Syria, and to join in the collective efforts to improve
the country’s difficult socioeconomic situation, restore
what the terrorists have destroyed and assure the
inalienable right of refugees and internally displaced
persons to return. In that context, we would like to
point to the announcement by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees that more than 250,000
Syrians are ready to return home next year.
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In our view, a selective approach to the provision
of assistance to the Syrian people is unseemly.
Politicizing issues related to humanitarian assistance is
unacceptable. People cannot openly defame the Syrian
Government while ignoring the unilateral steps taken
by other actors in the Syrian conflict. At the very least,
it is unethical to pretend that Raqqa does not exist. And
yet 80 per cent of the city’s civilian infrastructure lies
in ruins. They are still pulling bodies out from under the
rubble of people who died in the campaign to liberate
the city from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), who according to some estimates number more
than 8,000. Incidentally, at the time no one supported
the proposal to introduce humanitarian pauses in order
to get civilians away from the bombardments.
We need to urgently resolve two issues that are
critical to improving the situation in Syria. The first
is lifting the unilateral sanctions introduced by a
number of States without delay. Those restrictions
harm ordinary Syrians most of all, as independent
experts, including some in the United Nations system,
have acknowledged, by the way. Secondly, we have to
end the illegal occupation of Syrian territory, which
is not only undermining its territorial integrity and
sovereignty but also strengthening separatist trends
there, and that represents a threat to the national
security of neighbouring countries.
Withdrawal from the 55-kilometre so-called
security zone established by the United States around
the Syrian town of Al-Tanf is the main precondition for
a lasting solution to the Rukban problem. As we know,
the conditions in the camp there, which according to
various estimates is housing as many as 50,000 people,
are very difficult, in fact bordering on a humanitarian
disaster, with the residents basically being held hostage
by the illegal armed groups active in the area that are
linked to ISIL. Considering the deteriorating situation
in the camp, at the beginning of November Russia
supported sending a United Nations humanitarian
convoy and made significant efforts to help organize
it, including through its contacts with the Government
of Syria. Unfortunately, the humanitarian operation
within the 55-kilometre zone was not well organized.
The distribution of the humanitarian aid was farmed
out to militants from the Maghawir Al-Thawra group.
The staff of the United Nations and the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent had very limited access to the distribution
process, which resulted in part of it falling into the
militants’ hands. That means that the next delivery of

S/PV. 8423

humanitarian aid to Rukban must be carefully thought
through and the shortcomings of the first convoy
eliminated. We have to agree on parameters that
will ensure maximum transparency and the targeted
distribution of assistance without the participation of
illegal armed groups, and the Americans occupying the
area have the responsibility for that.
The fact that the trend towards stabilization is
strengthening in Syria is undeniable. Despite the
continuing problems, there has been genuinely positive
progress on the humanitarian front that is particularly
noticeable in the territories controlled by Damascus.
As we have repeatedly stressed, at this critical time the
international community must now extend a helping
hand to the Syrians in order to help them overcome
the devastation and restore normal life for those who
have made the decision to return voluntarily to their
homeland. Incidentally, since the Russian initiative on
this was launched in July the total number of returnees
is now in the tens of thousands.
Today our American colleagues gave us
disinformation squared. In April the Syrian Government
was blamed for a staged chemical attack in Douma
in eastern Ghouta. The outcome of the investigation
is still unknown. The experts are apparently still
collecting something or other. Might that be because
admitting the provocation would mean acknowledging
full-on involvement in the illegal act of aggression in
April for which the provocation served as an excuse?
And now, when we have reliable information that shells
containing chlorine were used by the same militants
who had used them before — which our Western
partners had admitted — they have come up with a new
tactic, accusing Syria and Russia of disinformation and
forgery. The Syrian Government has invited specialists
from the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to Syria, but for some reason they are in no
hurry to arrive. Apparently they are studying something
remotely. Where other areas were concerned, they
were in a rush to get there, although it is true that they
did their evidence-collecting in spots far from where
the incidents had actually taken place. And yet now
Washington has borrowed a brilliant formula originally
dreamed up by London whereby the Syrian Government
poisoned its own citizens with tear gas and then blamed
the militants. Gentlemen, this is all dreadfully clumsy
and we can see right through the propaganda.
The Astana guarantors are now focusing on
the situation in Idlib within the framework of the

18-4375513/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

implementation of the 17 September stabilization
memorandum. However, it must be understood that the
importance of a sustainable ceasefire does not negate
the need to continue working to effectively combat
terrorism. We note Turkey’s serious efforts within
its existing commitments to separate the terrorists
from moderate groups. It would be helpful if those
who originally supported those groups with the aim
of replacing the legitimate Government made efforts
to educate them. That would be a more fundamental
contribution to the efforts to reach a settlement than the
constant barrage of groundless questions and demands
directed at Russia and other States about what to do and
how to do it.
Russia and the other guarantor countries will
continue their intensive efforts on the political front
with regard to implementing the decision taken by the
Syrians in Sochi to form a constitutional committee.
Right now, the negotiations are at a particularly intensive
stage. We continue to believe that all the parameters
for the activity of a constitutional committee should
be approved by the Syrians themselves. That is the
only way that it can be effective and functional. We
want to emphasize that there is no viable alternative to
a constitutional committee. We urge everyone to join
in the collective work of establishing a comprehensive
political process, which is crucial to Syria, the Middle
East and the entire international community, under
the auspices of the United Nations and in line with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me start by welcoming
the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018), which we believe
will enable the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to deliver essential life-saving assistance to all
Syrians, based on their needs. We have always believed
that the Council should be united in supporting the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners, which
have been working under difficult circumstances to
deliver aid to millions of Syrians. Syrians’ humanitarian
needs should be our priority, and addressing them
should be central to the Council’s deliberations and
decisions. We hope that the resolution we adopted today
will contribute to ending the suffering of all Syrians.
We would like to express our appreciation to the
penholders, Kuwait and Sweden, for effectively leading
the negotiation process, and we thank all delegations
for their constructive engagement.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his briefing. Since this is our last statement on the
14/22

13/12/2018

Syrian humanitarian issue as a member of the Security
Council, I want to take this opportunity to reiterate
our profound appreciation for his effective leadership.
His briefings have always been very useful in bringing
the humanitarian tragedy in Syria to the attention of
the Council and the entire world. I thank him for his
outstanding and impeccable service. We also thank
all humanitarian workers for their selfless service in
delivering aid to all in need.
Despite a relative drop in the overall intensity of
violence, civilians in some parts of Syria are still affected
by the direct and indirect consequences of hostilities,
including deaths, injuries and the destruction of civilian
facilities. In that regard, we concur with the SecretaryGeneral, whose most recent report (S/2018/1104)
appealed for enhancing the efforts to maintain the
de-escalation and the agreed demilitarization zone
in Idlib and to protect civilians. We reiterate our
appreciation to Turkey and Russia for their continued
efforts to implement the Idlib agreement. Avoiding a
military escalation there remains critical to averting any
possible humanitarian catastrophe. In that connection,
we encourage all States with influence on the parties
to work together and strengthen global coordination in
combating terrorist groups on the United Nations list.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
have continued to reach millions of people through all
the available access routes, including through crossborder assistance, which the report of the SecretaryGeneral cites as a vital part of the humanitarian
response. We welcome the continued endeavours to
scale up humanitarian aid delivered from inside Syria.
In that regard, we strongly encourage the United
Nations and the Syrian Government to continue their
consultations on improving humanitarian access to all
areas, including those that are hard to reach. The safe,
sustained and unhindered delivery of humanitarian
access remains critical for all Syrians. In that regard,
the implementation of the resolution we adopted today
is crucial to improving humanitarian access.
In conclusion, as we have repeatedly stated, only
a comprehensive political solution can address the
humanitarian tragedy in Syria. There is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. It will be resolved only with
a political solution, facilitated by the United Nations,
based on resolution 2254 (2015), which commits to
meeting the legitimate aspirations of the people of
Syria. As the Secretary-General reminded us in his
report, the sole goal of United Nations efforts — ending
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the suffering of Syrians — should be supported by us
all. In that regard, we look forward to Special Envoy de
Mistura’s briefing next week.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing.
As some of our colleagues have already said, the
conflict in Syria has lasted for more than seven years,
and according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 500,000 people
have lost their lives and approximately 13 million
people are in need, of whom 5.3 million are children.
Nonetheless, the Syrian people continue to hope
for peace in their country and for a return to normal
everyday life, which at the moment seems a long
way off. We deplore the fact that non-State armed
opposition groups and Security Council-designated
terrorist groups are still perpetrating attacks that result
in the death or displacement of innocent civilians. In
spite of that, however, we want to remind the Council
that all counter-terrorism-related initiatives should take
international law into consideration.
Bolivia voted in favour of today’s resolution
because we believe that humanitarian assistance for
the Syrian people is urgent, particularly those in hardto-reach areas, as well as the most vulnerable who are
in need of protection and psychosocial support. We
thank the delegations of Kuwait and Sweden for their
commitment during the negotiations on the text for
today’s adoption of resolution 2449 (2018).
There have been numerous meetings on this issue
since Bolivia’s election as a member of the Council. We
have witnessed the pressing need of the Syrian people
for humanitarian assistance, but we have also seen
major progress made in stabilizing and in de-escalating
the violence of previous years, which in the past few
months has brought about a palpable change in the
conflict on the ground, owing primarily to the opening
up of dialogue between the parties involved. We
highlight the Astana agreements, which have enabled
the establishment of important de-escalation zones, and
which we see as one of the initiatives that will help to
reduce the level of violence in order to facilitate peace
and stability in Syria. We also want to highlight the
agreement brokered by Russia and Turkey establishing
a demilitarized zone to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid and emergency medical evacuation,

S/PV. 8423

as well as the surrender of heavy weaponry by some
members of terrorist groups. We encourage the parties
to replicate those agreements, as well as that made
in Istanbul on 27 October between Turkey, Russia,
Germany and France. Such commitments have a major
impact on people when they enable humanitarian
assistance and medical attention to reach them quickly.
We also commend the most recent compromise
between the United Nations and the Governments of
Syria, Jordan, Russia and the United States enabling a
convoy with humanitarian aid for 50,000 people to enter
Rukban camp, and we call for the continuation of efforts
to bring in humanitarian aid and cross-border convoys
within a framework of respect for the sovereignty of
Syria, which has reclaimed much of its territory.
I would once again like to pay special tribute to
the personnel of the various humanitarian agencies
and organizations who risk their own safety and
lives to do their work. Within the framework of
international humanitarian law, we call on the parties
to guarantee unconditional and unhindered access
to aid personnel, keeping them safe and secure and
ensuring that humanitarian convoys and personnel,
medical centres and schools do not become military
targets, regardless of the circumstances. We encourage
the parties involved to continue their efforts to enable
emergency medical evacuations and the establishment
of humanitarian corridors that allow civilians to move
around voluntarily, as well as ensuring the dignified
and safe return of internally displaced persons and
refugees to their places of origin. Clearing those areas
of unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war
and landmines is an essential task, as is re-establishing
water and sanitation services, schools and hospitals.
Bolivia rejects any attempts to fragment Syria or
sow sectarianism in that country. We also reject the
presence in Syria of foreign military forces without
the authorization of the Syrian Government. Those
forces must be withdrawn within the framework of
international law and the principles of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. We also ask Mr. Lowcock to include in
his next briefing the impact of the unilateral sanctions
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. Those sanctions
are illegal under international law and there is no doubt
that they have an impact on the delivery of humanitarian
aid. In addition, we reiterate our call for humanitarian
aid to not be selective; furthermore, we call for the
depoliticization of humanitarian aid. Finally, we

18-4375515/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

reiterate, as the representative of Ethiopia pointed out,
there is no military solution to the situation in Syria.
The only solution is to be found in an inclusive, Syrianled process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
as part of the Geneva process under the auspices of the
United Nations.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the convening of
this meeting and reiterates our gratitude to Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and his
entire team for their work and for keeping us informed
on a monthly basis about the humanitarian situation in
Syria.
The shifting of the subject of this meeting from
the political to the humanitarian briefing — the former
originally slated for next week — led my delegation
think that some development must have occurred that
would make it possible to address the humanitarian
issue in Syria with optimism and hope. Unfortunately,
that is not the case. Despite the enormous human and
financial resources mobilized and deployed by the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners, the
situation on the ground remains alarming. Since the
beginning of the conflict in Syria, enough has been
said about the humanitarian situation and a number of
reports have been produced that have led to the same
conclusion, which is that the humanitarian situation
remains extremely precarious, mainly due to increased
hostilities in various parts of the country.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea remains
concerned about the recent escalation of violence
in various parts of the country, such as Idlib, where
efforts must be redoubled to maintain the détente
and ensure the demilitarization of the area, as agreed
last September, and protect the civilian population.
Furthermore, the reports of an alleged chemical attack
at the end of November in Aleppo and the routine
targeting of Deir ez-Zor by counter-terrorism operations
require swift and decisive responses from the Council
in order to protect thousands of families who, as the
conflict continues, are losing their loved ones. Once
again, we emphasize the need for the warring parties
to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Nothing justifies the deliberate use
of explosive weapons in populated areas or the use of
chemical substances as a weapon of war. As such, we
voted in favour of resolution 2449 (2018), on United
16/22

13/12/2018

Nations assistance in Syria, because we believe that
the resolution is essential for cross-border operations.
We hope that its adoption will, in turn, alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people. We thank Ambassador
Mansour and Ambassador Skoog for facilitating the
drafting, negotiation and adoption of the resolution.
As the Secretary-General clearly describes in his
report (S/2018/1104) and according to data from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
cross-border deliveries of humanitarian aid remain
an indispensable lifeline for hundreds of thousands of
people throughout Syria. Food aid reached an average
of more than 750,000 people each month in the first
nine months of 2018 as a result of the cross-border
activities of the United Nations. There is no doubt
that after many years of ongoing conflict, the Security
Council, whose decisions are binding, should continue
to play a key role in shaping Syria’s future. It should do
so by bringing forward any initiatives that may one day,
as someone once said, heal the wounds of the suffering
body of Syria. And that should always be done with full
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the country. The Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea will continue to
prioritize a political solution to the conflict and calls
once again for members of the Council to pay more
attention to swiftly establishing and operationalizing
the constitutional committee, in accordance with the
outcomes of Syria’s National Dialogue Conference and
resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
abstained in the voting on resolution 2449 (2018), on
renewing the measures for cross-border humanitarian
assistance to Syria. China is of the view that the
international community’s humanitarian operations in
Syria should abide by the principles that guide United
Nations humanitarian work, as well as the relevant
provisions of international law, and scrupulously
observe the principles of neutrality, impartiality and
non-politicization, while ensuring that all areas in
Syria and all the populations in need receive timely
assistance.
Cross-border humanitarian assistance is a special
modality in response to a set of specific circumstances.
It must fully respect the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and proceed in
strict compliance with Council resolutions. Actions in
that regard should be place under the oversight of the
United Nations, throughout the process, with greater
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

transparency. Due attention should be accorded to
better coordination with the Syrian Government and
practical measures should be put in place to prevent aid
supplies from falling into the hands of terrorist groups.
China commends Kuwait and Sweden in their
roles as co-penholders for taking on board proposals
from Member States regarding, inter alia, facilitating
the return of Syrian refugees, improving humanitarian
operations and adjusting the frequency of the reports
of the Secretary-General over the course of the
consultations on the resolution. Nevertheless, some
legitimate concerns raised by members of the Council,
including China, were not fully taken on board. There
was still room for improvement. We are of the view
that members of the Council should continue to engage
on that in order to maximize consensus. I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
his briefing. I also commend the efforts of the United
Nations and other actors concerned to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria. China would like
to share its perspective on the current humanitarian
situation in Syria,
First, the humanitarian situation in Syria on the
whole remains grim. Many years of conflict have
left Syria with a large number of people in need of
assistance, crumbling infrastructure, food insecurity
and a lack of medical care and medicines. The situation
in northern and eastern Syria remains fragile. Civilian
casualties persist, as does the risk of a deterioration of
the humanitarian situation.
Secondly, the security situation in Syria is stable on
the whole. Conflict has eased throughout the country,
which provides a more favourable environment for
improving the humanitarian situation. Although the
implementation of the memorandum on the stabilization
of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone has
encountered some obstacles, the implementation process
is by and large under way. The Astana dialogue at the
end of November continues to play an important role
in the continued improvement of the Syrian situation
and in consolidating the cessation of hostilities and
violence.
Thirdly, Syria’s humanitarian assistance needs
have recently changed. As the situation in some parts
of Syria improves, the number of Syrian refugees
returning from neighbouring countries such as Jordan
and Lebanon is on the rise. The projections of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for

S/PV. 8423

Refugees put this number at a quarter of a million in
2019. The number of internally displaced persons
returning to their homes has also steadily increased.
The restoration or reconstruction of housing and of
water, electricity, medical and educational facilities is a
basic requirement, and the removal of mines and other
explosive remnants of war is now a top priority.
In view of the current situation, the Syrian parties
should put the greater good of national destiny and
people’s well-being first, respect the relevant Council
resolutions, resolve differences through dialogue and
consultation, work together to keep Syria stable, prevent
an escalation of conflict, and continue to create enabling
conditions to ease the country’s humanitarian situation.
It is incumbent upon the international community to
further increase its assistance — financial and in
kind — to the Syrian people and intensify support for the
host countries of Syrian refugees, including Lebanon,
Jordan and Turkey. At the same time, the international
community should step up its efforts to improve the
humanitarian condition of returning Syrian refugees
and internally displaced persons and create supportive
conditions, whereby they can live and work happily
in peace. Part of this process is the reconstruction of
infrastructure.
The current situation in Syria is offering a window
of opportunity for the political settlement process.
The international community should firmly support
the role of the United Nations as the main channel
of mediation and push the Syrian parties to come to
a solution that addresses the concerns of all parties
through negotiations, based on the principle that the
process should be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned and in
accordance with Council resolution 2254 (2015). Only
by so doing can we truly ease the humanitarian woes
facing Syria once and for all, leading to a comprehensive,
just and proper settlement of the Syrian issue.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for his comprehensive and
very informative briefing.
As we know that the ongoing conflict continues to
have an impact on the lives of civilians in Syria, we
strongly support humanitarian actors, including United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations,
operating across the country in saving lives. We voted
for resolution 2449 (2018) today, as we did for every
resolution during our two-year term in the Security
Council in which the issue of humanitarian aid

18-4375517/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

13/12/2018

and access was discussed. In so doing, Kazakhstan
stresses the importance of abiding by the humanitarian
principles of neutrality and impartiality, with assistance
provided to all, whether in Government-controlled or
non-Government-controlled areas, thus leading to an
even distribution of humanitarian aid.

peaceful efforts in Syria and ending the human
suffering. This is possible, it is evident, through an
inclusive Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. It is only
when the political tensions ease that the humanitarian
crisis will be relieved over time.

We commend UNICEF and the World Health
Organization for their work in Syria, especially
the 18-month-long intensive vaccination campaign,
which has been impressive and ended polio and virus
outbreaks in and around Deir ez-Zor. Global experts in
public health, urology and epidemiology confirm this
conclusion.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and for Mr. Mark Lowcock’s important
briefing.

With respect to the talks in Astana, we welcome
the participation of the representatives of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) in the recent round of the Astana process on
28 and 29 November, for that led to ways of mitigating
the humanitarian situation during discussions with the
delegations of Iran, Russia and Turkey. At the same
time, in the disaster zones, we see the lack of control
over the fair and efficient distribution of food, fuel,
drinking water and medicines, especially when the
resources flow into the hands of the armed groups and
not the civilian population.
Humanitarian aid must not be politicized. It is
therefore necessary to implement a mechanism for
coordinating the activities of the ICRC, the Syrian
Red Crescent Society, United Nations agencies, the
Government of Syria and the guarantor countries. We
see the great value of the United Nations initiative on
demining and restoring the infrastructure of territories
liberated from terrorists so as to enable humanitarian
operations to begin. This will also assist refugees,
including those in the Rukban refugee camp, in
returning home.
Kazakhstan considers the initiatives and
programmes of the Food and Agriculture Organization
most relevant, and appeals to other countries to support
and promote the organization’s programmes, including
providing Syrian farmers with free or subsidized seeds
and fertilizers, in order to improve the food situation in
the country.
Finally, we acknowledge with deep appreciation the
contribution of all participants in the Astana process
and in particular the guarantor States. The Astana
negotiations on Syria will focus on consolidating
18/22

Peru follows with deep concern the continuing
conflict and the serious humanitarian situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic. It is clear that in recent months
there have been developments on the ground and that
levels of violence have been reduced. It is also true that
millions of people are living in conditions of extreme
vulnerability.
We must deplore the persistence of violence in the
north-west of the country and its impact on the civilian
population, with new fatalities and injuries. We consider
it essential to avoid another humanitarian tragedy by
preserving the demilitarized zone established in Idlib,
thanks to the agreement reached by Turkey and the
Russian Federation last September. We also consider it
necessary to address the precarious conditions in which
the civilian population trapped in Deir ez-Zor is living,
and to protect them from attacks directed against
Da’esh militants.
In reiterating our strong condemnation of all
terrorist activity, we emphasize the need to observe the
humanitarian principles of proportionality, legality and
precaution. In welcoming the recent United Nations
humanitarian deployment in Rukban, we underscore
the obligation to allow sustained access to assistance
for as long as necessary.
On the other hand, we would like to welcome
the first advances made by the Astana group in the
identification of missing persons, the return of mortal
remains, and the release of detainees and missing
persons. We hope that new and further developments in
these important humanitarian issues will contribute in
the coming weeks and months to promoting the relief
from tensions required to end the conflict and achieve
Syrian reconciliation.
I conclude by stressing the need for the Security
Council to remain united in the exercise of its
responsibilities under international humanitarian law,
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

as reflected in the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018),
which, inter alia, has extended access to cross-border
assistance. In this regard, we acknowledge the efforts
of the delegations of Sweden and Kuwait to move the
draft resolution forward with a view to alleviating the
suffering of the Syrian population.
However, we must bear in mind that only the
achievement of a political solution that lays the
foundations for sustainable peace in Syria will make
it possible to overcome the humanitarian disaster that
continues to affect its population. In this vein, we
wish, finally, to stress the importance of convening the
constitutional committee before the end of this year,
with a view to making progress in the construction of
a political solution to the Syrian conflict, guided by
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
My delegation would like to congratulate Mr. Mark
Lowcock on his excellent briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Côte d’Ivoire remains particularly concerned about
the precarious humanitarian situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, which has recently been aggravated
by the military escalation in the north-west of the
country, including in the demilitarized zone in the Idlib
governorate, which was established in accordance with
the agreement signed by the Russian Federation and
Turkey on 17 September. This new military escalation,
following allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in Aleppo by armed groups, is an impediment to the
ongoing peace process and threatens the lives and wellbeing of millions of civilians living in the region. My
delegation would like to remind all stakeholders of their
responsibilities to ensure safe, prompt, unimpeded
and sustainable access for humanitarian assistance to
persons in distress throughout the Syrian territory. In
that regard, we welcome the arrival of a United Nations
and Syrian Arab Red Crescent humanitarian convoy
at the Rukban displaced persons camp on 3 November
after a 10-month interruption. That delivery provided
relief for the people seriously affected by weather, the
sanitary conditions and the lack of basic goods.
My delegation voted in favour of renewing for one
year the mechanism for the delivery of cross-border
humanitarian aid, which expires on 10 January 2019.
For the fourth consecutive year, that allows the United

S/PV. 8423

Nations and its partners to continue their humanitarian
assistance work despite the many challenges. We thank
Kuwait and Sweden for their work in that regard. Côte
d’Ivoire emphasizes the fact that all parties to the
conflict have the obligation to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights, including the
responsibility to protect civilians.
In conclusion, my country remains convinced that
only a lasting political solution will put an end to the
Syrian crisis. The intra-Syrian negotiations conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
Astana and Sochi processes constitute the legitimate
frameworks to achieve that. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire
urges the warring parties to agree on the formation of
the constitutional committee, which is meant to draft a
new constitution. That will be a decisive step towards
organizing transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections
with a view to restoring lasting peace and stability in
Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The paradox that attracted my attention during
this meeting on the humanitarian situation in my
country, Syria — throughout Syria, not only in part of
it — is that some colleagues who spoke, in particular
the Permanent Representatives of Sweden, Kuwait,
the United States of America, Britain and France, had
an extraordinarily narrow-minded view of resolution
2449 (2018) on renewing the so-called mechanism for
the delivery of cross-border aid. It was repeated at the
beginning of all their statements. They wanted the
extension of the mechanism only to transcend Syrian
sovereignty by continuing the cross-border aid. That is
the crux of the issue. They disregarded the fact that such
operations – the so-called cross-border humanitarian
aid – covers only 5 per cent of the assistance delivered
to Syrians. Ninety-five per cent of humanitarian
assistance is therefore delivered within the Syrian
territory, not across the borders.
That is of course apart from the fact that the border
crossings with Turkey are used to smuggle weapons and
terrorists, not to provide humanitarian aid. It is a long
story that we have repeatedly mentioned. There are
dozens of Turkish officers and judges in Turkish prisons
because they revealed that the cross-border convoys

18-4375519/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

13/12/2018

were delivering weapons, not humanitarian assistance.
Despite that fact, some are still doubtful after eight
years of the terrorist war being waged against my
country by a devilish global coalition, some members
of which are present in the Council’s Chamber.

aggression and interference in the internal affairs of
States, while undermining the territorial integrity of
Member States. It is as if all that was not set out in the
Council’s resolutions but was written by Shakespeare
400 years ago.

Today, we are considering the fifty-eighth report
of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation
in my country, Syria (S/2018/1104). As representatives
know, the Security Council has adopted many
resolutions and held hundreds of formal and informal
meetings in that regard. I believe that, after all those
resolutions and meetings, it is high time for the Council
to ask the following question: is the purpose of those
reports, meetings and resolutions really to improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria or for some to put
political pressure on the Syrian Government and to use
the suffering and pain of Syrians for cheap political
purposes? I would say that if the objective, as some
allege, is to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria,
what we need today is not to adopt new resolutions or
to hold spectacular meetings, but to do the following.

Thirdly, there must be an immediate lifting of
the unilateral coercive measures imposed against the
Syrian people by certain States, some of which are
members of the Council and present in the Chamber.
Those measures have greatly harmed the livelihood of
Syrians. My colleagues the Ambassador of the Russian
Federation and the Ambassador of Bolivia have
thankfully mentioned that. Those ongoing measures,
which are described by some as sanctions, are not
sanctions because they were not imposed by the Security
Council. They are unilateral coercive measures that are
condemned by the so-called international community.
We have adopted many resolutions in the General
Assembly in that regard. The continuation of those
measures is the main obstacle to ensuring a response to
the basic needs of Syrians, supporting their livelihood
and providing the basic requirements for the return
of displaced Syrians and refugees to their homes and
normal lives.

First, it is necessary to help the Syrian Government
to combat the remnants of the armed terrorist groups,
which were the main cause of the humanitarian crisis
and its escalation, including the displaced persons and
refugee crises. Anyone following the crisis and truly
wanting the well-being of Syrians would see that the
humanitarian crisis is only in areas infiltrated by those
armed terrorist groups, which harbour illegal foreign
troops.
Damascus has 8 million inhabitants. We do not
face any humanitarian problems there. There is no
humanitarian crisis in Damascus, Aleppo, Homs or
Hamah. They are all under the control of the State.
The humanitarian crisis is prevalent only in areas
under the control of armed terrorist groups and foreign
occupation. Members have talked about Al-Tanf and
Rukban. Who protects the terrorists from Da’esh in
those areas? Is it not the United States forces?
Secondly, the Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility by taking serious and immediate steps
to stop the aggression, massacres and systematic
destruction of infrastructure in Syria carried out by the
illegal coalition led by the United States of America.
The Council must compel the countries of that illegal
coalition to abide by the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the Council resolutions, which
all underline the condemnation of such crimes of
20/22

Fourthly, international humanitarian assistance
must be stepped up to respond to the needs of the
Syrians, especially given the current status of financing
humanitarian assistance, which has yet to meet
expectations, as Mr. Lowcock stated earlier. Donors
continue to hold their theatrical conferences and link
their financing to political conditions that run counter
to the principles of humanitarian work. They have
refused to support the reconstruction of Syrian facilities
that provide basic services in order to strengthen the
steadfastness of the Syrians and the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes in
dignity and safety. We listened today to our colleagues’
statements on behalf of the United States, Britain and
France in which they clearly spoke about their political
preconditions for reconstruction, the return of refugees
and ending their support for terrorism.
Fifthly, the politicization of the humanitarian
aspect in Syria must be brought to an end, including by
stopping the spread of falsified information and statistics
and ceasing to ignore facts, changes and developments
on the ground. Of course, when we discuss that issue,
we have facts, statistics and evidence at our disposal to
substantiate what we say. Others make false statements
by saying that only four or five humanitarian convoys
18-43755

13/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

have reached their destination during a particular
month. That is untrue. I was in Damascus a few days
ago, and I visited the President of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent. I asked him how many convoys had been sent
since the beginning of this year to date. I point this out
for Mr. Lowcock’s benefit. He provided me with the
table I have before me, showing a total of 182 convoys,
all solely carried out exclusively by the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent. Some brief the Council with falsified
information to say that only four or 12 convoys were
sent. When they send a convoy to Rukban or Al-Tanf
with our consent, they deliver it to the terrorists. It is
not delivered to the 50,000 civilians who are in dire
need of assistance. For Mr. Lowcock’s information, the
convoy that went to Al-Tanf ended up in the hands of
the terrorists, as he is well aware.
Extending the provisions of resolution 2165 (2014)
does not correspond to the recent developments on
the ground since its adoption on 14 July 2014. There
is no longer any need for cross-border humanitarian
assistance as we have regained control of all areas
that were categorized as besieged or hard-to-reach. In
that regard, I would like to stress once again that the
Government of Syria is the most eager of all to provide
every form of humanitarian assistance to its people
wherever they are throughout Syria. That is our duty
and we are duly discharging it in cooperation with the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent. The Government of Syria
will remain committed to fulfilling that obligation.
I also emphasize that my country stands ready to
cooperate and coordinate with the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners under the guidelines governing
the coordination and enhancement of humanitarian
work, which stress the need to respect the sovereignty
and independence of host countries and the role of the
countries concerned in overseeing the distribution of
humanitarian assistance within their territories, as well
as respect for the principles of impartiality, integrity
and non-politicization.
There is a State in Syria. It is a State that deserves
the respect of all and the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the provisions of the
Charter and international law. That is the main issue.
However, when certain representatives refer in their
statements to a “regime” or use other, similar terms
indiscriminately, such speech is not fitting of the
Council or those addressing it.
Some Council members insist on extending the
provisions of resolution 2165 (2014), while deliberately

S/PV. 8423

turning a blind eye to my country’s objective criticism of
the resolution and its extension. That in no way negates
its defects or implementation since the very first day of
its adoption. I would like to briefly cite those defects in
the hope that they will not be committed later.
First, the hub for humanitarian assistance for
the Syrian crisis is in Damascus — the capital of
Syria — and not, as the resolution attempts to convey,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) in Gaziantep, Turkey, or any other place.
Secondly, receiving the consent of the Government
of Syria before humanitarian assistance crosses its
country’s borders is a guiding principle in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 46/182. We should
not simply be informed, as stated in the Security
Council resolution, because such a move is similar to
the consultation process conducted by the co-sponsors
of resolution 2449 (2018), adopted today. They said that
they had consulted us, which is correct. They did not,
however, consider any of our observations. Is that what
consultations mean?
Thirdly, the United Nations monitoring mechanism
remains incapable to this very day of verifying the
delivery of cross-border assistance and whether it
reaches those for whom it is intended. The majority of
those operations take place across the Turkish-Syrian
border and are directed towards areas under the control
of the armed terrorist groups that confiscate such aid
and distribute it to their own members and families, as
happened in Al-Tanf. The mechanism has stood idly by
over the past four years rather than prevent the misuse
of those borders by neighbouring countries that have
taken advantage of the situation, provided support to
armed terrorist groups and smuggled whatever those
groups looted from factories, as well as antiquities and
petroleum products, back into their own territories.
Fourthly, the effectiveness of cross-border
assistance was and remains limited when compared to
the assistance distributed from within the Syrian Arab
Republic, as I previously mentioned.
Fifthly, senior OCHA staff members have not
upheld the principles of transparency or provided the
necessary guarantees to convince the international
community that the cross-border assistance would reach
those for whom it is intended and not the armed groups.
To this very day, those senior OCHA staff members
have not been able to provide an adequate explanation
regarding the so-called partners or independent

18-4375521/22

S/PV.8423

The situation in the Middle East

companies — third parties — that were contracted to
verify the delivery of assistance to warehouses and
beneficiaries despite our repeated requests.
Sixthly, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which has been
listed as a terrorist group by the Security Council,
levies taxes on assistance delivered from across the
borders, especially the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing
between Turkey and Syria. That is considered to be
direct financing of terrorism, in violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
2178 (2014), 2253 (2015) and 2396 (2017). That is exactly
what Qatar did when it disbursed millions of dollars to
Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front in the occupied Golan
Heights under the pretext of paying ransom to free the
hostages taken by those terrorist groups, which is once
again a clear violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2368 (2017).
In conclusion, the Government, the people and the
army of my country know very well who is our enemy
and who is our friend. We know very well that our fight
against terrorism is a war imposed on us by the sponsors
of terrorism to drain our energies in order to advance
their unjust plans in the region, foremost among which
is eliminating the Palestinian question and drowning
the people of the region in bloody obscurantism, fuelled
by extremist Wahhabi ideology, ignorance and agendas
of destruction.

22/22

13/12/2018

My Government is more determined today than ever
to fight the remaining armed terrorist groups in Idlib
and elsewhere. We are firm in exercising our legal right
for self-defence and expelling all foreign occupying
forces that have entered our territories illegally. My
colleague the representative of the United States of
America brazenly stated today that his country has
spent $8 billion towards financing terrorism in Syria,
which he labelled as humanitarian assistance. Those
$8 billion were in fact for financing terrorism.
We will continue to reconstruct the areas destroyed
by terrorists in order to restore normality to everyday
life and allow our people to enjoy the lives that they
had built before the war was imposed on them by the
terrorists. That will enable Syrian citizens to return to
their homeland after they left it because of terrorism
and the unilateral coercive economic measures that
targeted their livelihoods.
The success of the sponsors of terrorism,
destruction and the assassins of international law in
certain places does not in any way mean that their
plan will succeed in our country. We vow to foil their
schemes and conspiracies.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

18-43755
