UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

3 JUNE

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2372) . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Question concerning the situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas):
Letter dated 31 May 1982 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Panama to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15145) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . 1

SiPV. 2372

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officinl Records of the Secwity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
infarmation about it is given.
The resotutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Securiiy Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2372nd MEETING
Weld in New York on Thursday, 3 June 1982, at 11 am.
Presidenlr: Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France)

ticipate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, 1 propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

de NANTEUIL

Prrsent: The representatives of the following States:
China, ,France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain a.nd Northern
Ireland,
United States of
America, Zaire.
Provisional

I.

Adopltion

agenda (SlAgendal2372)

of the agenda

3. Mr. KAM (Panama) (intcI-p~Pt(~tio~iJj’o~~i Spanish):
At our meeting yesterday afternoon [ibid.], my delegation had the honour to join with the delegation of
Spain in submitting a draft resolution for the consideration of the Council [S/15156]. Now, after consultations with friendly nations which are as concerned as
we are over the situation in the region of the MaIvinas,
we should like to propose an amendment to that draft
resolution.

2. Question concerning the situation in the region of
the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
Letter dated 31 May 1982 from the Charge.
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Panama to the United Nations addressed to
the President
of the Security
Council
(S/ 15 145)

4. The amendment would be inserted as paragraph 2
and would read as follows:

Adoption of the agenda

“2. Requests the parties to initiate,
simultaneously with the cease-fire, the implementation
of
resolutions
SO2 (1982) and 505 (1982) in their
entirety;“.

The agenda II’NS adopted.
Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Falkland1Islands (Islas Malvinas):
Letter dated 32 May 1982 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Panama to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15145)

5. The subsequent paragraphs would be renumbered
accordingly.
6. My delegation and the delegation of Spain, in the
spirit of conciliation which we have always shown and
in response to the requests of several friendly countries that would like to see this insertion in the text,
which would moreover facilitate broader support in
the Council for the draft resolution, have agreed to
introduce this amendment, which we hope will win the
support of the whole Council.

1. The PRESIDENT
(iutcrpwtation
jk1171
French):
In accordance with the decision taken at the preceding
meeting, [?37/sf meeting], I invite the representative
of Argentina to take a place at the Council table;
1 invite the representative of Brazil to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber,
At the inllitation
of the President, Mr. Ros (Argentiw) took a place nt the Counc’iI table; Mr. CovL;a da
Costa (Brazil) took the place wsewc?d for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

7. Sir Anthony
PARSONS
(United
Kingdom):
I am grateful to the co-sponsors for the amendment
which has just been proposed. It certainly improves
the draft resolution. It now contains the concept of
a cease-fire and simultaneous
implementation
of
resolution 502 (1982), which of course means the withdrawal of Argentine forces, although this is not specifically mentioned.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
1 should like to inform members of the Council that
1 have received a letter from the representative of
Honduras in which he requests to be invited to parI

8. My defegation would need to consider this
amended text very carefully. I am sure that more time
than simply the lunch break will be required if it is to
be considered seriously and positively in my country’s
capital.

states: “Any motion for the suspension or for the
simple adjournment
of the meeting shall be decided
without debate.”
Therefore, I would ask that no
debate be held on this question.
16. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fiorn
Frencltj:
I simply asked whether there was any objection to
suspending the meeting until 3.30 p.m., and I called
on the representative of Jordan, who wished to make
a statement. I now call on him to continue that
statement.

9. I would therefore ask for a little more time-perhaps overnight-to
consider the amended text since
it does radically change the draft resolution before us.
IO.

Mr. de PINIl% (Spain) (inf~~‘,pl’c’talia/?f,.om
Spm7I am very appreciative to the representative of
the United Kingdom for the explanations
he has
offered, but the co-sponsors have decided to request,
under rule 33 of the provisional rules of procedure, a
two-hour suspension of the meeting, that is, until
3.30 this afternoon, with a view to proceeding then to
a vote on the draft resolution.
isk):

17. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): We are aware of the
gravity of the situation and the magnitude of the
problem. I am not proposing that we debate the issue;
I am simply asking for an additional hour and a hali
to enable delegations not only to reflect but also to
forward the amendment to their Governments and, it
is hoped, to receive instructions. I think it would IX
worth taking that additional
time in view of the
magnitude of the problem we are facing.

1I. Even yesterday we asked for the adoption of the
draft resolution as a matter of urgency. My delegation. and I speak also on behalf of the delegation of
Panama, does not wish to see any more time lapse
before the cease-fire comes into effect. As now
indicated in paragraph 2 of the revised draft resolution, the Cease-fire would be linked with a simultaneous implementation
of resolutions 502 (1982) and
505 ( 1982). With every passing hour there are more
casualties, and my delegation cannot accept any
indefinite postponement resulting in ever more casualties. On the other hand, if there were an immediate
cease-fire, we would then be able to discuss the rest
of the amendment, devoting whatever time was needed
to its consideration.
We realize the difficulties this
could cause some delegations, but we have now shown
sufficient understanding. We believe that the time has
come for a cease-fire. for the Council to call for a
cease-fire and for the immediate and simultaneous
implementation
of resolutions 502 (1982) and 505
(1982). What is clear is clear, and we are reluctant to
see even one more hour go by-or, at most, the two
hours of the suspension we are asking for-before
the
vote.

18. All I am requesting is a mere extension to 5 p.m.,
rather than 3.30 p.m. That would facilitate the consid.
eration of and voting upon the draft resolution,
19. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Frenrh):
I note that the representative of Jordan has requested
the suspension of the meeting until 5 p.m., and I there
fore repeat the question I asked a moment ago: is there
any objection to that request?
20. Mr. de PINI&
(Spain) (inre~p,.etntior7~017z
Spnn,
ish): Mr. President, 1 submitted a proposal for decision
by the Council. The proposal has now been amended.
That, in my view, means that it is being debated,
contrary to rule 33. I wonder how many more viclims
there will be in that additional hour and a half that has
been proposed. I agree that the proposal by the representative of Jordan should be put to a vote.
21. Mr. DORR (Ireland): I enter with great hesitation into a procedural debate, and I think there should
really not be very much disagreement between USon
a matter of an hour or two. However, on a point of
order, I believe that what was proposed by the representative of Spain comes under rule 33, subparagraph 3-that is to say, it fixes a certain day or hour.
I am in the hands of the President but, on a point of
order, I think that, if it is a simple suspension of the
meeting under subparagraph 1 of rule 33, that indeed
is decided without debate; but if it is fixing an hour
-which
would be 3.30 p.m.-this
seems to me to
bring it under subparagraph 3, which is not decided
without debate.

12. The PRESIDENT
(infcr’pr.ctalio/l
fro/n
Frewh):
The representative
of Spain has proposed that the
meeting be suspended until 3.30 p.m. Is there any
objection to that proposal?
13. Mr, NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I have listened very
attentively to the statement of the representative
of
Spain. The interest which the14. The PRESIDENT
(interp~rlorioll
J?WI~
Fwnch):
I call on the representative of Spain on a point of
order.

22. It is obvious that there should be a midpoint
in regard to the hour, but I hesitate to put forward
a proposal.

15. Mr. de PINIl% (Spain) (inrcrpretcrtion
from
Spnnish}:
I am sorry to interrupt my friend, the representative of Jordan, but I wish to recall that subparagraph I
of rule 33, to which 1 have referred, reads: “To suspend the meeting”,
The last paragraph of the rule

23.
isl7):

2

Mr. de PINIGS (Spain)(inrerprerntion~o/??
SPfle.
I think that I have had enough experience with

the practice of the Council. I have not asked for
adjournment
of the meeting. I have spoken clearly,
asking for a suspension of the meeting, as provided
for in subparagraph 1 of rule 33. I have not in any way
asked that the meeting be adjourned. I have asked that
it be suspended for two hours. We began to discuss
that request at 1.30 p.m. and we have been discussing
it for 15 minutes. We are debating something which
under the rules of procedure cannot be debated. We
have lost a quarter of an hour, I ask that the meeting
be suspended for two hours.
24. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The representative of Spain has proposed a suspension of the meeting until 3.30 p.m. Is there any
objection?
25. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): As this is the first occasion, Sir, on which I have
spoken in a meeting since you assumed the presidency,
I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you on your assumption of that office and also to offer
consolation
because you have assumed it at such a
delicate and extraordinarily
difficult moment in the
history of the Council and perhaps even of the world.
26. I do not know whether all the other members of
the Council will in fact be able to vote on this draft
resolution
at 3.30 p.m. I can only say, in the most
straightforward
fashion possible, that the proposed
amendment
very substantially alters the substance of
the drafi: resolution, and from my point of view it will
be necessary to consult with my Government in some
considerable
detail about our position on this substantial revision of the draft resolution. I think it will
simply be impossible for us to vote by 3.30 p.m. Therefore, I ~would appeal to the Council to authorize a
somewhat longer suspension than that so far proposed.
27. Mr. de PINI6S (Spain)(interpretation
from Spanish): I am sorry to have to speak so many times. However, I should like to remind the Council that it was
pointed
out to me that, under rule 31: “Proposed
resolutions,
amendments
and substantive motions
shall normally be placed before the representatives in
writing.”
That was the reason given for not immediately proceeding to a vote on the draft resolution
that we submitted yesterday. We accepted that interpretation
of the rules. We are not now prepared to
accept am interpretation of rule 33 which would allow a
debate on everything we have been discussing for the
past 20 minutes.

28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The representative of Spain has proposed a suspension
until 3.30 p.m. I shall put his proposal to the vote, but
before doing so I call on him again.
29.

Mr. de PINIJ?S (Spain)(interpretationfiom
SpanI should like to remind you that,
when the representative of Jordan moved the suspension of the meeting until 5 p.m., I pointed out that the
motion could not be discussed, but it seems reasonable
to me that it be put to a vote. Therefore, I request that
a vote be taken, not on my proposal but on the amendment submitted
by the representative of Jordan,
which is for a suspension until 5 p.m.
ish): Mr. President,

30. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French);
I proceeded in the way I did out of courtesy to the
representative
of Spain, but since he himself has
suggested that it be the proposal of the representative
of Jordan that be put to the vote, I would recall that
that representative
requested a suspension of the
meeting until 5 p.m. I shall now put that proposal to
the vote.
A vote was taken by shoiv of hands.
In favour:
Against:

China, France, Ireland, Japan, Jordan
None

Abstaining:
Guyana,
Panama, Poland, Spain,
Togo, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire
The result of the vote was 5’ in favour, none agaitzst,
bvith IO abstentions.
The proposal
was not adopted, having failed
obtain the affirmative
votes of nine members.
The meeting was suspended
sumed at 6.10 p.m.

to

at 1.55 p.m. and re-

3 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French);
At the request of several members of the Council, and
with the consent of the sponsors of the draft resolution, I propose to adjourn the meeting and to convene
the next meeting of the Council tomorrow, Friday,
4 June, at 4 p.m.
It MWS so decided.
The meeting

rose at 6.15 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UMTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et Its agences dCpositaires du
monde enticr. Informez-vous
auprbs de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
ir : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Genhve,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partcs del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300
