A /77/PV.33

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

33rd plenary meeting

Thursday, 10 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 34
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/340)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.11)
The President: Afghanistan is in crisis — it is in
many crises. It has been 15 months since the Taliban
consolidated control over the country. Its economy is in
ruins, the humanitarian situation is disastrous and two
thirds of the population is hungry. Girls and women are
banned from learning, having a job or getting proper
medical care. The country is awash with heroin and
opium. Organized crime and terrorist organizations are
thriving once again.
Afghanistan faces complex and interlinked
challenges that the Taliban have shown they cannot or
will not solve. It is time to support the Afghan people
with concrete solutions that place their needs front
and centre. It is true that some problems will require
some time to resolve, but there are actions the General
Assembly can take to change the paradigm now.
I would like Member States to consider one solution
through solidarity. The United Nations humanitarian
appeal for Afghanistan, which requires $4.4 billion, is
only half funded. With winter weather just weeks away,
I encourage Member States to provide urgent support
to help reduce the $2.3 billion shortfall. Let us remind

ourselves of the old saying from Afghanistan: “A real
friend is one who takes the hand of his friend in times
of distress and helplessness”.
Afghanistan has a rich history of scientific
achievement. I encourage the country to re-engage
with the international science community and allow
the women who used to be respected members of the
country’s science community to resume their research
and studies. Afghanistan is now the only State in
the world that would deny girls their full right to
education. The prospect of girls’ education has been
left to uncertainty amid seemingly random edicts from
the Taliban.
This time last year, Fawzia Koofi, the first woman
Deputy Speaker of the Afghan Parliament, recalled her
dream of one day addressing the United Nations as the
President of Afghanistan. She said: “With me, millions
of girls and women in Afghanistan had this dream
that now they think will never come true”. Dreams of
becoming President have been replaced by the reality
of child marriage and arrests if women and girls leave
their home without a male chaperone. I reiterate my
call for the protection of the fundamental rights and
freedoms of all Afghans, especially of women and girls.
Similarly, I urge the Taliban to ensure the safety
of all Afghans, regardless of their gender, ethnic
background, religious belief or political affiliation;
protect journalists and civil society members; allow
unhindered humanitarian aid; and cooperate with

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-68323 (E)

*2268323*

A/77/PV.33

humanitarian workers. We expect the Taliban to make
good on the commitments they made to the international
community — to show honesty through concrete action.
The dramatic changes of 2021 have taken a massive
toll on Afghanistan’s economy and profoundly widened
many security risks. Narcotics now make up the
country’s largest economic sector. Earlier this month,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime reported
that opium cultivation in 2022 increased by 32 per cent.
Prices have soared. We know where those drugs are
sent, and we know who profits from those drugs.
The threat of drug trafficking is linked with the
threat of terrorism and regional and global insecurity.
The Haqqani Network and Al-Qaida are just some of
the terrorist organizations active in Afghanistan. It is
crucial that Taliban leaders engage in a serious counterterrorism dialogue to stop and reverse the flow of
foreign extremists into the country and prevent their
own from becoming foreign terrorist fighters in other
countries. Afghanistan must never again become a
breeding ground and safe haven for terrorists.
There is a moral, as well as a practical, imperative
for the international community to support an
inclusive and sustainable peace in Afghanistan. I call
on the Taliban, other Afghans and members of the
international community to cooperate with the Special
Representative as she implements the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I welcome the appointment of Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva as the new Head of UNAMA. I commend
dialogue and mediation initiatives such as the Tashkent
format. After almost five decades of relentless conflict,
we need continued and concerted efforts for the
peaceful rebuilding of Afghanistan.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Germany to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.11.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Fifteen months after
the forceful takeover by the Taliban, the situation in
Afghanistan remains of the utmost concern. We are
witnessing a massive economic contraction and a
humanitarian crisis. Half the population is subject to
critical levels of food insecurity. We expect a harsh
winter and levels of needs that we have not seen in the
past decades, with little prospect for economic recovery
or a reduction of poverty.
The widespread and systemic denial of fundamental
human rights by the Taliban is the reality of Afghanistan
and its people. The systematic oppression of women and
2/30

10/11/2022

girls, who cannot enjoy their civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights, is extremely worrisome. There
is an absence of any effort towards inclusive governance
and a sustainable long-term political solution to govern
the country. We have also not seen any effort by the
Taliban towards the full enjoyment by women, girls and
persons belonging to minorities of their human rights.
Security remains fragile. The decrease in conflictrelated security incidents contrasts with the ongoing
fighting in the country and an increasing number of
terrorist attacks on schools, public transport, places of
worship and diplomatic premises.
The Taliban control the country, but they do not
live up to their responsibility towards the Afghan
people. They do not respond to the needs of the Afghan
population. That makes a coherent international response
all the more important. Draft resolution A/77/L.11,
which is before the Assembly, and which we seek to
adopt by consensus, sends a strong signal of support to
the Afghan people. It is a reminder of the international
community’s expectations of the Taliban, which the
Security Council formulated through its resolution 2593
(2021), adopted in August 2021.
The draft resolution before us is a clear call to
respect, protect and fulfil human rights, develop
inclusive governance and fight terrorism. It contains
the clear message that there cannot be business as
usual and a pathway towards recognition without such
measures being taken. Engagement with the Taliban
will have to remain limited in steps and scope, based
on principles.
The draft resolution is testimony to our joint
commitment to assisting the Afghan people, who rely
on us, while being neglected by their rulers. Germany
remains engaged. Since August 2021, we have provided
more than €1 billion in humanitarian assistance and
support for the basic needs of the Afghan people and in
support of Afghanistan’s neighbours.
The draft resolution is testimony to our support
for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). It fully endorses the renewal
of UNAMA’s mandate in March of this year, and it is
also testimony to our common long-term aspiration to
stabilize Afghanistan.
Finally, the draft resolution expresses the concerns
that we all share, together with the neighbours of
Afghanistan, regarding the dangers of a spillover of
instability, irregular migration flows, radicalization,
22-68323

10/11/2022

terrorism, organized crime and drug trafficking. It
clearly formulates appreciation and support for the
efforts of countries of the region to support Afghanistan
and its people.
Germany is the traditional facilitator of the
General Assembly resolution entitled “The situation
in Afghanistan”. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank all the sponsors of this draft resolution for
their invaluable support. This year’s draft resolution
is the product of a comprehensive negotiation process,
taking a step back after the events of last summer and
including a sizeable core group inviting neighbouring
countries and those countries carrying a heavy burden
over the past 15 months. It contains our collective
political understanding and is recommended for
adoption by consensus.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to adopt draft
resolution A/77/L.11, on the situation in Afghanistan.
Let me begin by expressing the gratitude and
deep appreciation of the people of Afghanistan to
the Permanent Mission of Germany as the traditional
facilitator of the resolution, particularly Ambassador
Antje Leendertse and Counsellor Michael Hasenau and
his team for their leadership, hard work and capable
facilitation of this draft resolution. Germany has been
one of the great supporters of the Afghan people and
a genuine partner and ally in supporting international
efforts to ensure peace, security and prosperity in
Afghanistan. I also wish to extend my appreciation to all
the other countries that participated in the discussions,
demonstrated flexibility and supported this draft
resolution through their contributions and sponsorship.
Since the most recent time that such a resolution
was adopted by the General Assembly, in November
2019 (see A/74/PV.36), unfortunately, Afghanistan
has gone through quite dramatic and tragic social,
economic and political upheavals. The forced takeover
of Afghanistan by the Taliban on 15 August 2021 further
exacerbated the already deteriorating socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. Since then,
we have witnessed an increasing social, economic
and humanitarian crisis, including a total collapse
and regression of two decades of hard-won gains. The
Taliban’s failure to establish a legitimate, accountable
and inclusive Government and its unwillingness to
address those crises to put Afghanistan back on the
road to recovery have deeply affected the lives of

A/77/PV.33

the people of Afghanistan, particularly women and
girls. That has further isolated Afghanistan from the
international community.
All reports warn of growing concerns regarding the
precarious situation in Afghanistan, where 24.4 million
people are currently in need of humanitarian assistance.
The country is also facing multiple threats, which
include increasing terrorist attacks on civilian targets,
including particular minority groups, such as the
Shia Hazara, Hindus, Sufis and Sikhs; a 32 per cent
increase in opium cultivation this year; the systematic
erasure of women and girls from all areas of public
life; and continued violations and abuses of human
rights, including arbitrary arrests and extrajudicial
killings of former security forces, journalists, human
rights defenders and protesters, as well as the collective
punishment and forced displacement of particular
ethnic groups.
There are deep concerns about the growing security
threats emanating from the presence of terrorist groups
in Afghanistan. The people of Afghanistan, including
women, girls and minority communities, are not safe
in places of education and worship. The Afghan people
have been the recurring victims of terror attacks,
and we lost many lives in the fight against terrorism.
The threat of terrorism requires a collective effort,
enabled through the genuine cooperation of all actors
and conducted through a capable, legitimate and
trusted Government.
The draft resolution reflects in an objective and
balanced way the overall current social, economic,
security and political situation in Afghanistan and its
impacts on the countries in the region and beyond,
including threats, challenges, problems and solutions,
and calls for immediate action by all stakeholders.
We appreciate that the draft resolution highlights the
most pressing issues, including the humanitarian
crisis, by urging the international community to
provide humanitarian assistance by supporting the
2022 humanitarian response plan for Afghanistan. We
are grateful to the donor and pledging countries for
providing support and funding.
By the same token, we also appreciate that the
draft resolution highlights the human rights situation
and expresses serious concern about the situation of
women, young people and minorities. The Taliban’s
ongoing human rights violations and growing
repression of the fundamental freedoms of all Afghans,

22-683233/30

A/77/PV.33

10/11/2022

including women and girls, human rights activists
and journalists, is factual, as reflected in the reports
of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Afghanistan and of the Secretary-General.
Depriving women and girls from their fundamental
human rights and freedoms, including the right to work
and education, has had a profound impact on the lives
of half of Afghan society and the country’s economy.
The situation of women and girls in Afghanistan
must not be overlooked, and their rights should not be
compromised. All girls and boys should have access
to equal and quality education at all levels. The draft
resolution also calls for action to address the problem
of the Afghan refugees, who are in desperate need of
support and assistance.

draft resolution today, the General Assembly and the
Member States will reaffirm their commitments and
continued support to the people of Afghanistan.

We are grateful to all Member States for their
constructive engagement despite their differences of
views. The most important issue for the Afghan people
is the implementation of the draft resolution before us,
in particular the section that emphasizes the importance
of the establishment by the Taliban of an inclusive
and representative system that upholds human rights,
including for women, girls, children and minorities,
as well as the other United Nations resolutions on the
situation in Afghanistan. I would like to reiterate that,
without an inclusive, representative, participatory and
responsive Government at the national and subnational
levels, with the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women, we will not be able to achieve a sustainable,
lasting peace and economic and political stability in
Afghanistan. The Taliban should respond to the calls by
the Afghan people and international partners for them
to fulfil their commitments by establishing an inclusive
and accountable system, as well as upholding the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all Afghans.

Mr. Skoog (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 27
member States. The candidate countries Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova;
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Andorra and Monaco, align themselves with
this statement.

The people of Afghanistan have been suffering
owing to protracted conflict, poverty, starvation, food
insecurity, unemployment and migration. They deserve
a peaceful, decent and dignified life. The people of
Afghanistan desperately need the support and solidarity
of all international partners, particularly the United
Nations, in achieving their long-awaited aspirations
for enduring peace, stability and prosperity. The draft
resolution must be adopted by consensus at this crucial
juncture in order to protect the needs of the Afghan
people and ensure that their struggle is not forgotten.
The draft resolution will create hope and optimism for
the people of Afghanistan, who are faced with a dire
humanitarian and economic situation. By adopting the
4/30

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank all countries for the sustained support they
have provided to date to the people of Afghanistan.
Their support for today’s draft resolution will send
the strong message that the United Nations and its
Member States will continue to support the people of
Afghanistan in their quest to achieve enduring peace,
stability and prosperity through their collective efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.

Let me start by thanking all the delegations that
participated constructively in the consultations on the
text of draft resolution A/77/L.11 and, in particular,
Germany and its team, for facilitating the negotiations.
International unity in the approach to the challenges in
Afghanistan is very important for the Afghan people,
and we hope that the draft resolution will be adopted by
consensus today.
The EU reiterates its support for the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and welcomes its efforts thus far. The United Nations
remains an indispensable partner and a key actor on
the ground. We also greatly appreciate the efforts and
reports of Mr. Richard Bennett, the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan.
We want to reaffirm that the EU and its member
States will stand with the Afghan people, and that
we remain committed to stability, prosperity and
sustainable peace in Afghanistan and the broader
region. That will require an inclusive political process
with the full, equal and meaningful participation of
all Afghans, including all ethnic groups and religious
minorities, and the meaningful participation of women
in decision-making positions. In that regard, the EU and
its member States welcomed the adoption of Security
22-68323

10/11/2022

Council resolution 2593 (2021), which encourages such
an inclusive, negotiated political settlement and sends
a clear, strong and united message on the international
community’s expectations and demands that must be
transformed into concrete actions.
We advocate for the protection and the fulfilment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance
with international conventions, to which Afghanistan
as a State party should adhere, while respecting
international humanitarian law. The EU remains deeply
alarmed by the increase in human rights violations and
abuses in Afghanistan. Accountability must be ensured
and, in that regard, we recall that Afghanistan is a party
to the Rome Statute.
As you said, Sir, and as the representative of
Afghanistan just set out in detail, the human rights
situation of women and girls continues to deteriorate. The
EU reiterates its strong, unwavering commitment to the
full, equal and meaningful participation of all women
and girls in all spheres of life in Afghanistan, as well as
to their protection from all forms of discrimination and
violence. Nowhere else are girls banned from attending
secondary education — that is unacceptable and must
be revoked immediately. Moreover, persons belonging
to ethnic groups and religious minorities, notably
Hazaras and the Shia population, as well as lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, human
rights defenders and journalists and other media
workers, suffer physical abuse, arbitrary detentions,
enforced disappearances, torture and even killings.
That is unacceptable. The shrinking space for civil
society and media and the restrictions on human rights
and fundamental freedoms remain primary concerns.
Afghanistan also faces a deep humanitarian and
economic crisis. The situation is expected to further
deteriorate during the upcoming winter. In the absence
of a legitimate and recognized Afghan government, the
EU has been working tirelessly with the international
community to find principled, pragmatic and creative
solutions to support the Afghan people and mitigate
the grave humanitarian and economic crisis. We have
committed more than €300 million in humanitarian aid
and mobilized €330 million to maintain basic services
and sustain livelihoods through United Nations
partners, local and international organizations and
non-governmental organizations, to all of whom we are
entirely grateful.

A/77/PV.33

The EU intends to continue its support to the
Afghan people in close coordination with international
partners. We have established a minimal presence in
Kabul to ensure the delivery of assistance, facilitate
operational coordination and represent EU policies
and positions. The EU prioritizes direct engagement
with the Afghan people, including through the Afghan
Women Leaders Forum, which aims to ensure that
Afghan women have a voice in international forums.
Allowing the implementation of humanitarian
operations in Afghanistan, in line with the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence and full respect of international
humanitarian law, is key. The Taliban must respect the
independence of humanitarian operations and guarantee
safe and unhindered access to the entire territory for all
humanitarian staff, including female staff. The safety
of beneficiaries of humanitarian aid must be ensured,
and all of them must have free and unhindered access
to aid services. We expect that all foreign nationals and
Afghans who want to leave the country are allowed a
safe, secure and orderly departure, in line with Security
Council resolution 2593 (2021), in full respect of the
freedom of movement.
An unstable Afghanistan will continue to threaten
and destabilize its neighbours, the wider region and
beyond. Illicit drug trafficking and terrorism do not
respect international borders. The EU underlines the
importance of preventing Afghanistan from serving as
a base for hosting, financing or exporting terrorism to
other countries. All efforts must be pursued to ensure
that the Taliban cease all direct or indirect ties with
international terrorism. We are greatly concerned about
the continued presence of terrorist organizations in
Afghanistan, including Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province.
We maintain contact with the Taliban in order
to allow for dialogue on the political priorities of the
European Union, to ensure the EU can provide support
to the Afghan people and to raise the key issues related
to the five benchmarks defined by the EU’s Foreign
Ministers. The EU engagement with the Taliban is
not an international legitimization of the Taliban’s
self-appointed interim Government and is carefully
calibrated to the policies and actions of the Taliban.
In conclusion, we believe that the draft resolution
we will adopt today is an important reflection of
our collective political understanding of the present

22-683235/30

A/77/PV.33

situation; of what is required to improve the plight of
the people, not least for women and girls; of our clear
demands and expectations of the Taliban; and of our
own commitment to and solidarity with the people of
Afghanistan as their long-term partners.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) — the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Sultanate of Oman, the State of Qatar,
the State of Kuwait and my own country, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia — under item 34 of the agenda of
the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly,
entitled “The situation in Afghanistan”.
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting to discuss the latest developments
in Afghanistan. We also take this opportunity to
thank all the delegations that have participated in
the consultations on the draft resolution contained
in document A/77/L.11. We specifically thank the
delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany for
leading the negotiations process.
We reaffirm that we had hoped that the draft
resolution would attach greater importance to supporting
Afghanistan by promoting its political stability and
other various security aspects besides fighting terrorism
and drug trafficking. That is extremely important to
achieving comprehensive development, while taking
into account the specificities of the Afghan people.
We had hoped that the international community will
send a message of solidarity and support to the Afghan
people. Accordingly, the GCC countries express their
deep concern over the continuing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan and the
fact that the Afghan economy is unable to ensure its
main functions. We are also concerned about limiting
the freedoms and rights of women and girls and the
escalation of terrorist threats.
The GCC countries have always supported security,
peace and stability at the regional and international
levels and helped to achieve that end whenever needed.
In that context, the GCC countries have been supporting
all endeavours aimed at restoring security and stability
in Afghanistan. The GCC countries reaffirm the joint
religious and cultural ties between the brotherly peoples
of the Gulf and Afghanistan as well as the importance
of Afghanistan, its status and its prominent role in that
vital region of the world.
6/30

10/11/2022

The GCC countries stress that building a secure and
stable Afghanistan is a sine qua non for the achievement
of peace and stability in its region and the world. To
achieve that goal and ensure that international efforts
in that regard are not undermined, the GCC countries
reaffirm that Afghanistan should not become a hub for
terrorist operations or a safe haven for terrorists. Its
territories should not be used to export drugs, as that
destabilizes the region and the world.
The GCC countries strongly denounce and always
reject all forms of violence aimed at destabilizing
security and which run counter to all religions and
humanitarian values and principles. The GCC countries
reaffirm the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan and the importance of restoring
peace and security in order to achieve the hopes and
aspirations of the brotherly Afghan people and to
establish regional and international peace and security.
In the context of the great efforts that are being made
by the GCC countries to support the Afghan people,
we have backed all efforts aimed at achieving security,
peace and prosperity in Afghanistan, including the
tireless efforts of the sisterly State of Qatar since 2020 to
support the peace process in Afghanistan with a view to
finding peaceful means for achieving a comprehensive
political settlement in the country.
The GCC countries are also cooperating
constructively with international organizations
that are dealing effectively with the Afghan issue.
That cooperation has also been undertaken with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation in support of the
outcomes of its relevant conferences. We have also
supported the humanitarian trust fund for Afghanistan
in cooperation with the Islamic Development Bank. At
the humanitarian level, the GCC countries have been
supporting development and humanitarian programmes
in Afghanistan, especially in relation to all efforts
related to evacuation issues.
In conclusion, the GCC countries call upon the
international community not to give up on the Afghan
people and to assist them in achieving their aspirations
towards establishing a free, secure and stable
Afghanistan living in harmony with its neighbours.
The GCC countries remain committed to supporting
political, humanitarian and development efforts at
the regional and international levels with a view to
overcoming the current political stalemate and building
a more stable and prosperous future for Afghanistan. We
commend all the efforts deployed by all Member States
22-68323

10/11/2022

as well as the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan aimed at helping the country. We reiterate
the importance of uniting all our efforts to tackle the
challenges in Afghanistan, especially those related to
stability and prosperity in the country, as they are part
and parcel of the stability and prosperity of the region
and the entire world.
Ms. Kalkku (Finland): I am pleased to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Finland.
At the outset, I would like to warmly thank
Germany for bringing the negotiations on this key draft
resolution (A/77/L.11) to a conclusion. We, the Nordic
countries, have co-sponsored the draft resolution
(A/77/L.11) at hand.
We remain deeply concerned by the developments
in Afghanistan. It is essential that the international
community continue to pay sustained attention to
the situation and developments on the ground. The
Nordic countries’ commitment to the Afghan people
remains steadfast.
The presence of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is vital. We
appreciate UNAMA’s work in the new reality facing
Afghanistan and want to reaffirm our unswerving
support for the continuation of its mandate and work,
including its strong human rights mandate, on which
Norway has led negotiations in the Security Council.
Let me express our appreciation for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, and wish her the best with her demanding
work ahead. Let me also express our gratitude and
appreciation to Special Rapporteur Richard Bennett,
whose work on human rights is invaluable.
The human rights situation in Afghanistan is
alarming. Women’s and girls’ full and equal enjoyment
of human rights can never be negotiable. It must
be a front-and-centre political priority. We expect
the Taliban to respect and ensure the fulfilment of
Afghanistan’s obligations under international law and
to hear the demands of the Afghans and the international
community. We are not witnessing isolated cases of
violations and abuses of women’s enjoyment of human
rights, but a systematic eradication of their human
rights and freedoms. Women are forced to disappear
from the public space, but let me assure members, they
will not disappear. We will not forget nor give up on the
Afghan women.

A/77/PV.33

The humanitarian, human rights, economic and
political crises are all interconnected, and we must
address them simultaneously. The ongoing crisis affects
women and girls disproportionately. Only an inclusive
political process and safe participatory dialogue to
decide on the future of Afghanistan can provide a path
towards sustainable peace and development. We call on
the Taliban to reconsider the decisions and policies that
restrict the rights of women and their participation in
economic, social and political life.
Access to education for all children — girls and
boys — is a human right. Shutting girls out of secondary
schools will have an impact on their lives and on the
Afghan society that will be hard to reverse. That will
have an immense impact for generations to come. We
urge the Taliban to live up to their promises and act
immediately to open schools for all girls.
We strongly condemn killings, arbitrary detentions,
enforced disappearances and any discrimination, abuse
and reprisals against protesters, persons belonging to
ethnic and religious groups, human rights defenders
and media workers. Instead, the de facto authorities
should engage with them and enable their work and
participation. We welcome the general amnesty
declared by the Taliban, and we urge the Taliban to
fully implement and enforce that amnesty now.
The security situation remains a concern, including
the terrorist threat. Continued attacks targeting
civilians, school facilities and mosques are a great
concern. Those are grave violations of international
humanitarian law. The de facto authorities are now
responsible for providing security to those in danger,
and those responsible must be held accountable.
The humanitarian situation is bleak. Recurring
droughts, the long-lasting effects of past conflicts
and the exclusion of women from society, inter alia,
continue to hamper Afghanistan’s food security and
the humanitarian situation as a whole. Another winter
season is near.
It is of utmost importance that the flow of
humanitarian aid and support for basic needs and
services for the Afghan people and the livelihoods of
local communities continue. We need to support civil
society in their struggle to preserve social structures.
The Taliban must ensure that such help can continue
independently, without any interference by the de facto
authorities. We also need to explore sustainable ways to

22-683237/30

A/77/PV.33

secure financial transactions in and out of Afghanistan
to avoid an economic collapse.
The Nordic countries continue to closely follow the
developments in Afghanistan. The Taliban will not be
assessed by their words, but by their actions.
Mr. Bunch (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for holding today’s important debate.
The United States remains committed to the
Afghan people, especially Afghan women, girls and atrisk ethnic and religious communities. We are meeting
at a deeply challenging time for those communities.
Since taking power, the Taliban have severely
restricted women’s exercise of their rights in
Afghanistan, turning back two decades of progress that
Afghan women themselves built, with the support of the
international community. As the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, Richard
Bennett, has reported “in no other country have women
and girls so rapidly disappeared from all spheres of
public life” (A/HRC/51/6).
The Taliban have rolled back women’s and girls’
right to education, women’s right to work and women’s
freedom of movement and assembly. Rates of genderbased violence are skyrocketing. Independent media,
and particularly female journalists, have been censored.
The Islamic State-Khorasan Province has perpetuated
horrific attacks on the Hazara community, including
the recent attack on an educational centre in Kabul,
which killed more than 50 people, most of them girls.
Here at the United Nations, we recall that the Charter
of the United Nations affirms the faith of all peoples of
the United Nations “in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal
rights of men and women”. Those are universal rights
to which all States Members of the United Nations are
supposed to subscribe. If the Taliban hope to be seen
as legitimate and for Afghanistan to resume its rightful
place in the international community, they must allow
women and girls to resume their rightful place in
Afghan society.
The United States has provided more than
$1.1 billion in total humanitarian assistance in
Afghanistan since the Taliban takeover more than one
year ago, in August 2021. The United States urges other
members of the international community to generously
support Afghanistan’s humanitarian needs and maintain
support for the Afghan people. For the effective delivery
8/30

10/11/2022

of humanitarian assistance, we reiterate the importance
of full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access for
all humanitarian personnel, including women. We have
also supported the establishment of a mechanism to
enable $3.5 billion of Afghan Central Bank assets to be
used for the benefit of the people of Afghanistan, while
keeping those funds out of the hands of the Taliban and
other malign actors.
With the help of Swiss and Afghan partners, the
Afghan Fund was incorporated as a Swiss foundation
to protect, preserve and, on a targeted basis, disburse
$3.5 billion for the benefit of the Afghan people. Those
disbursements are intended to help address the acute
effects of Afghanistan’s economic and humanitarian
crises by supporting Afghanistan’s macroeconomic and
financial stability.
We would also like to thank Germany for its
work in producing a balanced draft resolution
(A/77/L.11) that covers a broad range of issues at
play in Afghanistan — from human rights to counterterrorism to humanitarian assistance and more. We
encourage all States Members of the United Nations to
support the draft resolution. Let me simply conclude by
reaffirming the United States commitment to the future
of Afghanistan and the future of its people.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (A/77/340), and
I thank the delegation of the Federal Republic of
Germany for having led the negotiation process on
the draft resolution under consideration in the General
Assembly (A/77/L.11)
My country’s delegation associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Cooperation Council
for the Arab States of the Gulf.
Since the beginning of its constructive engagement
in Afghanistan, the State of Qatar’s objectives and
priorities have always been clear and specific. They
represent the implemented goals and terms of reference
of our foreign policy based on preventive diplomacy,
mediation and resolving regional and international
disputes through dialogue and negotiations while
helping the Afghan people to achieve freedom, peace
and development, in addition to bolstering regional
and international security and stability. To that end,
the State of Qatar has deployed tireless diplomatic and
22-68323

10/11/2022

A/77/PV.33

political efforts over many years in order to facilitate
negotiations between the warring parties locally
and internationally so as to put an end to the war in
Afghanistan. Our efforts led to a common declaration
between the United States and Taliban in February 2020
to achieve peace in Afghanistan. That was welcomed
by the Security Council.

of women, girls and children in Afghanistan. Our
goal will always be the same, namely, a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan. We call upon all actors to
cooperate together, with strong and honest political
determination, so that Afghanistan will not remain a
deplorable example of the failure of the international
community and humankind.

In addition, we have made continuous efforts to
facilitate and promote channels of communication
among international partners and the de facto Afghan
Government in order to promote peace, protect civilians
and deliver humanitarian and development aid while
protecting and promoting the political, economic and
social rights of the Afghan people, including the rights
of children, women and girls.

Mr. Ravindra (India): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this plenary meeting. I
would also like to express our appreciation to Germany
for its role in facilitating the draft resolution (A/77/L.11)
on Afghanistan.

The State of Qatar facilitated one of the largest
evacuation operations in modern history by evacuating
80,000 people at high risk, including Afghans and
foreigners, and provided them with support in Doha,
including by providing shelters and health care. In March,
the State of Qatar organized a pledging conference for
humanitarian response in Afghanistan, in cooperation
with the United Nations and international partners, to
alleviate the suffering of Afghans. The State of Qatar
pledged to provide $25 million to the Afghan people as
part of Afghanistan humanitarian response plan.
In addition to the deployed efforts to bring about
peace, undertake mediation and deliver humanitarian
aid, the State of Qatar made peacebuilding and
development one of its priorities in Afghanistan in
the post-war phase, in particular the issue of women
and girls. During last two years, the Education Above
all Foundation in the State of Qatar, the Institute of
International Education, which is based in the United
States, and the Qatar Fund for Development launched
an initiative to assist 250 Afghan students, half of them
women, by providing grants though the State of Qatar
Grant Project for Afghan Refugees in order to enable
them to continue their education.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reiterates its firm
commitment to working alongside the United Nations,
in particular the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We commend UNAMA’s
vital role in that regard. We also commend regional and
international partners in supporting Afghan brothers,
regardless of their stratus and race, as part of our efforts
to bring about peace, security, stability, development
and the promotion of human rights, including those

As a contiguous neighbour of Afghanistan, with
strong historical and cultural links, our approach
to Afghanistan, as always, will be guided by our
historical friendship and our special relationship with
the people of Afghanistan. As a neighbour and longstanding partner of Afghanistan, India has direct
stakes in ensuring the return of peace and stability to
the country. The elements in draft resolution A/77/L.11
set forth common concerns as well as the priorities and
asks of the international community.
India’s main priorities in Afghanistan include
providing immediate humanitarian assistance for
the Afghan people, the formation of a truly inclusive
and representative Government, combating terrorism
and drug trafficking and preserving the rights of
women, children and minorities. Those benchmarks
were also set forth by resolution 2593 (2021), which
guides the international community’s approach
towards Afghanistan.
India is deeply concerned about the unfolding
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. In response to
the humanitarian needs of the Afghan people, as well
as the urgent appeals made by the United Nations,
India has dispatched several shipments of humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan in recent months. Those
include 40,000 metric tons of wheat and about 50
tons of medical aid, consisting of essential life-saving
medicines, anti-tuberculosis medications, 500,000
doses of coronavirus disease vaccine, medical/surgical
items and 28 tons of disaster-relief aid.
Those aid consignments were delivered to the
Indira Gandhi Children’s Hospital in Kabul, the Afghan
Red Crescent Society and United Nations specialized
agencies, including the World Food Programme and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
In order to closely monitor and coordinate the efforts

22-683239/30

A/77/PV.33

of various stakeholders for the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance, and in continuation of our
engagement with the Afghan people, an Indian technical
team has also been deployed to our Embassy in Kabul.
India is closely monitoring the security situation
in Afghanistan and is actively engaged with the
international community on issues related to
Afghanistan. In the recent past, terrorist attacks have
targeted public spaces, such as places of worship and
educational institutes, and especially of minorities.
That is a concerning trend, and India strongly condemns
the targeting of innocent civilians. The attack at the
diplomatic premises of the Russian Federation is
highly condemnable.
The collective approach of the international
community is articulated in resolution 2593 (2021),
which unequivocally demands that the territory of
Afghanistan not be used for sheltering, training,
planning or financing terrorist acts, especially
terrorist individuals and entities proscribed by the
Security Council, including Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and
Jaish-e-Mohammed. India notes the useful role played
by the Security Council Monitoring Team and it expects
them to continue to monitor and report on all terrorist
groups that might use Afghanistan as a base to target
other countries.
Linked to the issue of terrorism is the menace of
drug trafficking. We recently seized big shipments
of drugs at our ports and in the high seas off our
coasts. It is important to strengthen international
cooperation in order to disrupt and dismantle those
trafficking networks.
On the political front, India continues to call for an
inclusive dispensation in Afghanistan that represents all
segments of Afghan society. A broad-based, inclusive
and representative formation is necessary for long-term
peace and stability in the country.
Peace and security in Afghanistan are critical
imperatives that all of us need to collectively strive
for. India will continue to play its role in pursuit of
that objective. The interests of the Afghan people will
continue to be at the heart of our efforts in Afghanistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): Since the change
of power in Afghanistan last year and the formation
of the interim Taliban Government, the country has
been experiencing the deepest socioeconomic and
humanitarian crisis in its recent history. Unfortunately,
10/30

10/11/2022

against the backdrop of other current international
challenges, efforts to resolve the Afghan issue have
begun to fade into the background. But we must
not allow the mistakes of the past to be repeated by
abandoning Afghanistan to its own problems. Today
the Afghan people need the help of the international
community more than ever. Any further isolation
of the de facto Afghan authorities will inevitably
lead to increased radicalization in the country and
its transformation into a platform or safe haven for
international terrorist organizations.
However, we do have to admit that the new
Government of Afghanistan is not fully meeting
the demands of the international community with
regard to forming an inclusive Government, ensuring
fundamental human rights, including those of women
and national minorities, and cutting ties with various
terrorist groups. At the same time, we have also seen
the Taliban take some encouraging steps, including in
fighting drug trafficking and drug addiction, allowing
girls in northern provinces to attend school and
receive an education, restoring women to jobs in State
institutions and resuming paying the salaries of civil
servants. Against that backdrop, we believe that the
new authorities in Afghanistan need some time to fulfil
their international obligations. Efforts to exert pressure
and make threats should be things of the past. Only then
will we be able to achieve real headway in Afghanistan.
In the past year, Uzbekistan has been taking
coherent steps to ensure that the Afghan issue remains
one of the international community’s top priorities.
At the recent Astana summit of the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, Uzbekistan’s President Shavkat Mirziyoyev put
forward an important initiative to form a high-level
international negotiating group to prepare and agree on
with the Afghan authorities an algorithm for the phased
fulfilment of the parties’ obligations. That initiative
would not only help to bring the positions of various
countries closer to that of the new Afghan authorities
but would be conducive to addressing the current dire
socioeconomic situation in the country.
The group could also conduct ongoing direct
negotiations with the Taliban movement to develop
a detailed road map on the interim Government of
Afghanistan’s fulfilment of the major international
demands and obligations — first, forming an inclusive
Government with the participation of all ethnic groups
and religious confessions of Afghanistan; secondly,
22-68323

10/11/2022

ensuring fundamental human rights, especially those
of women and national minorities, and providing all
Afghan girls with access to a full school education;
thirdly, preventing Afghan territory from once again
being transformed into a springboard for international
terrorists; and fourthly, cutting all ties with the various
terrorist groups in the country’s territory, first and
foremost Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant.
Mr. Mohamedou (Mauritania), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
We believe that those concrete steps by the Taliban
would not only improve the international community’s
attitude to the de facto Government but would also be
conducive to the unfreezing of the country’s foreign
assets, the gradual removal of the Taliban movement’s
leadership from the Security Council’s sanctions
list, a resumption of financial assistance from donor
countries and increased international efforts to provide
humanitarian and other aid to the Afghan people under
the auspices of the United Nations.
Maintaining active discussions with the current
authorities in Kabul on issues pertaining to the
implementation in Afghanistan of various infrastructure
projects — first and foremost in the areas of transport,
logistics and energy — should be among the key goals
of the proposed group. Special attention should also be
given to increasing Afghanistan’s active involvement
in regional integration processes of an economic
nature. Through the negotiating group’s activities we
could achieve the practical implementation of regional
connectivity in which Afghanistan would be an
important bridge connecting Central and South Asia.
The proposed group could include United Nations
Member States, as well as international organizations
that are not indifferent to the fate of the long-suffering
Afghan people.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Uzbekistan supports today’s draft resolution on
Afghanistan (A/77/L.11) because we believe that the
international community should continue its support
for the Afghan people to build a stable, resilient,
prosperous and secure State.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to the General Assembly’s consideration
of the situation in Afghanistan. We have consistently
advocated for the Assembly’s adoption of a genuinely

A/77/PV.33

consensus resolution, whose text would reflect both
the current realities and a consolidated approach on the
part of the international community to the quest for an
effective long-term settlement of the Afghan question.
Unfortunately the working process on the document
has been demonstrably the complete opposite of that
for years now.
We see our Western colleagues making persistent
efforts to impose their own interpretation of what is
happening in the country on the entire international
community in order to carefully gloss over the
consequences of their 20-year war and the irresponsible
flight of foreign troops at the end of August 2021. The
hypocrisy in their shifting of all the blame for the
failure of their military campaign and for the continuing
deteriorating situation onto the new authorities is
blatant. Against that backdrop, Afghanistan’s ongoing
socioeconomic and humanitarian problems, as well as
the concerns of the States in the region, have simply
been ignored.
We have repeatedly emphasized that the members
of the General Assembly would be quite capable of
achieving consensus on a resolution on Afghanistan. For
that to happen, the process itself has to be objective and
take into account a wide range of positions. However,
in practice our Western colleagues have continued to
show no interest in doing honest work, preferring to
indulge in games and manipulation behind the scenes.
This time, for instance, they outright demanded,
including by putting pressure on the informal
penholders, that anything interfering with what they
consider to be the correct perception of the current
situation in the country and its causes be removed from
the text. It is therefore no surprise that any references to
investigations of the Western coalition’s war crimes in
Afghanistan — which the International Criminal Court
was hastily forced to deprioritize following threats by
the United States — were subsequently removed from
the final document.
The West would like everyone to forget the
irresponsible actions of the United States and NATO
military forces, which regularly carried out random air
strikes on ordinary Afghans, not to mention night raids
and extrajudicial killings of civilians, including women
and children. Incidentally, the British Broadcasting
Corporation did yet another report on that just the other
day. Unfortunately, despite the reports that various
independent non-governmental organizations have
issued about horrific war crimes, with a view to seeing

22-6832311/30

A/77/PV.33

justice done and holding the perpetrators to account,
no investigations have been done, owing to crude
blackmail on the part of Washington. However, such
cynicism is nothing new. It is typical of the attitude of the
United States and its allies to the war crimes they have
committed in other crisis areas, including Iraq, Syria
and Libya. Against that backdrop, it seems hypocritical
of our Western colleagues to limit the discussion
of human rights violations to those of the de facto
authorities in Afghanistan. Our Western colleagues
also found unacceptable those passages pertaining to
weapons abandoned by the United States and NATO
in Afghanistan following the hasty withdrawal of their
troops. And yet those delegations did not even try to
give a reasonable explanation of their position on the
points they considered problematic.
Amid the deteriorating humanitarian and economic
situation in Afghanistan, the quest for a speedy solution
to the protracted issue of the frozen Afghan assets that
the country needs for its economic recovery and further
development has been pretty much ignored. We have
noted the lack of willingness among Western donors
to seriously discuss the matter without trying to use
this financial issue as leverage for putting pressure on
the de facto authorities. At the same time, it is obvious
that the fate of ordinary Afghans, who are without the
most basic means of subsistence, is bottom of the list of
those countries’ concerns. We are disappointed by the
obvious unwillingness of our Western colleagues even
to mention the role of regional organizations such as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation or to consider the proposals of
States of the region for assisting Afghanistan with its
socioeconomic recovery and further development.
It is deeply regrettable that thanks to a preconceived
position benefiting a particular group of countries and a
clear disregard for proposals supported by the States of
the region, the document was ultimately an unbalanced
one. In the circumstances we feel compelled to call for
putting draft resolution A/77/L.11 to a vote.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
despite the situation regarding the draft resolution,
we continue to support Afghanistan and its people in
this important period for them, and our vote should
be interpreted only as disapproval of the actions and
working methods of the informal penholders on the file.
12/30

10/11/2022

Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan and Afghanistan
are inextricably bound together by bonds of culture,
faith, ethnicity and common geography. For the past
40 years, the people of Afghanistan have endured
prolonged suffering from foreign interventions,
civil war and terrorism. As Afghanistan’s immediate
neighbour, Pakistan has a vital stake in peace and
stability there — in an Afghanistan that is at peace
with itself, its neighbours and the wider international
community; an Afghanistan that respects and nurtures
all its citizens, irrespective of gender, ethnicity or
religion; an Afghanistan that is free of terrorism; and a
prosperous Afghanistan that is well integrated into the
international community.
One year after the withdrawal of foreign
troops and the assumption of power by the Taliban
Government, the first priority remains the prevention
of a humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan. Ninety-five per
cent of Afghanistan’s people live in extreme poverty,
and another winter is coming. To prevent another
humanitarian crisis, the international community must
respond positively to the Secretary-General’s call for
$4.2 billion in humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.
Despite our own calamity from an epic flood disaster,
this year Pakistan has kept open the land, air and sea
corridors to and from Afghanistan to provide such
support as we can to our Afghan brothers and sisters.
Even 40 years on, Pakistan continues to host and
support more than 3 million Afghan refugees.
Secondly, it is essential to revive the Afghan
economy, especially the banking system, without which
commerce and investment have been frozen. The urgent
issue of releasing Afghanistan’s national reserves held
abroad is crucial to the revival of the banking system
and the promotion of normal business activity. A rapid
resumption of reconstruction in Afghanistan and the
implementation of shovel-ready regional connectivity
and infrastructure projects with Central Asia, as well
as the extension of the China-Pakistan economic
corridor to Afghanistan, would contribute immensely
to development and peace in Afghanistan and the
adjacent regions.
Thirdly, it will be critical to avoid actions that could
ignite another internal conflict within Afghanistan.
Regardless of ideological considerations, the world
must welcome the fact that after 40 years, a single
authority controls the entire territory of Afghanistan
and there is no credible challenge to that authority.
It is essential to ensure that no spoilers, within or
22-68323

10/11/2022

outside Afghanistan, are able to foment instability,
insurgency or terrorism in Afghanistan. We must
check the role of spoilers, especially the one from our
region that wants to aid and abet terrorism against
Pakistan from Afghan soil, and the terrorist network
it has established must be dismantled in Afghanistan
and the region. It is in the vital interests of the entire
international community to effectively end the threat
of terrorism — within Afghanistan or emanating from
it — posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the LevantKhorasan or Da’esh, the Tehrik-i-Taliban, the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement, the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan and other terrorist groups. We must develop
a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy. And to
do that, engagement with the de facto Government
is essential.
Pakistan will support counter-terrorism efforts
while respecting Afghanistan’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Pakistan fully shares the
international community’s desire to ensure the full
protection of human rights, especially women’s rights,
and greater political, social and gender inclusion. Those
objectives are more likely to be achieved through greater
and more sustained engagement with Afghanistan and
its de facto Government. It is worth repeating that what
could not be realized through force cannot be achieved
through isolation, sanctions or financial coercion. A
coercive approach could lead to renewed violence and
conflict, strengthen terrorist groups and generate a new
flow of Afghan refugees that none of Afghanistan’s
neighbours are in a position to accommodate.
With regard to human rights and girls’ education,
Pakistan, along with other Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) countries, remains engaged, through
conversations between the Taliban and the delegations
of Islamic scholars and ulemas, in addressing questions
of sharia and its interpretation, particularly with a view
to facilitating education prospects for Afghan women
and girls. It is important that we continue to build on
those initiatives with patience and perseverance. As
regards political inclusion, the efforts by the de facto
Afghan Government to encourage the return of former
Afghan officials and the announcement of a general
amnesty must be welcomed and built on to promote
greater inclusivity in the governance of Afghanistan.
We should also welcome the announcement by the de
facto Government of a ban on poppy cultivation. If the
ban is to be successful, the international community

A/77/PV.33

should support efforts to promote alternative crops that
can support the livelihoods of Afghan farmers.
We trust that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will maintain its close
engagement and build a relationship of mutual trust with
the de facto Government of Afghanistan. We welcome
the appointment of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva. We hope
that UNAMA’s composition will become aligned with
the new realities in Afghanistan.
Finally, the international community must build
a realistic and pragmatic path towards normalization
in Afghanistan, one that addresses the concerns of
the world community — human rights, inclusion and
terrorism — while also accommodating the legitimate
expectations of the de facto Afghan Government.
Pakistan will continue its endeavour to that end
within the format of Afghanistan’s six immediate
neighbours plus Russia within the OIC and with other
friendly countries.
Mr. Razali (Malaysia): The situation in
Afghanistan is of grave concern to Malaysia. The
precarious security environment, the curtailing of
civil liberties and the dire humanitarian scenario are
intensifying the hardships faced by the Afghan people.
The food insecurity and malnutrition crisis and the
combination of severe drought and natural disasters are
further exacerbating their plight.
In his report (A/77/340), the Secretary-General
highlights that approximately 24.4 million people, or
59 per cent of the estimated population of Afghanistan,
are in need of humanitarian assistance this year, up
from 18.4 million people at the beginning of 2021. The
international community must work hand in hand to
alleviate the suffering of the people of Afghanistan,
especially those impacted by disaster and food
insecurity. In response to the earthquake and floods that
struck Afghanistan earlier this year, the Government
of Malaysia recently made a contribution of $200,000
through the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. That contribution is in addition to the one
made during the virtual high-level ministerial meeting
on the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan held on
13 September 2021, as well as through the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation humanitarian trust fund for
Afghanistan, established in December 2021.
In addition, a number of Malaysian non-governmental
organizations continue to engage with relevant parties
and actively extended humanitarian assistance to the

22-6832313/30

A/77/PV.33

Afghan people, including through humanitarian relief
missions and the operation of health and preschool
facilities. Malaysia expresses its appreciation to the
leadership and staff members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
unstinting assistance to the Government and the people
of Afghanistan, and we echo the Secretary-General’s
appeal for funding support to the humanitarian
response plan to meet the $2.59 billion shortfall in
order to enable the provision of a life-saving response
to Afghans in need.
Malaysia remains committed to an Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled peace and
national reconciliation process. That process must be
inclusive and uphold human rights and fundamental
freedoms, which include the full and meaningful
participation of women, young people and persons
belonging to ethnic, religious and other minority
groups. In that regard, Malaysia is concerned about
the infringement of the rights of women and girls in
Afghanistan, particularly the continued deprivation
of secondary and tertiary education for girls. All
impediments to the full enjoyment of that fundamental
right must be promptly removed.
Malaysia is also deeply concerned about the
persistent attacks against ethnic, religious and other
minority groups in Afghanistan, in particular by
terrorist groups. We condemn in the strongest terms
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and
we deplore the spate of attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure, including educational facilities
and religious sites, as well as diplomatic premises and
personnel. The perpetrators of such heinous acts must
be held accountable.
Malaysia
notes
with
appreciation
the
recommendations contained in the most recent report
by UNAMA on human rights in Afghanistan, published
in June, and calls for their careful consideration
and prompt implementation, including by the
international community.
Decades of conflict on Afghan soil have resulted
in contamination by remnants of war, in particular
explosive ordnance. Those, coupled with the
significant threat from improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), continue to pose serious harm to civilians
and humanitarian personnel, with disproportionate
impacts on children. Every now and then, civilians
are either killed or maimed due to the detonation of
14/30

10/11/2022

unexploded ordnance or IEDs. Malaysia commends
the work of the United Nations Mine Action Service in
clearing contaminated land in Afghanistan in the face
of challenging circumstances, and we call for support
in eradicating the harm posed by remnants of war
and IEDs.
There is also a need to undertake concrete measures
to address the narcotics problem in Afghanistan given
the strong linkages to criminal activities and terrorism.
We note the ban on the cultivation of opium poppies
and all narcotics, decreed by the Taliban Government
in April, as well as the engagement with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on alternative
livelihood programmes for farmers.
While the peace and national reconciliation process
must emanate from within Afghanistan, the support
of the international community is a requisite towards
creating favourable conditions in that regard. Regional
cooperation plays an important role in the creation
of such conditions in Afghanistan, and it should be
recognized. Malaysia wishes to acknowledge the efforts
and contribution of the various regional organizations
and arrangements vis-à-vis Afghanistan.
With regard to draft resolution A/77/L.11, which is
before us this morning, Malaysia takes this opportunity
to thank the Permanent Mission of Germany for
facilitating the negotiations of the draft text. We
understand that the draft resolution that has been
introduced represents a delicate balance of the different
views of delegations. While there is a desire for more
ambitious language on humanitarian assistance,
socioeconomic development and regional cooperation,
we understand that not all delegations shared that view
during the negotiations. Nevertheless, Malaysia will
support the draft resolution.
Malaysia reaffirms its readiness to collaborate with
third countries to provide humanitarian assistance,
human capital development and financial assistance to
the people of Afghanistan, including through various
non-governmental organizations.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): The issue of Afghanistan represents one
of the most serious challenges for the international
community. It is a country ravaged by a humanitarian
situation, a collapsed economy, frequent terrorist
incidents and a severe human rights crisis.
22-68323

10/11/2022

The Secretary-General’s reports leave no doubt
about the decline in women’s and girls’ rights in
Afghanistan, as well as the exclusion of minorities and
other ethnic groups from key Government positions,
which is regrettable for a people as diverse as the
Afghan people. The fundamental right to education, as
well as the provisions of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, must be fully implemented as a necessary
element in securing Afghanistan’s future.
Mexico firmly believes in dialogue as the only way
to support the Afghan people. However, it is frustrating
to reiterate calls for the honouring and fulfilment of
promises without concrete results. We reiterate that
there should be a substantial shift towards a system
of participation and inclusive governance, as well as
a legal framework that ensures access to justice and
complies with Afghanistan’s international obligations.
Faced with the increasing levels of food
insecurity, unrestricted humanitarian access without
discrimination is needed. Economic recovery is
fundamental to a stable Afghanistan, and, given the
current crisis, there is an urgent need to create jobs,
with half of the Afghan labour force unable to work.
The exclusion of women means that, regardless
of the support that the international community
can provide, the institutional barrier is so great that
lasting results cannot be achieved. Given the severe
humanitarian needs, Afghanistan cannot do without
the contribution of women. Sustainable peace requires
the full, equal and meaningful participation of Afghan
women in the peacemaking and reconstruction
processes of the country. In that regard, Mexico also
condemns acts of abuse and reprisals against women
human rights defenders, civil society activists, health
workers and humanitarian personnel.
The fight against the scourge of terrorism in
Afghanistan must remain a priority. The attacks that
have taken place over the past year have killed and
injured unacceptably large numbers of people, and
several of them targeted minorities. We reiterate
that Afghan territory must never again be used as a
headquarters for terrorist activities.
Mexico recognizes the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the agencies,
funds and programmes on the ground. In that regard, we
would like to highlight the Mission’s important work in
combating the traffic in small arms and light weapons
in accordance with its mandate. We therefore welcome

A/77/PV.33

the fact that the draft resolution before the General
Assembly (A/77/L.11) incorporates the issue of arms
trafficking, and we hope that the regional dimension
of arms trafficking will be considered as well. We also
recognize the work that is being done by Afghanistan’s
neighbours and urge them to continue working together
with a view to stabilizing the country.
Ms. Dhanutirto (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Germany
for introducing draft resolution A/77/L.11, on the
situation in Afghanistan. Indonesia believes that at this
pivotal juncture it is important to value accommodation
over confrontation, move the process forward and
overcome stagnation. My delegation therefore affirms
Indonesia’s long-standing commitment to supporting
Afghanistan in restoring peace and paving the way
for well-being and prosperity. We are convinced that
only an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
can resolve the decades of conflict. The process should
lead to a comprehensive agreement that focuses on the
interests of the Afghan people, including its women
and girls, in order to overcome the crisis and guarantee
long-lasting peace, development and stability in
Afghanistan. Against that backdrop, Indonesia would
like to emphasize the following points.
First, the full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation of Afghan women in all walks of life
is crucial to overcoming the crisis and building a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan. In March
2022, Indonesia signed a letter of intent with Qatar on
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan,
with special attention to access to education for all,
including women and girls. Through that partnership,
we aim to provide more scholarships and capacitybuilding programmes at a grass-roots level to ensure the
protection and promotion of human rights, especially
the right to education and freedom of movement. Prior
to that initiative, in 2020 we also fostered women’s
empowerment by establishing the AfghanistanIndonesia Women’s Solidarity Network, which serves as
a platform for Afghan women to increase their capacity
for involvement and participation in the peace process.
Secondly, acknowledging and understanding
the dynamics and interplay between religion and
the multifaceted conflicts in the country will
contribute to a more sustainable future engagement
and peacebuilding process. As the world’s largest
Muslim-populated country, with a diverse cultural
background, Indonesia believes in the implementation

22-6832315/30

A/77/PV.33

of Islam ramadan mil al-amin, which means “blessing
of the universe”. In that regard, we continue to foster
dialogue between ulemas in Indonesia and Afghanistan
through conferences and meetings so as to further
facilitate exchanges of views on practicing Islam
in order to bring about a better understanding of the
teachings of moderation, tolerance and mutual respect.
Together with Qatar, Indonesia recently conducted
a meeting between ulemas from Indonesia, Qatar
and Afghanistan in Doha and also participated in the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s ulema visit to
Kabul. During both meetings, in which an Indonesian
woman ulema also participated, we emphasized how
access to education for women and girls, in harmony
with Islamic values, contributes to nurturing peace.
Lastly, Indonesia continues to call on the de facto
authorities to fulfil their promises and commitments.
Despite the ongoing efforts, we have yet to see
significant developments in Afghanistan. We remain
concerned about the increasing security challenges
with regard to the full withdrawal of foreign troops
and the significant increase in terrorist attacks aimed
at the civilian population. In addition, the deteriorating
situation in the country calls for immediate
humanitarian mitigation. A road map with action plans
to realize those commitments is essential to measuring
progress and follow-ups, and the de facto authorities
should showcase it. That is imperative for ensuring
safety in Afghanistan and stability in the region.
In conclusion, the united support of the
international community remains vital to safeguarding
the peace process, ensuring the unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance and delivering genuine relief
to the Afghan people. The draft resolution reflects
our continued collective support for an inclusive
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process with
a view to building a more stable, prosperous and
democratic country.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Over the past four decades, the General Assembly
has addressed the situation in Afghanistan with a
focus on peace, stability, good governance, human
rights and development. This year, the Assembly will
consider its first draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan (A/77/L.11) since the foreign forces’
irresponsible withdrawal and the takeover by the
Taliban. Today’s debate comes at a critical time in the
ongoing situation in Afghanistan, which is dealing with
a number of interconnected and overlapping crises. The
16/30

10/11/2022

humanitarian situation is particularly dire. Millions
of people are living in poverty. Food insecurity is
growing worse, and we are seeing continuing violations
of human rights, particularly of women and girls,
who are still denied access to education. Meanwhile,
the de facto authorities have yet to fulfil their
international obligations.
The current situation in Afghanistan serves as a
reminder that intervening militarily in other countries
on a pretext of combating terrorism while claiming
to bring democracy, peace and prosperity not only
degrades those shared values but also harms those States
and their peoples. This catastrophic situation demands
the recognition of their responsibility and obligations
by the foreign forces that illegally invaded and occupied
Afghanistan under the guise of fighting terrorism and left
nothing but devastation in their wake. Today my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution in order to send
a strong message that all members will stand firmly in
unity with the people of Afghanistan in their efforts to
build a peaceful, prosperous and self-resilient country.
The future of Afghanistan is principally contingent
on restoration of the country’s Constitution and a
strong commitment to it. An inclusive Government
based on an established Constitution is the only way
to ensure and protect the rights of all Afghan people,
including women and girls, as well as linguistic, racial,
and religious minorities. In a multi-ethnic and diverse
society such as that of Afghanistan, no single group,
party or faction can claim to hold power by itself
alone. The Taliban must be mindful of the international
community’s repeated calls for the formation of a
Government that accurately reflects Afghanistan’s
multi-ethnic society. The formation of an inclusive
Government based on an established Constitution is
a critical component for international recognition.
The international community must uphold its
support for Afghanistan, particularly in terms of
providing the humanitarian and development assistance
that has been critical to the response to the immediate
needs of the Afghan people, and of maintaining basic
services and reviving the economy. In this regard,
restoring the banking and financial systems and enabling
access to frozen assets belonging to the Afghans and
the Afghan Central Bank for the benefit of the Afghan
people are crucial and represent a sustained and longterm solution to addressing the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan. We emphasize that those assets must enjoy
immunity and be safeguarded from domestic judicial
processes and the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction.
22-68323

10/11/2022

It is also regrettable that — again due to the
objection of some Western countries — the draft
resolution fails to refer to the role of foreign military
intervention and the irresponsible withdrawal of
foreign forces from Afghanistan in creating such a
dire situation in Afghanistan. Moreover, we strongly
emphasize the necessity of investigating allegations
of war crimes committed by foreign forces, and
completing investigations previously undertaken and
now deprioritized owing to bias and political pressure.
Afghanistan’s security situation remains a
source of concern, since attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including educational
centres and diplomatic premises, are on the rise. We
strongly condemn all such attacks, most of which are
perpetrated by terrorist groups, particularly Da’esh,
elements of which are still coming from Syria and
Iraq to Afghanistan. Terrorism has had a devastating
impact on Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries.
We share the strong determination of the international
community not to allow Afghanistan’s territory to be a
safe haven for Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant or other international terrorist groups and
their affiliates, or that it be used by them to threaten
or attack any country. We highlight the international
community’s ongoing demand that the Taliban commit
to fighting terrorism.
Equally critical, addressing the serious threat
caused by illicit opium cultivation and drug production
and trafficking must be a priority. Iran is directly
affected by this menace and pays a high price for it.
Over the past 40 years, Iran has played an active role
in combating drug trafficking in the region, in which,
nearly 4,000 members of Iran’s law-enforcement forces
have been martyred and over 12,000 others have been
injured. We stress the importance of the narcotics
ban on the cultivation, production, trafficking and
consumption of illicit drugs and express our concern
with regard to the fact that the amount of illicit opium
cultivation, as well as drug production, has been
rising at an alarming rate since the Taliban took over
of the country. Iran also highlights the importance
of a comprehensive approach in addressing the drug
problem in Afghanistan, which includes agricultural
and rural-development programmes for the creation of
improved alternative licit livelihoods for farmers.
We believe that this important annual resolution
could also benefit from highlighting the vital role of
regional organizations in promoting the long-term

A/77/PV.33

stability of Afghanistan. We would like to highlight the
Foreign Ministers’ Meeting among the Neighbouring
Countries of Afghanistan, which has developed a
great deal of expertise and proved its great value on
critical issues for Afghanistan. Regional cooperation
and regional connectedness are key and effective
means of improving the situation in Afghanistan and
bringing about peace, security, stability and economic
development in the country and the region.
In close coordination with Afghanistan’s neighbours
and other relevant parties, and while fully respecting
Afghanistan’s territorial integrity, unity and political
independence, the Islamic Republic of Iran will continue
its endeavours to assist the people of Afghanistan in
restoring peace and stability and in paving the way
towards well-being and prosperity for all Afghans,
Mr. Fifield (Australia): First of all, Australia thanks
the Secretary-General for his report on the situation
in Afghanistan (A/77/340), but I am compelled to say
that Australia is extremely concerned by the report’s
findings of escalating abuses of women’s and girls’
human rights. The growing humanitarian demands
and ongoing problems with security also highlight the
significant challenges facing the people of Afghanistan.
We
are
particularly
concerned
by
the
disproportionate and methodical targeting of the
Hazara community. The senseless attacks on places of
worship, schools and public spaces are abhorrent, and
we call for those responsible to be held accountable and
for those responsible to be brought to justice.
We renew our call on the Taliban to respect the
rights of all Afghans and ensure the protection of ethnic
and religious minorities. The Taliban have spurned
the opportunity for reform and instead have chosen
to systematically roll back hard-won gains in human
rights, including by taking away the rights of women
and girls. They have doubled down on repression and
non-inclusion and have been negligent in providing the
most basic services to the people of Afghanistan.
The gravity of the situation cannot be overstated.
Effective humanitarian support is contingent upon
unimpeded access to affected populations. Ensuring the
safety and freedom of movement of all humanitarian
staff, especially women, is essential.
On security, the international community has been
clear in its expectation that the Taliban not support the
presence of any terrorist group in Afghanistan nor that

22-6832317/30

A/77/PV.33

10/11/2022

it allow Afghan territory to be used to threaten or attack
any country. Afghanistan continues to remain the only
country in the world to deny girls their full right to
education. This is unacceptable. Once again, we urge
the Taliban to stand by its commitments to the Afghan
people and immediately end the exclusion of girls from
secondary education and set a firm date for the opening
of secondary schools to all children. We call on the
Taliban to respect the rights of Afghan women and girls
by removing restrictions on their movement and right
to access employment.

international community. The brave men and women
serving in Afghanistan under the United Nations
have provided unprecedented levels of humanitarian
assistance, including more than $2 billion through the
United Nations Humanitarian Response Plan, which has
helped to sustain Afghan citizens facing food insecurity
during the winter months and beyond. They are now
preparing for the upcoming winter. In 2022, Canada
contributed to those efforts by allocating more than
$140 million in humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan
and its neighbouring countries.

Australia strongly supports the draft resolution on
the situation in Afghanistan (A/77/L.11), and we join
with the international community in reiterating our
commitment to the people of Afghanistan. Australia is
staying the path, no matter how long the journey. We are
steadfast in our determination to support and speak up
for the people of Afghanistan.

(spoke in English)

Mr. Rae (Canada) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by congratulating the Government of Germany
on the remarkable job it has done in giving us a text that
reflects, I think, the opinion and feelings of the entire
General Assembly. I also think it is important that we
make a great effort to support the draft resolution before
us today (A/77/L.11).
We are meeting here today as representatives of the
States Members of the United Nations to discuss the
truly tragic situation in Afghanistan. Fifteen months
have passed since the fall of Kabul, which completed
the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan. For many of us,
regrettably, I must say that our worst fears have been
realized. Millions of Afghans are facing acute hunger. In
much of the country, girls are not allowed to go to school.
Some women are not allowed to work and are forced to
stay at home. Women are not allowed to participate in the
country’s once vibrant economic and social life. Terrorist
groups have proliferated throughout the country, while
journalists, human rights defenders, minority groups,
women, former Government officials and members of the
defence and security forces and many others live in fear
of violence, arbitrary detention or worse. Several of my
colleagues have spoken about the plight of the Hazara
community, and we are seeing the extent to which the
lives of several groups have become almost impossible
due to the attitude of the Taliban Government.
In those incredibly difficult circumstances, the
United Nations and its agencies have been the main
point of contact between the Afghan people and the
18/30

Yet here we are again. Winter is approaching and
the Taliban is not meeting the needs of the Afghan
people. While all of us can and must do more to support
the Afghan people — and Canada will continue its
humanitarian support to them — it must be said that
our ability to do so is restricted by the policies of the
Taliban. How can an economy grow to its potential when
half of its population faces restrictions in the workforce?
How can the health and education needs of a society be
met if girls are not allowed to go to school? How can
sustainable peace be achieved without inclusive and
representative governance and media freedom? I note
the comments of the Ambassador of Iran on that very
subject. How can we trust the Taliban as they continue
to ignore their commitments by engaging with terrorist
groups that we know are now active in Afghanistan and
beyond, as well as by terrorizing their own people?
We have responded. The Security Council provided
a clear and united message on the demands of the Taliban.
We responded through the continued engagement of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), led at the time by a Canadian, Deborah
Lyons. It is now led by Roza Otunbayeva of Kyrgyzstan,
with whom I have had the opportunity to discuss those
issues. We also have the advantage of the appointment
of a Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Afghanistan, Richard Bennett, who reported
to the General Assembly last month on the situation of
human rights in Afghanistan. I commend that document
(A/HRC/51/6) to the Assembly for reading. It is a very
compelling and accurate report about what is happening
in the country. Mr. Bennett shared the serious concerns
he has found with respect to girls’ education; child,
early and forced marriage; violence against women and
children; the right to work; reprisal killings; arbitrary
detentions and the persecution of ethnic and religious
minorities. It is all there in Mr. Bennett’s report. He had
22-68323

10/11/2022

the opportunity not only to interview the Government
but to travel all over the country and see for himself
exactly what was going on.
Not surprisingly, the desire to leave Afghanistan
has never been greater, and with the cooperation
of close partners, including Qatar, the United Arab
Emirates, Türkiye and Pakistan, Canada has been able
to fulfil its commitment to resettling 40,000 Afghan
refugees, with nearly 23,000 Afghans welcomed so far.
We are grateful for that support. At the same time, in
my role as Chair of the Group of Friends of Afghanistan
here in New York, we have been meeting both with the
leadership of UNAMA on a regular basis and with the
voices of Afghan civil society, who convey very clearly
the difficulties of life under the Taliban, particularly
for women and girls. In recent weeks we have heard
calls to action from those brave leaders, talking to us
directly about recognizing the continued discrimination
against women by the Taliban as what they call
“gender apartheid” or “gender persecution”. Canada is
committed to fighting that systematic discrimination
against women and continuing to work for change.
It is essential that the Assembly deliver a united
message. It is essential that the people of Afghanistan
know that they have not been abandoned; that our
commitment to defending fundamental human rights
and freedoms, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, remains strong; and that the suffering
of Afghan women, children and minority groups is
simply not acceptable to any of us, as States Members
of the United Nations united under the Charter. They
must know that even as the Taliban seek to limit media
freedoms, the international community is well aware
of the violations being committed. There is no place
to hide. There is no place to pretend that this is not
happening. There is no way that in the societies in
which we live we can pretend we do not know what
is going on. We must seek to hold the perpetrators
accountable. In that respect, I want to be clear that
Canada, in congratulating Germany on an outstanding
job at a difficult time, will certainly support draft
resolution A/77/L.11. I call on all Member States here
today to do so as well and not to use the suffering of the
Afghan people to advance their own political agendas.
Sometimes when we spend the morning listening
to a debate, we get a chance to hear what people have
to say. Like many members, I had the opportunity to
listen to the comments of my colleague the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation. He indicated that Russia will

A/77/PV.33

not support the draft resolution because there were
elements that were absent from the document, and he
did not feel that it perfectly reflected the views of his
Government with respect to what should be in such a
draft resolution.
Well, sometimes it helps to have a draft resolution
in front of us so we can actually read it. When the
representative of Russia said, for example, that there was
no reference in the document to regional cooperation,
that is not true. It is in the document. When he said
that there was no reference to the fact that Afghanistan
has been the subject of intervention by both the Russian
Federation — he did not mention that intervention, but
I am mentioning it now — and by Western countries
after the attack on the twin towers in New York City,
he said that there was no mention of accountability, but
in fact there is a very clear indication of the need for
investigation and for looking not only at current human
rights abuses but past abuses as well.
He then complained that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) had dropped the investigation
into the behaviour of American and other troops in
Afghanistan. Well, Russia declined to sign the Rome
Statute. Russia is not a party to the Rome Treaty. If
Russia were really worried about crimes against
humanity and about the investigatory capacity of the
ICC, then presumably it is now going to sign it. He said
there was no mention in the report of the ICC dropping
its investigation. I can therefore only assume that the
Russian Federation is going to join the Rome Treaty,
which I welcome. As Chair of the New York Working
Group and Vice-President of the Assembly of States
Parties, we would welcome Russia’s participation, as
we would the participation of the Government of Iran,
whose representative also mentioned the fact that the
ICC is not doing its job in Afghanistan.
When one looks at the document, it actually
provides a very comprehensive overview of what it is
that we need to do, of the nature of the challenges that
are being faced and of how we all have an obligation to
work together at a time when a message of solidarity
with the women and the men of Afghanistan is
critically important. There is an entire section on
regional cooperation.
Everyone recognizes that the tragedy of
Afghanistan is that there is such an opportunity for
Afghanistan to be a profitable, prosperous and engaged
community — educated, globally oriented and a

22-6832319/30

A/77/PV.33

regional leader — with the participation of partners in
Central Asia — Iran, Pakistan and India — to create
that dream. This is possible. What is holding it back? I
do not think an objective observer could say that what
is holding it back is the fact that it has been the subject
of such difficult violence over the past 20 or 30 years,
alone. I would say that this is a factor, but it cannot be
the only factor.
The one thing that the representative from Russia
did not mention in this document, the one thing he did
not mention in his speech is that of the 193 countries that
are Members of the United Nations, only the provisional
Government of Afghanistan has decided that girls will
not be allowed to go to school and that women will not
be given the opportunity to work outside the home,
unless accompanied by somebody going in and out and
all of their other requirements. In particular, I would
say as a non-Muslim, no other Muslim country — that I
have heard — considers that to be a legitimate practice
of Islam. The representative of Iran talked very clearly
just before me at this rostrum. Representatives from
Pakistan, Malaysia and from all over the world all agree.
This is not some religious requirement. It is a political
doctrine that places women several hundred years back
in time and refuses to allow women to participate fully
in the life of their country. To say to a 12-year-old girl,
“Your brother can go to school, but you cannot go to
school” is not acceptable. How can we accept that? How
can we, as the General Assembly, say that this is not
a bad thing. The Russian Federation would not stand
for it. The women of the Russian Federation would not
stand for it for one second.
I think we have an obligation, not just a choice,
but an obligation to support this draft resolution. I
would recommend that anyone who has doubts as
a result of what they have been told was either in or
not in the document to read it. They have nothing to
lose by reading the document and then deciding for
themselves whether this is some Western invention or
some expression of imperialism. The equal rights of
women is not an invention of any one country. It does
not come from any one part of the world. The equality
of women and the openness to the world is a decision
that is made by every single country in this place when
they join the Organization. When a country signs up
for the Charter of the United Nations, that is what it is
signing up for. That is what the United Nations does.
And whether those United Nations officials are coming
from China or Egypt or Estonia or any of the countries
20/30

10/11/2022

that are here today, they are not doing so in the name
of Western imperialism. They are doing it in the name
of humanity. And in the name of humanity, which we
share, we cannot turn our backs on the women and on
all the people of Afghanistan.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): Poland aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
European Union.
As one of the co-sponsors of draft resolution A/77/L.11, Poland encourages all Member States to
vote in favour of it. We thank and congratulate Germany for its successful facilitation.
Over 14 months after the violent rise to power by the
Taliban, it is evident that the de facto Afghan authorities
have failed to meet most of their commitments
with regard to sharing power with Afghan religious
and ethnic minorities, protecting human rights and
preventing Afghanistan from becoming a safe haven for
international terrorist groups. The lack of international
recognition of the de facto Government is a clear
indication that the international community is not
willing to resume diplomatic relations with a regime
that is not representative of the whole population of
Afghanistan and does not respect basic human rights.
Poland is particularly concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation and the reluctance of the
Taliban regime to render the political system more
inclusive. We are also worried about continuing
human rights restrictions and violations, including the
institutionalized and systematic oppression of Afghan
women. According to alarming reports by human
rights mechanisms and civil society organizations, the
human rights situation in Afghanistan is marked by a
staggering extent of violations and abuses. Millions
of Afghans need humanitarian assistance and are
affected by global food insecurity. Among them,
women and children — as is usually the case — are
disproportionately affected.
The systemic and systematic oppression of Afghan
women is a cause for great concern. All aspects of
women’s and girls’ lives are systematically deteriorating.
Infringements on their freedom of movement and the
curtailment of their political and economic rights are
compounded by growing discrimination and violence.
But it is hard to add to what my colleague just said from
this rostrum a moment ago.
22-68323

10/11/2022

Poland is especially concerned with the ban on
secondary schooling for Afghan girls. Blocking access
to education is not only a blatant violation of the human
rights of the affected individuals, but also a far-reaching
detriment to Afghan society as a whole. Poland is
an active founding member of the Group of Friends
of Women in Afghanistan, established in 2019 at the
initiative of the United Kingdom and Qatar. Together
with our fellow members, we are fully committed to
the same cause. We use this informal Group to generate
political momentum and further promote the full, equal
and meaningful enjoyment of human rights by Afghan
women and girls.
For all those reasons, during the fifty-first session of
the Human Rights Council, Poland and the other member
States of the European Union facilitated a resolution
on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, which
the Council adopted on 7 October 2022 (A/HRC/51/20).
The aim of the resolution was, inter alia, to renew the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Afghanistan and to strengthen it,
including with regard to the protection of children’s
human rights. The resolution firmly reiterated the
call for an immediate end to all violations and abuses
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law in Afghanistan.
It should be emphasized that the lack of
rapprochement between Afghanistan and the
international community is holding back the process of
restoring much-needed economic and trade relations,
as well as international development assistance. That
in turn translates into missed opportunities in terms
of enhancing regional connectivity and trade links
in Central and South Asia, strengthening food and
energy security, boosting economic growth, creating
jobs and securing the livelihoods that the Afghan
population deserves.
As far as international engagement in Afghanistan is
concerned, the United Nations has a critical role to play.
Poland reaffirms its strong support for United Nations
leadership in the peace, humanitarian, development
and human rights efforts in Afghanistan. We also
welcome the appointment of Ms. Roza Otunbayeva as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We commend
UNAMA’s uninterrupted presence on the ground and
all of its efforts focused on the implementation of its
political, humanitarian and human rights mandate. We

A/77/PV.33

express our appreciation to all United Nations personnel
in Afghanistan for their unwavering commitment in
extremely challenging conditions.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
My country thanks the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation in Afghanistan (A/77/340) and followup on the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The report examines the increase in humanitarian needs
that has resulted from the country’s severe economic
decline and a devastating combination of several
factors — decades of conflict, prolonged vulnerability
and recent earthquakes and recurring natural hazards
affecting some 24 million people, or 59 per cent of the
estimated population.
Human rights violations against women and girls
have been steadily increasing. Despite the fact that
the de facto authorities initially promised that women
would be able to exercise their rights, including the
right to work and study, they have systematically
excluded women and girls from public life. Chile
notes with deep concern that just over a year after the
Taliban’s takeover of de facto control of Afghanistan,
on 15 August 2021, severe restrictions continue to be
imposed on the fundamental rights and freedoms of
Afghan women and girls, including a ban on secondary
education, making Afghanistan the only country that
denies girls the full right to education.
According to the report published by UNAMA on
20 July on the human rights situation in Afghanistan,
covering the first 10 months after the Taliban took
power in 2021, it is clear that Afghan women and
girls continue to be particularly affected by the
disparate implementation of the directives issued by
the de facto authorities. Together, those decrees have
created a restrictive environment for women and
girls in every aspect of life. Restrictions on women’s
movement and bodies continue to worsen. In May, the
Taliban decreed that women must cover their faces
in public and instructed them to stay at home unless
absolutely necessary. Women were banned from
traveling long distances without a male chaperone,
and unaccompanied women are increasingly denied
access to essential services. In general, the informal
surveillance of women by families, communities and
employers, who often act that way out of fear of the
possible consequences of not adhering to the genderspecific guidelines, has increased. In addition, the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights

22-6832321/30

A/77/PV.33

noted in his September report (A/HRC/51/6) that
children’s rights organizations in Afghanistan have
reported a sharp increase in child marriage owing to
the worsening economic and humanitarian crisis and
the lack of educational and professional opportunities
for women and girls.
Chile thanks Germany for its leadership as
the facilitator of draft resolution A/77/L.11, on the
situation in Afghanistan, and shares the repugnance
and indignation at the damage that the measures I
have described do to the population in general, and
especially women and girls. Decades of progress in
gender equality and women’s rights vanished in just a
few months. I would like to cite a conversation between
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Afghanistan and a woman in Kabul, as documented
in his report, which gives an account of the hopelessness
of millions of women in Afghanistan. She told him that
“Afghan women know what it means to be resilient and strong, we have endured pain and hardship for years during the conflict, we have buried
our sons and daughters, but the pain and fear we
feel today for ourselves and our daughters’ futures,
while feeling forgotten by the international community, is a pain much worse.” (A/HRC/51/6, para. 21)
Afghan women and girls must know that they are
not alone and that the international community has
not forgotten them. We have a continuing obligation
and responsibility to defend their rights and amplify
their voices.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, the United Arab Emirates
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Gulf
Cooperation Council.
I thank the delegation of the Federal Republic of
Germany for facilitating the negotiations on the draft
resolution entitled “The situation in Afghanistan”
(A/77/L.11).
More than a year after the Taliban took power in
Kabul, the situation in Afghanistan is still a source
of concern, especially with regard to the people’s
increasing humanitarian needs and the country’s
economic regression, with continued discrimination
against women and girls, who are being deprived of
their right to participate fully, meaningfully and equally
in society. There is further concern about the continued
22/30

10/11/2022

threats from terrorist groups in Afghanistan, which are
affecting security and stability in the country and the
region as a whole. The international community must
continue its efforts to prevent Afghanistan from turning
into a safe haven for terrorists. The de facto authorities
should engage in serious and meaningful dialogue with
the international community to combat terrorism and
establish security in Afghanistan. The United Arab
Emirates underscores the importance of making every
effort to establishing security in Afghanistan and
helping it to achieve stability and development so that
it can meet the hopes and ambitions of the friendly
Afghan people. Realistically and practically speaking,
the channels of communication with the de facto
authorities must be kept open if tangible results are to
be achieved.
My country supports the calls of the international
community on the de facto Afghan authorities, including
through the draft resolution under consideration today,
to relinquish the policies and practices restricting the
rights of Afghan women and girls. We emphasize that
such restrictions run counter to all religious precepts,
humanitarian values and principles. The issue of
women’s participation and girls’ access to education
is not an option but rather a necessity for achieving
development and prosperity in Afghanistan. The
United Nations Development Programme has noted
that the Afghan economy lost nearly $5 billion in a
single year, and it will be difficult to recover that loss
if women are not allowed to effectively contribute to
their community and girls are not granted their right to
education. We emphasize the important role played by
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in that regard.
Issues pertaining to women’s rights in Afghanistan
will not be addressed without taking into account the
cultural and religious contexts in the country.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates the importance
of uniting international efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance and launch education initiatives to build a
more stable and prosperous future for the Afghan people.
In line with our historical role supporting international
efforts in Afghanistan and the Afghan people, we
recently signed a memorandum of understanding
with the International Committee of the Red Cross to
provide assistance amounting to $4 million to cover
the operational and administrative costs of hospitals
in Afghanistan. We have also provided more than
$1.7 billion to facilitate air bridges providing food and
medical assistance to the Afghan people, especially
22-68323

10/11/2022

women and children. And the United Arab Emirates
has played an essential role in the evacuation of nearly
50,000 Afghans and foreign nationals since August
of last year. We will continue collaborating with our
regional partners and the international community to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
Afghan people.
I would like to mention that the dire humanitarian
crisis demands that the Afghan economy be reinvigorated
by taking measures to increase the country’s liquidity
and facilitate its financial transactions and banking
services. That can be done in collaboration with
international financing institutions and the relevant
stakeholders to alleviate the constraints imposed on
Afghanistan and take the necessary measures to support
the financial sector. We are all aware that humanitarian
assistance is not a sustainable solution and that
revitalizing various sectors of the Afghan economy
will help to reduce the people’s humanitarian needs.
Since its current membership in the Security
Council began, the United Arab Emirates has worked
with all the other Council members to encourage the
international community to respond to the serious
challenges facing Afghanistan and ensure a practical
and constructive approach to that end. We therefore
look forward to finding ways to support the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
headed by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, including by upholding its strong mandate
during the upcoming Security Council negotiations
next March. That is a vital issue, as UNAMA plays an
active role on the ground. International efforts must
also be coordinated to improve the situation of the
Afghan people.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its commitment to supporting the Afghan people and
to participating constructively in the Security Council
and the General Assembly, or through regional and
international arrangements, to improve the situation
in Afghanistan.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier on behalf of the European Union.
Let me start by expressing our appreciation to
Germany for submitting draft resolution A/77/L.11.
It is a balanced text, and it sends a clear message of
support to the Afghan people. Since the last time we
discussed this resolution in this forum, two years ago

A/77/PV.33

(see A/75/PV.40), the situation in Afghanistan has
obviously changed dramatically. The human rights
situation, particularly for women and girls, has further
deteriorated, as we heard clearly from the Special
Rapporteur two weeks ago. Media outlets are being shut
down, tremendously limiting access to information.
The economy has shrunk, and millions of people are
facing hunger this winter again. And while security
incidents have decreased, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and Al-Qaida are very much present
in Afghanistan today. The de facto authorities are not
taking the necessary steps that will enable them to be
recognized as a responsible Government by either the
Afghan people or the international community. We see
disappointingly little progress on important issues,
such as girls’ right to education. Let me be clear. The
plethora of challenges in Afghanistan cannot be solved
without an inclusive Government that represents all
Afghan people.
History has shown us that isolating Afghanistan is
not an option. Instability in Afghanistan will spill over
in our interconnected world. It is key to ensure that we
keep Afghanistan on our minds and on our agendas. It is
key that we continue to talk with people in Afghanistan
on how best to support them. And it is key to continue
to put pressure on the de facto authorities to do better,
much better. Sustainable and lasting peace requires full
respect for civil, political, economic and cultural rights,
as well as a commitment to inclusive and representative
governance. The Netherlands is therefore proud to be a
sponsor of today’s draft resolution, and we encourage
all Member States to vote in favour of it.
Mr. Aldehani (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our deep thanks
and appreciation to the President for convening this
important meeting under agenda item 34, entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan”, against a backdrop of rapidly
evolving developments in Afghanistan.
My delegation also associates itself with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the countries
of the Gulf Cooperation Council.
I would like to highlight some of the efforts made
by the State of Kuwait on the political side and the
negotiation track among the relevant parties, and at the
relief and logistical levels with regard to evacuation
processes. Given the enormity of the humanitarian
crisis, since 4 August 2021 my country has engaged

22-6832323/30

A/77/PV.33

over many weeks with a number of others to evacuate
nearly 15,000 people of 32 different nationalities
through our territory in order to facilitate the safe
passage of all individuals and ensure their arrival at
their final destinations.
On the relief front, and in line with our firm
commitment to supporting humanitarian action and
contributing to peacebuilding and communal security,
the State of Kuwait has provided humanitarian assistance
to the friendly Afghan people amounting to more than
$92 million in total, most recently in March at a highlevel pledging conference to support the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan, where we pledged $10 million
as Kuwait’s official contribution. We have contributed
an additional $5 million through the various specialized
United Nations agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. I would also like to
mention the basic relief assistance that various charity
institutions and associations in the State of Kuwait have
been providing, based on their belief in the importance
of supporting the Afghan people and in meeting their
basic needs. Kuwait will continue collaborating and
working closely with international relief organizations,
especially given the approaching winter season and its
impact on the humanitarian and food-security situations
in Afghanistan.
With regard to the political track and the negotiation
process, the State of Kuwait, through its participation
in various regional and international meetings, has
emphasized the importance of meeting the basic needs
of the Afghan people and implementing development
programmes that have a direct impact on Afghanistan’s
stability and comprehensive security.
In conclusion, I would once again like to thank the
President for convening this meeting. We reaffirm the
commitment of the State of Kuwait to continue working
with various regional and international humanitarian
actors and participating in relevant regional and
international meetings and sessions.
Mr. Tamaura (Japan): Allow me to begin by
expressing our gratitude for convening today’s debate at
this critical juncture for Afghanistan. We would also like
to thank the delegation of Germany for its leading role
in facilitating the consultations on the draft resolution.
Japan is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution A/77/L.11. We believe the draft resolution comprehensively covers all aspects of the challenges that
Afghanistan faces.
24/30

10/11/2022

Although we take note of certain developments
since the Taliban’s takeover in August last year, namely
security, anti-corruption measures and humanitarian
access, the Taliban are far from fulfilling the commitments they made to the Afghan people. There is much
work to be done, including building an inclusive political system, while listening to the voices of all Afghan
people, respecting the rights of all Afghans, including
women, children and minorities, and completely cutting ties with terrorism.
Addressing those issues will benefit the Taliban
themselves and is the best way to gain the trust of
the international community and secure the resources
and assistance necessary to rebuild the country. We
have been repeatedly emphasizing that point in our
engagement with the Taliban.
Japan has been standing by the Afghan people.
Since the Taliban takeover in August 2021, Japan has
provided support for humanitarian and basic human
needs in Afghanistan and neighbouring countries
totalling $200 million.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
continued commitment to Afghanistan, particularly
when Japan will be taking a seat as an elected member
of the Security Council starting from January. We will
do our utmost to support the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in its work
towards peace and stability in the country.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union.
We want to thank Germany for draft resolution A/77/L.11 and its constructive facilitation of the
text. As a member of the core group, Ireland actively
participated in the negotiations. The adoption by consensus of the draft resolution would reflect a significant
recognition of the importance of speaking with one
voice to the people of Afghanistan and to the Taliban.
Ireland remains deeply concerned about the
situation in Afghanistan. The violence, abuse,
subjugation and hunger suffered by millions of Afghans,
greatly exacerbated by the Taliban’s seizure of power,
should trouble every member of the Assembly. Today’s
edicts banning women from Kabul’s public parks and
funfairs are but the most recent devastating example of
the Taliban’s disdain for Afghan women.
22-68323

10/11/2022

The draft resolution reflects that deep concern
about the human rights situation in Afghanistan,
particularly those of women and girls and minorities.
It further reiterates our collective commitment to
the importance of inclusive, representative and
participatory Government — one that includes the
full, equal, meaningful and safe participation of
Afghan women.
As winter approaches, the need to respond to
Afghanistan’s growing humanitarian crisis is all the
more urgent. Sustained support from the international
community remains vital, including, as the draft
resolution recognizes, critical humanitarian assistance
and basic needs.
As a member of the Security Council, Ireland has
been steadfast in its support to the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
United Nations country team in Afghanistan. Their work
in support of the Afghan people, against the Taliban’s
growing repression, is more critical than ever. So, too,
is the important work of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Afghanistan, shedding
light on the horrors being visited on the Afghan people.
In conclusion, today’s draft resolution is an
important articulation of our responsibility as the
international community to the Afghan people — our
responsibility to call out human rights abuses and
violations and insist on the upholding of the inalienable
rights of the Afghan people.
As we call on all members of the General Assembly
to uphold that responsibility, we must also call on the
Taliban to be accountable and to take responsibility for
the suffering and challenges facing the Afghan people
since the takeover by force of the country.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Slovenia aligns itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and would like to add a few points in its
national capacity.
First, allow me to thank the German team for its
efforts in facilitating the process leading to the text
of draft resolution A/77/L.11. That has particular
significance this year, reflecting the change in
circumstances on the ground. I would also like to
express Slovenia’s strong support for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). It is
important for UNAMA to maintain an active presence
in the country and for all actors in Afghanistan to

A/77/PV.33

ensure a safe and secure environment for its work, as
mandated by Security Council resolution 2626 (2022),
adopted on 17 March.
Among the issues about which Slovenia remains
extremely concerned are the challenging humanitarian
situation and the hardship that the population of
Afghanistan faces, which is worsened by increasing
restrictions on human rights, especially those of women
and girls. All humanitarian operations need safe and
unhindered access to the entire territory to provide
urgent assistance to all those in need.
The human rights situation in Afghanistan has
worsened dramatically, in particular for women
and girls. We call for the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and girls in public life, their
right to education, work and employment, access
to health care and services, as well as their right to
movement, expression and assembly.
In the past year, Slovenia has contributed almost
a half a million euros for the humanitarian needs of
the Afghan people, through a number of international
partners and United Nations funds and agencies,
including the United Nations Population Fund, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the World Food Programme and the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
Slovenia has maintained a continuous presence in
Afghanistan since 2014 through ITF Enhancing Human
Security, a humanitarian non-profit organization
established by the Government of the Republic of
Slovenia. That organization has since carried out
various projects, predominately in the field of mine
action, and despite complex circumstances on the
ground, has remained present in Afghanistan, including
after August 2021.
Slovenia is also an active donor in the field of
victim assistance and in the health sector, through
direct support to the Mine Detection Centre Polyclinic
in Kabul. The services of that clinic are free of charge
and encompass the full spectrum of services ranging
from physical health to psychosocial counselling for all
segments of the Afghan population. In October, with
the support of other donor countries, ITF Enhancing
Human Security began to implement a second victims
assistance project aimed at providing emergency mobile
physical rehabilitation and psychosocial support across
the Kabul, Kandahar and Nimroz provinces.

22-6832325/30

A/77/PV.33

In conclusion, we are convinced that the adoption
of the draft resolution will provide an updated political,
humanitarian and development framework for future
dialogue with and on Afghanistan so as to address the
needs of the Afghan people.
Mr. Croker (United Kingdom): The magnitude of
the challenges the Afghan people face requires a resolute
and unified response by the international community.
More than 28 million people are in humanitarian need,
and approximately 20 million people are acutely food
insecure. If food assistance is not sustained, we risk the
emergence of famine-like conditions.
In recent months, some Member States have
attempted to exploit the crisis to score political points.
They have tried to sow division where unity is required,
while, at the same time, failing to contribute to the
chronically underfunded United Nations humanitarian
response plan.
For its part, in the last financial year, the United
Kingdom disbursed $325 million in humanitarian
and development assistance to Afghanistan, and we
have committed a further $325 million this financial
year. We are the second largest donor to the World
Bank’s Afghanistan Reconstruction Fund, and we are
leading efforts with the World Bank and others on
economic stabilization.
However, Afghanistan’s problems will not be
resolved unless the fundamental building blocks for
stability are put into place. As a first step, this requires
that the Taliban uphold rather than repress human rights.
The economic cost of women’s and girls’ exclusion
from political, economic, educational and social spaces
is stark. The human cost is starker still.
The same is true of ethnic division. Inclusive
governance and protection of minorities is vital for
a stable and prosperous society. Yet we are gravely
concerned at the risk of atrocity crimes, including
against such minorities as the Hazara. The Special
Rapporteur has warned of abuses that show all the
hallmarks of crimes against humanity. These must
be investigated.
And the Taliban must play a direct role in stabilizing
the economy. This includes ensuring transparency
with regard to revenue and the budget as well as
re-establishing an independent Central Bank with the
right expertise.
26/30

10/11/2022

Today’s meeting provides Member States with the
opportunity to stand in solidarity with the Afghan people.
But our solidarity is insufficient. We must continue to
support economic stabilization while standing firm on
holding the Taliban to its commitments, including on
counter-terrorism and the protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Afghanistan is a country that has experienced
vicissitudes and hardships. With the hasty withdrawal
of foreign troops last year, the 20-year-long war in
Afghanistan came to an end in chaos. Now, Afghanistan
has entered a new phase of recovery and healing, and
the country faces the long and arduous task of peaceful
reconstruction. History has once again proved that
military intervention and external models do not work.
The future of Afghanistan must be in the hands of the
Afghan people themselves. All parties should not just
pay lip service to the mantra “Afghan-led and Afghanowned” but should really keep it in mind and put it
into practice.
We should encourage the Afghan authorities
to build a broad and inclusive political structure,
eradicate the breeding ground for terrorism and explore
a governance model consistent with Afghanistan’s
national conditions. This is bound to be a gradual
and endogenously driven progress. The international
community should therefore maintain reasonable
expectations and demonstrate the necessary patience.
Afghanistan faces a severe humanitarian and
economic situation, with more than half of its population
living in hunger and in dire need of humanitarian
assistance, and with women and children bearing the
brunt. As the cold season approaches, the international
community must race against time with immediate
action to help the Afghan people get through the harsh
winter by sending them warmth and hope.
The rights of Afghan women and girls to education
and employment should be guaranteed. We hope that
the Afghan Taliban will make greater efforts to this end
in order to respond to the concerns of the international
community. At the same time, humanitarian aid
should not be politicized, nor should it be tethered to
other issues.
Twenty years of war have ended, but the effects are
still lingering. To this day, tens of millions of landmines
remain buried in Afghanistan, leaving no place safe.
Foreign troops have abandoned large quantities of
22-68323

10/11/2022

weapons and equipment, which have made their way
onto the black market. With regard to the investigation
into and accountability for the crimes committed
by foreign troops in Afghanistan, the Afghan people
are waiting for an answer. Countries that bear the
primary responsibility for the current situation must
earnestly reflect on and rectify their mistakes in a
timely manner. Cutting off development assistance
and imposing political blockades and isolation will not
solve the problem, but will instead intensify the Afghan
people’s plight.
The overseas assets of Afghanistan are the sovereign
property of the country; they are life-saving money for
the Afghan people. The full amount should be returned
to Afghanistan immediately and put at the disposal of
its people themselves to be used for reconstruction and
the improvement of livelihoods. This is the general
wish of the Afghan people, the widespread expectation
of the international community and the embodiment of
fairness and justice.
As a neighbour of Afghanistan, China has always
actively supported the peaceful development of
Afghanistan. In the past year, the Chinese Government
has provided 300 million yuan in emergency aid
to Afghanistan and actively fulfilled its pledge to
provide 1 billion yuan in bilateral aid. We have also
actively expanded economic and trade cooperation
with Afghanistan and imported more than a 1,000 tons
of pine nuts from the country through the pine-nut
air corridor, which helps the Afghan people generate
more income.
Next month, China will exempt tariffs on 98 per cent
of timber products from Afghanistan. This is another
important initiative to help the people of Afghanistan
earn more income. China will continue to work with
the international community to support Afghan
participation in regional cooperation and connectivity
with a view to unleashing their geopolitical advantages
and achieving stability and prosperity at an early date.
The General Assembly is about to take action on
the draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/77/L.11). We always expect the annual General
Assembly resolution to comprehensively and objectively
reflect the situation in Afghanistan, send out a strong
signal of international solidarity and demonstrate
rock-firm international support for Afghanistan in its
efforts to overcome its difficulties, improve people’s
livelihoods and restore development.

A/77/PV.33

Regrettably, the text of the draft resolution is
unbalanced, in particular on such issues as unfreezing
overseas Afghan assets, investigating foreign troops’
crimes committed in Afghanistan and the proliferation
risk associated with weapons that were abandoned in
the country. These issues are real and important. The
General Assembly resolution should not lose sight of
them.
In addition, regional organizations play a unique
role in Afghanistan and have been making positive
contributions to peace and stability there. However,
certain Member States refused to let the draft
resolution make reference to the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and other major regional organizations
involved in Afghanistan. As a result, many important
elements are absent.
It was hoped that the sponsors would take a
balanced approach to the legitimate concerns of all
parties with greater objectivity and impartiality and
abandon their persistently lopsided preference for the
position of certain countries. China will continue to
work with other countries to make more contributions
to peace, stability and development in Afghanistan.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Sovereign Order of Malta.
Mr. Mc Guire (Sovereign Order of Malta): I think
that we would all agree that our educational opportunities have contributed to our being here today. The creativity and innovation that are rapidly shaping our planet
for the better have all been exercised through education
and the remarkable capabilities of humans have all been
nurtured by education. As a Catholic entity, the Sovereign Order of Malta views the acquisition of knowledge
as a lifelong and life-wide enterprise.
Reflective self-directed learning and teaching
provide conditions for teachers and students to
interiorize knowledge. It is therefore no wonder that
Benjamin Franklin famously said that investment in
education pays the best interest, and, as His Eminence
Cardinal Parolin stated during the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly, that investment in
education is one of the most effective ways of making
our world and history more human.
Despite that, the Secretary-General’s report
(A/77/340) solemnly confirms that the ban on secondary education for females makes Afghanistan the only

22-6832327/30

A/77/PV.33

country in the world to deny girls their full right to education. What is more, according to Save the Children,
27 per cent of the Afghan youth are engaged in child
labour instead of learning. Sustainable Development
Goals 4 and 5 are clearly not being fulfilled in the country of Afghanistan. As former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan stated in 2003,
“Study after study has taught us that there is no tool
for development more effective than the education
of girls. If we are to succeed in our efforts to build
a more healthy, peaceful and equitable world, the
classrooms of the world have to be full of girls, as
well as boys. Every year of schooling completed
by them will be a step towards eradicating poverty
and disease”.
The words “fundamental human rights” remain
some of the most commonly used words within these
walls. Why is that? It is because we are all witness
to those fundamental human rights being denied to a
distressingly large number of people across the world.
Save the Children found that 19.7 million children
and adults — almost 50 per cent of the population
of Afghanistan — are going hungry, with 5 million
children being one step away from famine. In addition
to that, 55 per cent of the population continues to live in
poverty. Combating that through our international relief
agency, Malteser International, the Sovereign Order of
Malta continues to provide urgent humanitarian aid to
internally displaced persons in and around Kabul and
supports refugees through its teams in Pakistan, as
urged by the United Nations a year ago.
We have all come to accept that we are now at the
tipping point of whether or not we will achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development; hence the reason
that this day, this week and this year are so important to
the future of our planet and to our people. While some
people may believe that those goals are unattainable,
we still have a choice. That choice is to either succeed
or fail. The current geopolitical landscape, which is
home to more than 100 million forcibly displaced
people, 27 ongoing conflicts, 13,000 nuclear warheads
and 690 million people living in extreme poverty,
desperately needs every nation to fully harness the
themes of the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly: solidarity, sustainability and science. If
we are serious about creating a sustainable future
where no one is left behind, then action-orientated
responses, accountability and global transparency are
all tools that we need to continue to implement across
28/30

10/11/2022

every aspect of the United Nations and within our own
domestic policies.
The Sovereign Order of Malta strongly affirms
its belief in the right to education as one of the most
powerful solutions in creating a sustainable future,
and it is greatly distressed by the findings from within
Afghanistan. With that, I would like to echo the words
of yet another former Secretary-General, Ban Ki-Moon,
when he noted:
“Education is a fundamental right and the basis for
progress in every country. Prosperous countries
depend on skilled and educated workers. The
challenges of conquering poverty, combating
climate change and achieving truly sustainable
development in the coming decades compel us to
work together. With partnership, leadership and
wise investments in education, we can transform
individual lives, national economies and our world.”
The Sovereign Order of Malta commends the steps
taken by the United Nations to implement the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. That truly
is a positive and reliable means of providing insight
into ongoing developments from within. Steps such as
those need to continue to be proposed, encouraged and
implemented by the international community.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of the Russian Federation on a point of order.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In connection with the notable mistakes in the
English interpretation of the final part of our statement,
I must repeat myself. I hope that this statement will be
transmitted correctly.
We deeply regret that, due to the inherently biased
positions that favour certain Western countries and to
the blatant disregard of proposals supported by regional
States, draft resolution A/77/L.11 is unbalanced. I will
also add here that, after the past 20 years, Afghanistan
is in a dire situation, with women unable to work or
study, so they are forced to sell their organs and their
children just to feed their families. Considering this, it
is irresponsible to try to cover up the fact that the West
is responsible for what is happening and to refuse to
consider the real steps that we could take to improve the
situation, in particular by releasing assets.
In that regard, we are compelled to put the draft
resolution to a vote. We stress the fact that, despite the
situation concerning the draft resolution, we continue
22-68323

10/11/2022

A/77/PV.33

to support Afghanistan and its people at such an
important time for them. Our vote should be interpreted
as nothing other than disapproval of the actions and
working methods of the informal co-penholders on
the dossier.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution A/77/L.11, entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”. The draft resolution has now closed for
e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/77/L.11: Andorra, Australia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the
Dominican Republic, Finland, Hungary, Japan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Palau,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,

Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Belarus, Burundi, China, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Ethiopia, Guinea, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Russian Federation, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/77/L.11 was adopted by 116 votes
to none, with 10 abstentions (resolution 77/10).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Costa Rica,
Micronesia (Federated States of) and Tunisia
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
representatives from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan abstained in the
voting on resolution 77/10, on Afghanistan.
We participated actively in the informal
consultations and appreciate that some of our suggestions
were accommodated by Germany and the resolution’s
co-sponsors. We welcome the acknowledgement
of Pakistan’s role in hosting Afghan refugees and
facilitating evacuations from Afghanistan. We also
welcome the recognition of the threats to Afghanistan’s
immediate neighbours, the call on Afghanistan to take
concrete steps against all terrorist organizations, the
caution expressed against attempts to derail peace and
stability in Afghanistan, the need for the sustained
engagement of the international community with
Afghanistan, the importance of regional-connectivity
projects, the acknowledgement of the general amnesty

22-6832329/30

A/77/PV.33

measures and the ban on opium cultivation announced
by Afghanistan. Pakistan welcomes the resolution’s
call for commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan and the need to overcome the
security challenges. We also endorse the expressed
desire to ensure the protection of human rights,
including the rights of women and girls, to promote
inclusive governance and to eliminate terrorism within
and from Afghanistan.
Nevertheless, the resolution remains unbalanced
and, in several respects, unrealistic. It does not
acknowledge that there is a de facto new Government
in Afghanistan. It does not delineate any process to
promote normalization in Afghanistan through a process
of engagement with the de facto Government. There
is no commitment to unfreeze Afghanistan’s national
reserves, and no commitment to help Afghanistan’s
economic recovery beyond humanitarian assistance.
In particular, Pakistan is disappointed that one
delegation was allowed to block references to the

30/30

10/11/2022

specific mention of terrorist organizations, including
the Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan, as well as references to
the role and contributions of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We therefore do not consider this resolution’s
provisions as sufficiently comprehensive or realistic
as a framework for promoting the objectives of peace,
security, development and human rights in Afghanistan.
While acknowledging the efforts of the co-sponsors,
for those reasons my delegation must abstained in the
voting on this resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 34?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

22-68323
