146

General Assembly-Forty•first Session

affecting vast areas of Africa, and to remain prepared to
provide assistance to affected countries at short notice, as
necessary;
17. Supports the establishment of effective earlywarning systems and national, subregional and regional
food security arrangements in developing countries to
combat future food emergencies;
18. Urges Governments to ensure and enhance the
participation of women in the formulation and implementation of national food policies. plans and projects, in view
of the importance accorded to food and the acknowledged
role of women farmers in food production, marketing and
family nutrition and in view of the consensus achieved on
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women;SO
19. Invites the World Food Council within its mandate:
(a) To assess the impact of economic adjustment policies in developing countries on the nutrition levels of lowincome groups and to suggest, where necessary, remedia!
measures in this area, including ways to stimulate the
provision of resources to alleviate the sufferings of these
groups;
(b) To assess the impact of the present agricultura!
trade situation in all its aspects and to maintain an active
interest in the progress and outcome of multilateral negotiations on agricultura! trade issues;
(e) To assist in accelerating the promotion of regional
and subregional food strategies by stimulating vigorous
follow-up action with ali parties concerned in order to implement the recommendations adopted at the regional and
interregional consultations organized by the World Food
Council in 1986;
(el) To stimulate progress in and contribute actively to
the implementation of the food policy and programme
components of the United Nations Programme of Action
for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990, particularly in increasing food production and
reducing hunger, and to assist African Governments in
implementing the mutually agreed food-sector priorities
through concrete and accelerated assistance in support of
food strategies and policies.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/192.

Special programmes of economic assistance

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the special
programmes of economic assistance, 51
Affirming the validity of the concept of special programmes of economic assistance and the need to enhance
their efficiency,
1. Takes note with appreciation ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General;
2. Endorses the recommendation made by the Secretary-General that special programmes of economic assistance should be limited to countries genuinely in need of
such assistance and to special circumstances falling out50 Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade Jor Women: Equality.
Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 Ju/y 1985 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. 1, sect. A, paras. 174-188.
51 A/41/308-E/1986/67.

side the competence of the regular programmes of the
United Nations system;5 2
3. Also endorses the recommendation that the special
programme of economic assistance for a country should
be of limited duration and should be terminated after the
review mission and, where the special circumstances that
gave rise to the special programme of economic assistance
remain, any continuing assistance should then be channelled through the regular programmes of the system; 52
4. Recommends that efforts to transfer the implementation of the special programmes of economic assistance to
other United Nations bodies should be continued, if practicable;
5. Affirms that special programmes of economic assistance should be drawn up in consultation with the recipient Governments concerned and recommends that the
programmes should, as far as possible, be established and
reviewed through the field offices of the United Nations
system.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/193.

Assistance to Solomon lslands

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the devastation in Solomon Islands
caused by cyclone "Namu" from 17 to 19 May 1986,
which resulted in loss of life, destruction of housing and
extensive damage to the economic and social infrastructures and to the agricultura!, stock-farming, transport and
industrial sectors,
Concerned at the negative impact of this damage on the
development efforts of Solomon Islands,
Noting with appreciation the emergency assistance provided by severa! States, international and regional organizations, specialized agencies and voluntary agencies,
Noting the efforts of the people and Government of Solomon Islands to deal with the emergency situation and to
initiate a reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Affirming the need for prompt and concerted international action to assist the people and Government of Solomon Islands in carrying out the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the affected regions and sectors,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States, programmes
and organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental, non-governmental and voluntary organizations that provided assistance to Solomon Islands during
the emergency;
2. Urges ali States to participate generously through
bilateral or multilateral channels in projects and programmes for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Solomon Islands;
3. Requests international organizations, in particular
the relevant organs and bodies of the United Nations system, regional organizations and voluntary agencies to continue and increase their assistance in response to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of
Solomon Islands;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps, in collaboration with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, to mobilize the
financia!, technical and material assistance needed for im-

52 /bid.,

sect. 111.B.
