6S

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2598 (XXIV). Housing, building and planning

resolution 2036 (XX) be replaced by a quinquennial
housing survey of an analytical and comparative
character;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare as
soon as possible, and certainly by 1975, a comprehensive housing survey, in accordance with resolution
2036 (XX), which will place equal emphasis on the
rural and urban sectors of housing, especially considering the needs and problems of the developing
countries and taking into account the results of the
1970 round of population and housing censuses;
3. Urges that, in the preparation of the strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade, due
attention be given to the problems in the field of
housing, building and planning, in view of the increasingly adverse impact that inadequate housing and
community facilities are having upon social and economic development in rural and urban settlements;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session, on
the basis of available material, including data on housing
collected by the International Labour Organisation, a
report ascertaining the problems and priorities confronting Member States in the field of housing, building
and planning, and in particular giving information on
trends in building and financing costs and the need for
low-income housing, rural housing, community facilities
and environmental improvements, together with his
conclusions and recommendations on these matters;
5. Decides to consider the question of housing,
building and planning as a matter of high prioritjo
during its twenty-fifth session.
·

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the continued deterioration of human
settlements and the imperative need of mobilizing
national and international resources for their improvement,
Recognizing further the importance of the housing,
building and planning sector in economic and social
development and the desirability of according it an
appropriate role in the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the report and recommendations of
the Interregional Seminar on Rural Housing and Community Facilities, held at Maracay, Venezuela, from
2 to 19 April 1967, 44 which suggested that greater
attention should be given to rural housing and environmental services in the work undertaken by the Committee on Housing, Building and Planning and the
Centre for Housing, Building and Planning, since this
was one of the greatest problems confronting the developing countries in the housing sector,
Recalling its resolution 2036 (XX) of 7 December
1965 which concerns, in part, the preparation of biennial progress reports on the measures taken by Member
States towards the solution of their housing, building
and planning problems,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1299 (XLIV) of 28 May 1968, in which the
Council suggested certain changes in the reporting requirements specified in General Assembly resolution
2036 (XX),
Taking into consideration the note by the SecretaryGeneral,45
Adhering to the recommendations of the Ad Hoe
Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of
the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies, in
so far as reduction of the volume of documentation
is concerned, as endorsed in General Assembly resolution 2150 (XXI) of 4 November 1966,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1299 (XLIV) and decides that the biennial reporting requirements specified in General Assembly

1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.

2599 (XXIV). Question of the elderly and
the aged
The General Assembly,
Regretting that it has been unable to examine at its
twenty-fourth session the question of the elderly and
the aged owing to the heavy programme of work,
Decides to give priority and adequate consideratiun
to this question at its twenty-fifth session.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December I i)(i()_

44 ST/TAO/SER.C/103.
4 ~ Official Records of the

General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 50, document A/7679.

*

01/,,,r

*

decisions

RPJ10rl1-1 of the Economic and Social Council

(Item 12)
At its 1834th plenary mccling, on 15 December 1969, the General Asscmblv
took note of the decisions nt the Third Committee as set forth in paragraphs 4·1
to 45 of its report. 4 "
411 Ibid., agenda itw1 '2. ducumt•nl A/7 840.
