U.

Resolutions adopted without reference to__a_M_ai_n_C_o_m_m_i_tt_e~e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
tS

tral America: threats to international peace and security
and peace initiatives".
28th plenary meeting
7 October 1987

42/2.

Credentials of representatives to the forty-second
session of the General Assembly
A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee. 4
36th plenary meeting
13 October 1987

B
The General Assembly
Afproves the second report of the Credentials Committee.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/3.

The situation in Kampuchea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/22 of 14 November 1979,
35/6 of 22 October 1980, 36/5 of 21 October 1981, 37/6
of 28 October 1982, 38/3 of 27 October 1983, 39/5 of
30 October 1984, 40/7 of 5 November 1985 and 41/6 of
21 October 1986,
Recalling further the Declaration on Kampuchea 6 and
resolution 1 (1) 7 adopted by the International Conference
on Kampuchea, which offer the negotiating framework for
a comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean
problem,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of General Assembly resolution
41/6, 8
Deploring that foreign armed intervention and occupation continue and that foreign forces have not been withdrawn from Kampuchea, thus causing continuing hostilities in that country and seriously threatening international
peace and security,
Noting the continued and effective struggle waged
against foreign occupation by the Coalition with Samdech Norodom Sihanouk as President of Democratic
Kampuchea,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1987/155 of 29 May 1987 on the right of peoples to selfdetermination and its application to peoples under
colonial or alien domination or foreign occupation,
Greatly disturbed that the continued fighting and instability in Kampuchea have forced an additional large number of Kampucheans to flee to the Thai-Kampuchean border in search of food and safety,
4 A/42/630.

5 A/42/630/ Add. l.
6 Report of the lnternational Conference on Kampuchea.

New York.

13-17 Ju/y 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.1.20),

Recognizing that the assistance extended by the intemational community has continued to reduce the food shortages and health problems of the Kampuchean people,
Emphasizing that it is the inalienable right of the Kampuchean people who have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries to return safely to their homeland,
Emphasizing further that no effective solution to the
humanitarian problems can be achieved without a comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean conflict,
Seriously concerned about reported demographic
changes being imposed in Kampuchea by foreign occupation forces,
Convinced that, to bring about lasting peace in SouthEast Asia and reduce the threat to intemational peace and
security, there is an urgent need for the intemational community to find a comprehensive political solution to the
Kampuchean problem that will provide for the withdrawal of ali foreign forces and ensure respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and neutral
and non-aligned status of Kampuchea, as well as the right
of the Kampuchean people to self-determination free from
outside interference,
Reiterating its conviction that, after the comprehensive
political settlement of the Kampuchean question through
peaceful means, the countries of the South-East Asian region can pursue efforts to establish a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East Asia so as to lessen intemational tensions and to achieve lasting peace in the
reg10n,
Reaffirming the need for ali States to adhere strictly to
the principies ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations, which
call for respect for the national independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of ~11 States, non-intervention and
non-interference in the interna! affairs of States, nonrecourse to the threat or use of force and peaceful settlement of disputes,
l. Reaffirms its resolutions 34/22, 35/6, 36/5, 37 /6,
38/3, 39/5, 40/7 and 41/6 and calls for their full implementation;
2. Reiterates its conviction that the withdrawal of ali
foreign forces from Kampuchea, the restoration and preservation of its independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, the right of the Kampuchean people to determine their own destiny and the commitment by ali States
to non-interference and non-intervention in the interna!
affairs of Kampuchea are the principal components of any
just and lasting resolution of the Kampuchean problem;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Ad Hoc Committee of the International Conference on
Kampuchea on its activities during 1986-19879 and requests that the Committee continue its work, pending the
reconvening of the Conference;
4. Authorizes the Ad Hoc Committee to convene when
necessary and to carry out the tasks entrusted to it in its
mandate;
5. Reaffirms its decision to reconvene the Conference
at an appropriate time, in accordance with Conference
resolution 1 (I);
6. Renews its appeal to ali States of South-East Asia
and others concemed to attend future sessions of the Conference;
7. Requests the Conference to report to the General
Assembly on its future sessions;

annex I.
7 /bid.,

annex 11.

8 A/42/608.

9 A,CONFI09/12

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

16

8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consult with and assist the Conference and the Ad Hoc Committee and to provide them on a regular basis with the
necessary facilities to carry out their functions;
9. Expresses its appreciation once again to the Secretary-General for taking appropriate steps in following the
situation closely and requests him to continue to do so and
to exercise his good offices in order to contribute to a comprehensive political settlement;
10. Expresses its deep appreciation once again to donor
countries, the United Nations and its agencies and other
humanitarian organizations, national and intemational,
that have rendered relief assistance to the Kampuchean
people, and appeals to them to continue to provide emergency assistance to those Kampucheans who are still in
need, especially along the Thai-Kampuchean border and
in the various encampments in Thailand;
11. Reiterates its deep appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts in co-ordinating humanitarian relief
assistance and in monitoring its distribution, and requests
him to intensify such efforts as necessary;
12. Urges the States of South-East Asia, once a comprehensive political solution to the Kampuchean conflict
is achieved, to exert renewed efforts to establish a zone of
peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East Asia;
13. Reiterates the hope that, following a comprehensive political solution, an intergovemmental committee
will be established to consider a programme of assistance
to Kampuchea for the reconstruction of its economy and
for the economic and social development of ali States in
the region;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the ítem entitled "The situation in
Kampuchea".
39th plenary meeting
14 October 1987
42/4.

Co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, 10
Taking into account the desire of both organizations to
co-operate more closely in their common search for solutions to global problems, such as questions relating to intemational peace and security, disarmament, selfdetermination, decolonization, fundamental human rights
and the establishment of a new intemational economic order,
Recal/ing the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations which encourage activities through regional cooperation for the promotion ofthe purposes and principies
of the United Nations,
Noting the strengthening of co-operation between the
specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United
Nations system and the Organization of the Islamic Conference,

10 A/42/388 and Add. l.

Taking note of the encouraging progress made in the five
priority areas of co-operation as well as in the identification of other priority areas for developing trade and technical co-operation among the Islamic countries,
Convinced that the strengthening of co-operation between the United Nations and other organizations of the
United Nations system and the Organization of the Islamic Conference contributes to the promotion ofthe purposes and principies of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 37 /4 of 22 October 1982, 38/4
of 28 October 1983, 39/7 of 8 November 1984, 40/4 of
25 October 1985 and 41/3 of 16 October 1986,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Notes with satisfaction the active participation of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference in the work of the
United Nations towards the realization of the purposes
and principies of the Charter of the United Nations:
3. Requests the United Nations and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference to continue co-operation in
their common search for solutions to global problems,
such as questions relating to intemational peace and
security, disarmament, self-determination, decolonization, fundamental human rights and the establishment of a
new intemational economic order;
4. Encourages the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to continue to expand their co-operation with the Organization of the Islamic Conference, particularly by negotiating cooperation agreements, and invites them to multiply the
contacts and meetings of focal points for co-operation in
priority areas ofinterest to the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen cooperation and co-ordination between the United Nations
and other organizations ofthe United Nations system and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference to serve the
mutual interests of the two organizations in the political,
economic, social and cultural fields;
6. Recommends that the third general meeting between the representatives of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the representatives of the United
Nations and other organizations of the United Nations
system should be organized in 1988 at a time and place to
be determined through consultations;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General in the promotion of co-operation between
the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, and expresses the hope that he will continue
to strengthen the mechanisms of co-operation between the
two organizations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the state of
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference".
40th plenary meeting
15 October 1987
