204

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

Having heard the statements made on the subject of
Western Sahara, including the statement of the representative of the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de
Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, 21
Bearing in mind the profound concern of the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity and the nonaligned countries regarding the decolonization of Western Sahara and the right of the people of that Territory
to self-determination,
Recalling its resolution 33/27 of 1 December 1978 on
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
Taking note of the decision of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its sixteenth ordinary session, held at Monrovia
from 17 to 20 July 1979, 22 by which the Assembly
adopted the recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee
of the Organization of African Unity on the question of
Western Sahara,
Also taking note of the peace agreement concluded at
Algiers on 10 August 1979 between Mauritania and the
Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra
y de Rio de Oro 28 and the decision of Mauritania to
withdraw its forces from Western Sahara,2 4
Aware of the profound concern of the United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity and the non-a1igned
countries at the aggravation of the situation prevailing
in Western Sahara because of the continuation and extension of the occupation of that Territory,
Recalling the part of the Political Declaration adopted
by the Sixth Conference of Heads of States or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from
3 to 9 September 1979, relating to Western Sahara, 25
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Western Sahara to self-determination and independence,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the charter of the Organization of African Unity and the
objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure the enjoyment of that right, as envisaged in the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the decision concerning Western Sahara taken by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its sixteenth ordinary session;22
3. Also takes note with satisfaction of the part of the
Political Declaration adopted by the Sixth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries relating to Western Sahara;
4. Welcomes the peace agreement concluded between Mauritania and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rfo de Oro and considers
that this agreement constitutes an important contribution
to the process of achieving peace and a definitive, just
and lasting settlement of the question of Western Sahara;
5. Deeply deplores the aggravation of the situation
resulting from the continued occupation of Western
21 lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras. 50-59, and 15th meeting, paras. 3-17; and ibid.,
Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum. For the full
text, see A/C.4/34/L.4.
22 A/34/552, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.114 (XVI).
28 A/34/427-S/13503, annex I. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1979.
2' See A/34/427-S/13503, annex II. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1979.
28 See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, paras. 96-98.

Sahara by Morocco and the extension of that occupation
to the territory recently evacuated by Mauritania;
6. Urges Morocco to join in the peace process and
to terminate the occupation of the Territory of Western
Sahara;
7. Recommends to that end that the Frente Popular
para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro,
the representative of the people of Western Sahara,
should participate fully in any search for a just, lasting
and definitive political solution of the question of Western Sahara, in accordance with the resolutions and
declarations of the United Nations, the Organization of
Afri,an {Jrntv and the non-aligned countries;
8. R. quests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara as a priority question and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
9. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to keep the Secretary-General of the United Nations informed of the
progress achieved with regard to the implementation of
the decisions of the Organization of African Unity concerning Western Sahara;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to follow closely
the situation in Western Sahara and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
0

34/38.

Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 26
Recalling its resolutions 3432 (XXX) of 8 December
1975, 31/50 of 1 December 1976, 32/32 of 28 November 1977 and 33/36 of 13 December 1978,
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland 21 and Guatemala, 28
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of Belize, 29
Taking note of the part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, relating to Belize, in particular the statement that the Conference reiterated its
unconditional support for the Belizean people's inalienable right to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity and condemned all pressure or threats to
prevent full exercise of that right, 80
26 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.l), chaps. VJ, annex
III, and XXIX.
27 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 19th meeting, paras. 2-4; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendum.
2 S Ibid., 22nd meeting, paras. 68-81; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
29 Ibid., 19th meeting, paras. 6-22.
so See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 165.

VII.

Resoludons adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Reaffirming the principles established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, set out in its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, in particular that all peoples have
the right to self-determination, by virtue of which right
they freely determine their political status and freely
pursue their economic, social and cultural development,
Recognizing the special responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to take urgent and necessary steps
to enable the people of Belize to exercise freely and
without fear their right to self-determination and to the
firm and early independence of all of their territory,
Noting with regret the continuing failure of the parties
concerned to settle their differences in a manner which
will not prejudice the right of the people of Belize to
self-determination, independence and territorial integrity
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination, independence and the
preservation of the inviolability and territorial integrity
of Belize;
2. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, acting in close
consultation with the Government of Belize, and the
Government of Guatemala to continue their efforts to
conclude their negotiations without prejudice to the
right of the people of Belize to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity and in furtherance of
the peace and stability of the region and, in this connexion, to consult as appropriate with other specially
interested States in the region;
3. Requests the Governments concerned to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on any
arrangements which have been made to enable the people of Belize to exercise freely and without fear their
right to self-determination and an early and secure
independence;
4. Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain from
exerting any pressure or the use of threats or force
against the Government and people of Belize to prevent
the full exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity;
5. Urges all States to respect the right of the people
of Belize to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity and to render all practical assistance
necessary for the secure and early exercise of that right;
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to remain seized of the question and to
assist the people of Belize in the early exercise of their
inalienable rights.

75 th plenary meeting
21 November 1979

34/39.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having ex~mined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard

205

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,31
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to Guam,
Noting that the administering Power continues to
maintain military installations in the Territory,

Considering that the policy of maintaining military
bases and installations in Non-Self-Governing Territories
which inhibit the right of self-determination of peoples is
incompatible with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power, 32
Welcoming the active participation of the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee and
expressing the hope that this co-operation will be
strengthened further so as to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in July
1979, 33
Noting the observations of the Visiting Mission relating to the results of the constitutional referendum held
in Guam on 4 August 1979,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam,
Mindful that Guam requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement
by its people of the objectives embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of Guam and stressing
the necessity of diversifying the Territory's economy as
a matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence on
fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Guam; 34
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Guam to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people of
Guam, to continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth
in the Declaration with respect to the Territory and to
81 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev. l), chaps. IV and
XXVII.
82 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 22nd meeting, paras. 17-21, and 27th meeting, paras. 64 and 6S.
88 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.l), chap. XXVIl, annex.
84 Ibid., chap. XXVII.
