A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/152
7 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 114 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/632/Add.3)]
48/152.

Situation of human rights in Afghanistan

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1/ and the International Covenants
on Human Rights 2/ and accepted humanitarian rules, as set out in the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949 3/ and the Additional Protocols thereto, of
1977, 4/
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all and resolved to remain vigilant with
regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the obligations
they have freely undertaken under the various international instruments,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/37 of 24 May 1984,
in which the Council requested the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights
to appoint a special rapporteur to examine the situation of human rights in
______________
1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

4/

Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
/...

A/RES/48/152
Page 2

Afghanistan, with a view to formulating proposals that could contribute to
ensuring full protection of the human rights of the inhabitants of the country
before, during and after the withdrawal of all foreign forces,
Recalling also its resolution 47/141 of 18 December 1992 and all its
other relevant resolutions, as well as the resolutions of the Commission on
Human Rights and the decisions of the Economic and Social Council,
Taking note, in particular, of Commission on Human Rights resolution
1993/66 of 10 March 1993, 5/ in which the Commission decided to extend the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Afghanistan for one year and to request him to report to the General Assembly
at its forty-eighth session, and of Economic and Social Council decision
1993/275 of 28 July 1993, in which the Council approved the Commission’s
decision,
Noting that, following the demise of the former Afghan Government, a
transitional Islamic State of Afghanistan was established, 6/
Noting with deep concern that in spite of the efforts and initiatives
taken by the Government of Afghanistan towards ensuring complete peace and
stability, a situation of armed confrontation, affecting mainly the civilian
population, which is still the target of indiscriminate military attacks by
rival groups, continues to exist in parts of the territory of Afghanistan, and
in particular in Kabul, and has also caused a dramatic rise in the number of
persons displaced inside the country,
Concerned that the prevailing situation in the country as regards the
political and legal order is affecting the security of members of all ethnic
and religious groups, including minorities,
Noting with concern reports of violations of rights enshrined in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2/ such as the right to
life, liberty and security of person and to freedom of opinion, expression and
association,
Deeply concerned about the violation of the human rights of women by
warring factions in Afghanistan, and about the lack of respect towards them
and their honour, physical integrity and dignity, as reported by the Special
Rapporteur,
Concerned at reports of detainees who are being held for political
reasons by rival groups, in particular in prisons run by political parties,
among whom are several members of the former Government,
Noting that much remains to be done for the treatment of prisoners to be
in conformity with the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949
and the Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977,
___________
5/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993,
Supplement No. 3 (E/1993/23), chap. II, sect. A.
6/

See A/47/656, annex, appendix I.
/...

A/RES/48/152
Page 3

Deeply concerned that the repatriation of Afghan refugees has
dramatically declined in 1993, owing to the prevailing situation in
Afghanistan, and expressing the hope that conditions in the country will allow
those still in exile to return as soon as possible,
Aware that peace and security in Afghanistan are prerequisites for the
successful repatriation of about four million refugees, in particular the
achievement of a comprehensive political solution and the establishment of a
freely and democratically elected government, the end of armed confrontation
in Kabul and in some provinces, the clearance of the minefields that have been
laid in many parts of the country, the restoration of an effective authority
in the whole country and the reconstruction of the economy,
Affirming that the declaration of general amnesty issued by the Islamic
State of Afghanistan should be applied in a strictly non-discriminatory manner
and that prisoners detained by rival groups without trial on Afghan territory
should be released unconditionally,
Commending the activity carried out by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Committee of the Red
Cross in cooperation with the Afghan authorities, as well as non-governmental
organizations, in favour of the people of Afghanistan,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur 7/
and of the conclusions and recommendations contained therein,
Welcoming the fact that the Special Rapporteur was able to visit the
capital of Afghanistan, Kabul,
1.
Welcomes the cooperation that authorities in Afghanistan have
extended to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Afghanistan, in view of the circumstances prevailing in the country;
2.
Also welcomes the cooperation that the authorities in Afghanistan
have extended, in particular to the Coordinator for Humanitarian and Economic
Assistance Programmes Relating to Afghanistan and to international
organizations, such as the specialized agencies, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Committee of the
Red Cross;
3.
Urges all the Afghan parties to undertake, where appropriate under
the auspices of the United Nations, all possible efforts in order to achieve a
comprehensive political solution, which is the only way to bring about peace
and the full restoration of human rights in Afghanistan, based on the free
exercise of the right to self-determination by the people, including free and
genuine elections, the cessation of armed confrontation and the creation of
conditions that will permit the free return, as soon as possible, of about
four million refugees to their homeland in safety and dignity, whenever they
wish, and the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
Afghans;
_____________
7/

A/48/584, annex.

/...

A/RES/48/152
Page 4

4.
Welcomes all the efforts towards reaching a comprehensive,
peaceful political solution to the conflict in Afghanistan;
5.
Urges all the parties to carry out, as soon as possible, a
disarmament process which constitutes a prerequisite of a solution to the
conflict, as decided also in the Afghan Peace Accord signed by the Afghan
parties at Islamabad on 7 March 1993; 8/
6.
Invites the United Nations to offer, upon the request of the
Government of Afghanistan and with due regard to the Afghan tradition,
advisory services and technical assistance concerning the drafting of a
Constitution, which should embody internationally accepted human rights
principles, and the holding of direct elections;
7.
Recognizes that the promotion and protection of human rights
should be an essential element in the achievement of a comprehensive solution
to the crisis in Afghanistan, and calls upon all the Afghan parties to respect
human rights;
8.
Urges all the Afghan parties to respect accepted humanitarian
rules, as set out in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and the
Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977, to halt the use of weapons against the
civilian population, to protect all civilians from acts of reprisal and
violence, including ill-treatment, torture and summary executions, and to
expedite the simultaneous release of prisoners wherever they may be held;
9.
Strongly urges all Afghan parties to ensure respect for the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of women, so that their honour and dignity
would be ensured in accordance with the provisions of international human
rights instruments and humanitarian law;
10.
Calls upon all States and parties concerned to make all efforts
for the realization of its decision 47/428 of 16 December 1992 entitled
"Prisoners of war and persons missing as a result of war in Afghanistan", and
calls upon them to make all efforts for the immediate release of all prisoners
of war, and in particular of former Soviet prisoners of war, as provided for
under article 118 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of
Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949, 9/ considering that the hostilities in
which the former Soviet Union was involved have legally and effectively ended,
and also in particular for the tracing of the many Afghans still missing as a
result of the war;
11.
Urges the unconditional release of all prisoners detained without
trial on the Afghan territory by rival groups, and calls for the abolition of
prisons run by political parties;
____________
8/

S/25435, annex I.

9/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 972.

/...

A/RES/48/152
Page 5

12.
Calls upon the authorities in Afghanistan to investigate
thoroughly the fate of those persons who have disappeared during the conflict,
to apply amnesty decrees equally to all detainees, to reduce the period during
which prisoners await trial, to treat all prisoners, especially those awaiting
trial or those in custody in juvenile rehabilitation centres, in accordance
with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, 10/ adopted by
the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders, and to apply to all suspected or convicted persons article 14,
paragraphs 3 (d) and 5 to 7, of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights; 2/
13.
Appeals to all Member States to provide adequate humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan to contribute to the alleviation of the suffering of
refugees and especially to the improvement of the living conditions of women
and children;
14.
Urgently appeals to all Member States and humanitarian
organizations to continue to promote the implementation of the projects
envisaged by the Coordinator for Humanitarian and Economic Assistance
Programmes Relating to Afghanistan and the programmes of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, especially the pilot projects for the
repatriation of refugees;
15.
Reiterates its appeal to all Member States, humanitarian
organizations and all parties concerned to cooperate fully on the question of
mine detection and clearance, in order to facilitate the return of refugees
and displaced persons to their homes in safety and dignity;
16.
Strongly urges all the parties to the conflict to undertake all
necessary measures to ensure the safety of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations involved in the implementation of the United Nations
humanitarian and economic assistance programmes relating to Afghanistan and
the programmes of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in order
to avoid further deplorable incidents such as those which have caused loss of
life among that personnel;
17.
Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, once the situation is back to normal and upon the invitation of
the Afghan Government, to study the situation of the Kabul Museum and of the
national archives and to take proper action to preserve the Afghan cultural
heritage;
18.
Recommends the translation of the report of the Special Rapporteur
into the dari and pashtu languages;
19.
Urges the authorities in Afghanistan to continue to extend their
full cooperation to the Commission on Human Rights and its Special Rapporteur;

______________
10/ See Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.88.XIV.1).

A/RES/48/152
Page 6

20. Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to
the Special Rapporteur;
21. Decides to keep under consideration during its forty-ninth session
the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, in the light of additional
elements provided by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and
Social Council.
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993
