S/PV.9386

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9386th meeting

Wednesday, 26 July 2023, 11.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Grudinskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-21946 (E)
*2321946*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9386

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

are concerned about the threat that this war increasingly
poses to Ukrainian culture and heritage, and we urge
the Russian Federation to immediately cease attacks
against cultural property protected by widely ratified
international normative instruments.

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: As we return to the Chamber for the
third time in 10 days to address the crisis in Ukraine,
we continue to witness the widespread destruction and
suffering caused by the war. This week, the port city of
Odesa has been the target of devastating waves of air
strikes. On Sunday, a Russian missile attack damaged
the UNESCO-protected Transfiguration Cathedral
and other historical buildings in the historic centre
of Odesa — a world heritage site. In that shocking
attack, one person was reportedly killed, and several
others, including children, were injured. The attack
also caused extensive damage to an important place
of worship with religious and cultural significance to
Ukraine and beyond. Sites such as the Transfiguration
Cathedral are protected under the World Heritage
Convention. Attacks against them are a violation of
1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. Sunday’s
attack followed several successive nights of deadly
Russian missile and drone strikes targeting Odesa and
other cities in southern Ukraine, including Mykolayiv
and Chernomorsk, killing at least three people and
injuring dozens of others. I reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s strong condemnation of those attacks.
Unfortunately, Sunday’s attack was not the first
targeting Ukrainian culture and heritage. In fact, since
24 February 2022, UNESCO has verified damage to
274 cultural sites in Ukraine, including 117 religious
sites. As the Secretary-General stated this weekend, we
2/12

26/07/2023

As was underscored by Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths in
the Security Council this past Friday (see S/PV.9382),
attacks against Ukrainian Black Sea port facilities risk
having far-reaching impacts on global food security,
in particular in developing countries. We have now
seen disturbing reports of further Russian strikes
against port infrastructure, including grain storage
facilities in Reni and Izmail ports of the Danube River,
a key route for shipment of Ukrainian grain, not far
from Ukraine’s borders with Moldova and Romania.
Deliberately targeting infrastructure that facilitates
the export of food to the rest of the world could be
life-threatening to millions of people who need access
to affordable food. These attacks, targeting Ukraine’s
grain-export facilities, like all attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, are unacceptable and
must stop immediately. I must emphasize that attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure may
constitute a violation of international humanitarian
law. The Secretary-General stated last week that he
would not relent in his efforts to ensure that Ukrainian
and Russian food and fertilizer are available on
international markets, as part of his ongoing efforts to
fight global hunger and ensure stable food prices for
consumers everywhere.
The humanitarian response plan for 2023 is 29 per
cent funded. We are grateful to donors for ensuring
that the humanitarian community in Ukraine can
continue to support Ukrainians whose lives have been
so brutally disrupted by this war. But further funding
is desperately needed to help all of those in need. In
the first six months of 2023, some 7.3 million people
received humanitarian assistance in Ukraine. The
United Nations and its humanitarian partners remain
committed to providing life-saving humanitarian
assistance and safeguarding the lives and dignity of
persons affected by the war.
In the wake of Russia’s withdrawal from the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, these latest attacks signal
a calamitous turn for Ukrainians and the world. Port
cities that allow for the export of grain, such as Odesa,
Reni and Izmail are a lifeline for many. Now they are
the latest casualties in this senseless, brutal war. As
23-21946

26/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

long as the war continues, civilians continue to suffer.
Ukrainians have suffered enough. The world has
suffered enough. I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call
for just and sustainable peace, in line with the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): In a war that has lost its way,
as part of a policy that has no meaning and as a terrible
result of an erratic judgement since the start, Russia
is targeting everything: innocent people, including
children; residential areas; civilian infrastructure and
cultural heritage. All these amount to war crimes. With
its latest decision to kill the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
Russia is again disrupting the food supply chain. As if
that were not enough, it is intentionally targeting ports
and grain storage facilities.
Russia’s intention to target the Ukrainian national
identity: its history, architecture, language and culture
has never been a secret. It is fully in line with the
Kremlin’s policy, according to which Ukraine is not a
nation and does not have the right to exist. As of 20 July
2023, UNESCO verified damage to 116 religious sites,
27 museums, 95 buildings of historical and artistic
interest, 19 monuments, 12 libraries and one archive.
Last week, Russian missiles destroyed the Odesa
Transfiguration Cathedral, built in 1794. It was not the
first time this Cathedral suffered a vicious attack. The
Kremlin had already attacked it under Stalin, in 1936.
Eighty-seven years later, illegally acquired Iranian
drones, used by the Russian army, would hit it with the
same intention, to destroy it. The cathedral is one of
several historical parts of central Odesa, a UNESCO
World Heritage Site. I wonder what explanations Russia
will come up with, as it never wastes an opportunity to
pretend that Russia never attacks non-military targets.
Russia’s intense drone and missile attacks against
Odesa sought to damage the port infrastructure,
including its grain and oil terminal. The bombardment
inflicted serious damage to export facilities and
destroyed at least 60,000 tons of grain.
First, Russia withdrew from the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, playing with the anxiety of millions unsure of
having food in the coming days and weeks; now it wants
to destroy ports, export facilities and even silos full of

S/PV.9386

grain. By blocking and bombing Ukrainian seaports
and preventing freedom of navigation in the Black Sea,
Russia is not only preventing Ukraine from exporting
its grain and agricultural products; it is condemning
millions to food insecurity in many parts of the world,
mostly in developing countries in the Global South, and
is again trying to weaponize food.
We believe that it is time for this Council to act and
work to address this issue. Attacks against civilian and
critical infrastructure, including infrastructure related
to grain exports, must come to an end. We also call on
Russia to engage and remove its obstacles to the flow of
grain exports through the Black Sea.
Let us not forget that deliberate attacks against
critical infrastructure constitute war crimes.
Perpetrators must be held to account. This continued
deliberate destruction policy only reinforces the need
to continue supporting Ukraine militarily, politically,
and economically for its self-defence until proper
conditions for peace are created — a peace fully in line
with the Charter of the United Nations that respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his very sobering briefing.
Earlier this morning, Russia wasted the Council’s
time with another sham meeting (see S/PV.9385), and
this one was cruelly ironic given that Russian forces
destroyed Odesa’s historic Transfiguration Cathedral
just this week with a targeted Russian missile.
According to UNESCO, roughly 270 cultural sites
have been damaged since President Putin launched his
full-scale invasion of Ukraine. The loss of Ukrainian
cultural heritage is staggering, and it is truly shameful.
The attack on the historic Transfiguration Cathedral was
just one of the many attacks that Russia has carried out
in the Odesa region this week. The Kremlin’s campaign
of brutality has been relentless, and the Ukrainian
people are paying a heavy price. After Russia’s 19 July
strike, Odesa’s city Government reported that one
person died and eight people were injured, and this past
Saturday, Russia’s attacks on Odesa killed one person
and injured 22 others. My heart goes out to the loved
ones of those killed and injured, to the communities
that have been rocketed by Russian missiles and drones
and to the children who have endured so much needless
suffering and violence.

23-219463/12

S/PV.9386

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We all know Russia’s attacks have global
consequences. These are attacks on the world’s food
supply, on all who face hunger, malnutrition and
famine, especially in parts of the world that can least
afford it. Over the past week, the Russian military
bombarded Odesa and other port cities. One attack
destroyed 60,000 tons of grain, which, according
to the World Food Programme, is enough to feed
more than 270,000 people for a year. And on 23 and
24 July, Russia struck Ukrainian ports on the Danube,
destroying grain-storage infrastructure at the port of
Reni, just across the river from Romania. Russia’s
attacks on Chernomorsk, a port that facilitates nearly
70 per cent of Ukrainian wheat exports to developing
countries, caused damage that experts say will take at
least a year to repair.
Russia is hell-bent on preventing Ukrainian
grain from reaching global markets, which is why it
unilaterally suspended its participation in the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. Even though Russia never fully
implemented the Initiative, that arrangement helped get
food to those in need. This arrangement helped to get
food to those in need. And as the Secretary-General has
said, it has been a beacon of hope. We encourage him to
continue his efforts to find a path forward to resuming
the initiative.
This initiative, brokered by the United Nations
and Türkiye, lowered food prices for all. It has been
critical to the World Food Programme’s humanitarian
work in such places as Afghanistan, Somalia and
Yemen. Further, the Black Sea Grain Initiative
disproportionately benefited the developing world. As
Mr. Khiari said, it was a lifeline to many.
Russia will tell you otherwise. It will say that only
Western countries benefited from this arrangement.
But the facts are not on Russia’s side, and the Russians
know it, which is why they have chosen not to speak in
the Chamber today, which is another temper tantrum
for not getting their way.
According to the United Nations, nearly two thirds
of the wheat exported through this arrangement went
to developing countries. Global food prices spiked to
near record highs after Russia launched its full-scale
invasion of Ukraine. They rose again after the Russia
suspended its participation in the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. And this past Monday, wheat prices spiked
in response to Russia’s missile barrage against Odesa.
4/12

26/07/2023

The world is paying the price for Russia’s barbaric
attacks, so let us not “both sides” this issue. Only one
country — one country — is weaponizing food. Only
one country is cynically using its grain as leverage in
order to secure support from other countries, and only
one country is responsible for the suspension of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative.
We must all urge Russia to cease its attacks on
global food security and extend, expand and fully
implement the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Furthermore,
we must continue to hold Russia accountable for its
unprovoked illegal war against Ukraine.
The Security Council cannot be silent. It is time
to act. This is a pressing matter of international peace
and security. The Ukrainian people need peace. The
world needs peace. It is far past time for President Putin
to silence his guns, withdraw his troops and end his
brutal aggression.
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari for his briefing.
We once again deplore the fact that, after
suspending its participation in the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, the Russian Federation has decided to follow
up on that decision with ongoing attacks on cities and
port facilities. We just held a Security Council meeting
convened at Russia’s request on issues involving
religion (see S/PV.9385).
Having expressed our concern to members of the
Council in January and May of this year (see S/PV.9243
and S/PV.9321, respectively), I must now add to that
our alarm that the military aggression against Ukraine
has resulted in the destruction of hundreds of religious
sites, most of which were verified by UNESCO in the
context of its preliminary assessment of the damage
caused to cultural sites. In this regard, I must recall
article 53 of the Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions relating to the Protection of Victims of
International Armed Conflicts, which prohibits acts
of hostility directed against places of worship which
constitute the cultural or spiritual heritage of peoples.
We therefore condemn the air strikes on Odesa that
have resulted in the destruction of the historic Orthodox
Cathedral of the Transfiguration, and recall that none
of these acts should be left unaccounted for or without
redress. We further condemn the continued attacks on
any civilian critical infrastructure as well as threats of
23-21946

26/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9386

attack against civilian vessels. We call for the cessation
of attacks on production and export infrastructure and
on major or alternative routes for the grain trade, first,
because no provision of the United Nations Charter
gives any country the right to invade or attack its
neighbour, and, secondly, because such actions will
continue to exacerbate global food insecurity.

Russia must stop this headlong rush. Together
with UNESCO, France will continue to support the
preservation and reconstruction of this Ukrainian
heritage, which is also the universal heritage of
humanity. To ensure that no crime goes unpunished,
our country will continue to support Ukrainian justice
and international criminal justice.

Finally, we call on the Security Council to insist
that the Russian Federation withdraw its occupying
troops and end the aggression without further delay.

The Russian aggression against Ukraine is having
catastrophic repercussions for the entire world. But it
is also a dead end for Russia, for it is in the process of
failing, and our support for Ukraine will not waver.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
For over a week, Russia has been raining missiles
and drones down on the Odesa region. These murderous
strikes have but one objective: to punish Ukraine for its
resistance to Russian aggression, which has kept Odesa
a free city.
Since ending the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
Russia has launched a campaign of strikes on the port
infrastructure of Odesa and Mykolayiv. Grain silos,
warehouses and terminals are being shelled. At a time
when over 700 million people worldwide are suffering
from hunger, Russia has already destroyed over 60,000
tonnes of grain.
Russia is once again using blackmail as a tactic and
hunger as a weapon. It is deliberately blocking exports
from Ukrainian ports in order to drive up agricultural
prices and boost the profits on its own exports.
Because, in the end, it is the vulnerable countries that
suffer from these actions, Russia compounds cynicism
with irresponsibility. For its part, France will continue
to provide aid to the populations affected by this food
blackmail, through its deliveries of grain and fertilizers
and through the European Union’s solidarity corridors.
By targeting the historic centre of Odesa, listed
as a UNESCO World Heritage site in January, Russia
is seeking to destroy Ukrainian heritage and culture.
The UNESCO listing obligates Russia to protect the
city’s exceptional value, both for Ukraine and for
humanity. Striking both civilian infrastructure and
protected property is tantamount to committing a
double war crime. By damaging the Cathedral of the
Transfiguration, Odesa’s leading and largest Orthodox
church, Russia has revealed its powerlessness, but it
will not succeed in breaking up Ukraine by attacking its
culture and destroying its heritage — quite the contrary.

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.
For some time now, the situation on the ground in
Ukraine has been escalating, with expanding clashes
and confrontations, rising civilian casualties and evergreater damage to critical civilian infrastructure. There
is no end in sight to this war, which China finds deeply
concerning. I wish to make three points.
First, the priority at the moment is to alleviate
civilian suffering and prevent the situation from
escalating. China calls upon the two parties to the
conflict to keep calm and exercise restraint, renounce
the logic of military confrontation and prevent the war
from getting out of control and beyond the point of
no return.
Parties to the conflict must strictly comply
with international humanitarian law and relevant
international conventions and refrain from attacking
civilians, civilian infrastructure and cultural heritage
sites and irresponsibly using and transferring cluster
munitions. It is especially important not to take any
action that might endanger the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. All efforts should be made to prevent
nuclear disasters.
Secondly, alleviating the food crisis and containing
any spillover effect is an imperative that concerns us all.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative and the memorandum
of understanding on facilitating exports of Russian
food products and fertilizers are important in terms of
stabilizing global food prices, maintaining global food
security and, in particular, improving the food supply
to the most vulnerable countries. At the moment, the
window of opportunity to revive the package deal is
still open. The international community should act
with a heightened sense of urgency and encourage

23-219465/12

S/PV.9386

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the parties concerned to accelerate dialogue and
consultation, to actively meet one other halfway and
to address one another’s concerns so as to resume
food and fertilizer exports from both countries. China
supports the Secretary-General in continuing to make
efforts towards that end.
Thirdly, the fundamental solution is to promote
peace talks for a political settlement. However difficult
a situation might be, the door to diplomatic negotiation
must never close. Efforts towards the cessation of
hostilities must not stop. It is imperative to encourage
and help the parties to step up engagement and search
for solutions that accommodate each other’s concerns
in a manner consistent with regional realities. The
international community should support the relevant
diplomatic endeavours, create a positive atmosphere
for peace talks, find common ground between the
parties and help to establish conditions for a political
settlement to the Ukraine issue.
On the issue of Ukraine, China consistently
advocates that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries should be protected, the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations respected,
the legitimate security concerns of all parties taken on
board and all efforts conducive to a peaceful settlement
of the crisis supported. We stand ready to continue to
work alongside the rest of the international community
towards a political settlement of the Ukraine crisis.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his briefing.
Since the outbreak of the war in Ukraine, civilian
infrastructure has been regularly targeted by attacks
causing extensive and sometimes irreversible damage,
as well as much loss of life and countless injuries
among the civilian population. The events of the past
few weeks confirm that trend and provide evidence
of an intensification of violence against civilians. The
strategies used by the parties to the conflict to target
residential areas with the aim of destabilizing the
adversary constitute actions against international peace
and security that deserve to be firmly condemned.
The trajectory of the conflict increases our
concerns. Despite calls for de-escalation, the violence
persists, and attacks and reprisals continue unabated.
We call on the parties to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and not to target
essential infrastructure and civilian populations.
6/12

26/07/2023

The already heavy toll should be a wake-up call to
the warring parties to invest in a diplomatic and
political solution.
At a time when the global food supply is in danger
of being deprived of one third of the world’s cereals, the
bombing of the port of Odesa is likely to damage the
existing structures used for transporting those cereals
and raises fears of a true food crisis in several countries
around the world. With that in mind, Gabon reiterates
its appeal to the Secretary-General to continue to
use his good offices to promote the opening of talks
between all parties. For its part, the Security Council
must support and coordinate the various diplomatic
initiatives to promote a negotiated settlement.
Even if the prospects for peace seem remote and the
sound of cannon fire persists, we remain hopeful that
dialogue and peace will eventually triumph.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.
Brazil deeply regrets the attacks over the past
few days on populated areas in Ukraine, namely in
Odesa, resulting in the loss of yet more human life
and significant damage to civilian infrastructure and
cultural and historical Ukrainian heritage, such as
the Transfiguration Cathedral. We note with concern
the destruction inflicted on port facilities and
transportation infrastructure.
We once again call on all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, the
1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and its two
Protocols, the 1972 Convention for the Protection of
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, and resolution
2347 (2017), adopted by the Council in March 2017.
Since the start of the conflict, UNESCO has
recorded damage to 270 cultural sites in Ukraine,
including 116 places of worship. Brazil welcomes the
expected deployment of a mission of the agency to
Odesa in the next few days to ascertain the extent of the
destruction resulting from the recent attacks.
Once again, we stress the urgent need for a peaceful
solution to the conflict, fully respecting Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territory integrity, as well as the security
concerns of the parties involved. The continuation of
hostilities will result in more fatalities, in particular of
the innocent and more vulnerable, and jeopardize the
future of generations, given the extent of the destruction
23-21946

26/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of civilian infrastructure and the historical and cultural
heritage of Ukraine. Reconstruction will also require
considerable human and material resources and will
take years.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): Mozambique thanks
Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his
important insights.
It is our considered view that attacks on bridges,
critical port facilities and grain export infrastructure in
the Black Sea signal a significant escalation of the war.
Those attacks could lead to a full-fledged commerce
war and the unintended expansion of the conflict into
international waters. We fear that neutral third nations’
ships passing through those crucial naval routes might
be targeted, increasing the risk of collateral damage and
retaliatory actions.
Mozambique urges all parties to fully comply with
their obligations under international law, including the
requirement to abide by the principles of distinction,
proportionality, precaution and the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure. In that connection, we
strongly urge maximal restraint and remind all parties of
their obligations under international law.
As the conflict intensifies and expands, the
humanitarian consequences worsen. A refugee crisis
looms over the region. In addition, as the chances of
reviving the Black Sea Grain Initiative diminish, the
global food shortage worsens and diplomatic options to
de-escalate the conflict decrease. As we have stated in
previous consultations, Mozambique reiterates its call
for an immediate halt to hostilities and the resumption
of direct negotiation between the parties. We also
emphasize the importance of considering various peace
initiatives, including those recently proposed by some
African countries, in resolving the conflict. We consider
the matter to be of the utmost urgency and that it must be
addressed in complete accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV.9386

The recent escalation in violence by the Russian
Federation against the port city of Odesa has
raised concerns regarding the safety of the civilian
population. We know that targeting civilians and
civilian infrastructure is morally unacceptable and
constitutes a violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. We therefore join UNESCO
in condemning the increased attacks on a number
of cultural sites, including the historic city centre of
Odesa, a world heritage property. We want to point to
resolution 2347 (2017), which condemns any unlawful
destruction of cultural heritage during armed conflict,
and note that such actions may constitute war crimes.
We also recall the obligation of States to respect the
1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and the 1977
Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions.
We emphasize the need for the parties to heed
the calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities. We
believe that further militarization of the conflict, fuelled
by the manifest combative choices of the parties, would
not change the dynamics of the conflict on the ground.
In our view, it is futile to use force in contemporary
relations between States.
While noting the breaches of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, we are also disturbed
about the negative effect of the conflict on the global
humanitarian situation. The war’s impact on world
food prices is aggravating socioeconomic conditions
in many countries that were already reeling from the
adverse effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We
therefore reiterate our call to the Russian Federation to
immediately cease its attacks on cultural property that
is protected by widely ratified international normative
instruments, and once again call for both the Russian
Federation and Ukraine to cease their hostilities.
Dialogue is the path we must choose, and dialogue is
the choice we must support.

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I wish to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.

Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.

Today alone, the Council has convened two
meetings on the situation in Ukraine. That regrettably
demonstrates the divergent interests in the ongoing
conflict and the evolving complications that arise with
the continuation of the war. We once again call on the
Council and the wider international community to put
aside all differences and make every effort to help the
parties to stop the unjustified war.

After Russia’s termination of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative last week, its aggression against Ukraine has
continued and in some cases intensified. Russia has
used heavy weaponry to target civilian infrastructure,
including grain stores in Odesa, and has also launched
drone attacks on grain-storage facilities in Reni, which
is located approximately 200 metres from Romania,
across the Danube. Moreover, it has unjustly marked all

23-219467/12

S/PV.9386

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

vessels bound for Ukrainian ports as potential carriers
of military cargo, which means that Ukrainian grain
facilities and civilian shipping across the Black Sea
may also be targeted. It is reported that Russia has
placed more sea mines near Ukrainian ports.
Russia’s reprehensible actions clearly demonstrate
its relentless strategy of using global food supplies as
a weapon, with severe consequences for vulnerable
people all over the world. Since Russia left the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, reports say that grain prices have
risen rapidly. The Council must do everything it can to
alleviate the situation as soon as possible. Japan once
again condemns Russia’s actions, which are holding
the rest of the world hostage while it blames others for
the crises it has created by its aggression. We would
also like to remind the Council that the destruction of
civilian infrastructure may constitute a violation of
international humanitarian law.
The aggression’s grievous impact on civilians has
been compounded by Russia’s recent missile strike
on Odesa, which resulted in civilian casualties and
damaged a number of significant cultural sites that
are protected under the World Heritage Convention,
including the Cathedral of the Transfiguration.
According to UNESCO, as many as 270 cultural sites in
Ukraine have been damaged since Russia’s hostilities
began, including religious sites, museums, historically
significant buildings, monuments, libraries and more.
Cultural heritage embodies the unique identity and
history not just of a nation but of humankind at large.
Attacking and damaging cultural heritage is therefore
equivalent to attacking peoples’ distinctive identities.
Japan affirms that any harm to cultural heritage is
utterly unacceptable and strongly urges all parties
involved to honour all the pertinent international
instruments, including resolution 2347 (2017) and the
UNESCO 1954 Hague Convention, together with its
two Protocols.
We want to express our gratitude to UNESCO for
its unwavering support to the Ukrainian authorities in
safeguarding Ukraine’s cultural heritage. Japan has
contributed more than $4.5 million to UNESCO to
assist it in its activities in Ukraine, such as enabling
satellite monitoring of priority areas and repairs to
damaged sites. Our commitment to supporting Ukraine
in protecting and preserving its cultural heritage and
properties remains steadfast.
8/12

26/07/2023

Let us be unequivocal. The suffering we are seeing
in Ukraine and around the world is the result of Russia’s
unprovoked aggression. Russia must stop it and
withdraw its troops and military equipment from the
entire internationally recognized territory of Ukraine
immediately, completely and unconditionally.
Mr. Abushabab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.
The destruction and damage to Odesa are a further
reminder of the material and intangible costs of the
war for civilians, civilian objects and cultural heritage.
Since February 2022, there have been nearly 25,000
civilian casualties recorded in Ukraine, including more
than 9,000 killed and close to 16,000 injured. Despite
the exhortations of the international community, the
destruction of critical civilian infrastructure in Ukraine
continues, with estimates of damage in the billions of
dollars. And as mentioned earlier, UNESCO has verified
damage to 270 cultural sites in Ukraine since the
beginning of the war.
The toll wrought by war is heavy, and the road to
reconstruction and healing will be long and arduous.
As long as the war continues, the level of destruction
will only increase. The human price is already too high,
but it will be even higher tomorrow and the day after
tomorrow. That reality in the ongoing war is causing
untold suffering to civilians and leaving wounds that
will not easily heal. As we noted earlier today (see
S/PV.9385), cultural heritage, particularly in places of
cultural exchange, represents a prism through which
we can view our common humanity. Its damage and
destruction are a loss to all of us.
We once again reiterate our call on the parties to abide
by their obligations under international humanitarian
law to ensure the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Civilian objects must never be targets
of attack. We reiterate today that we must make every
possible effort to bring the war to a just, lasting peace
that is in line with the Charter of the United Nations
and respects Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for
his briefing.
Since Russia’s decision last week not to extend the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, the population of Odesa has
been enduring nights that no one should have to live
through. Switzerland is appalled by the considerable
23-21946

26/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9386

increase in the number of Russian attacks on the Black Sea
coast, which have resulted in civilian casualties and the
destruction of homes, port infrastructure and grain silos.
On Sunday, several cultural sites, including, as we have
heard, the Orthodox Cathedral of the Transfiguration,
were damaged in Odesa’s city centre, a key area that is
protected under the World Heritage Convention, as a
result of another Russian strike. Switzerland condemns
the recent spate of attacks as part of Russia’s military
aggression against Ukraine. I would like to make three
observations in that regard.

the Secretary-General and other actors, including the
Government of Türkiye, to facilitate free access to world
food and fertilizer markets.

First, over the past 10 days we have been witnessing
an increase in the number of direct attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure. We recall that indiscriminate
or disproportionate attacks are prohibited under
international humanitarian law and must immediately
stop. That also applies to humanitarian infrastructure,
including personnel and medical supplies, which
also benefit from special protection. In that context,
Switzerland condemns the damage recently caused
during a Russian artillery attack on a cultural centre that
had served as a humanitarian facility in Chasiv Yar, in
the Donetsk region.

Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his remarks.

Secondly, attacks on areas protected by the World
Heritage Convention represent a serious threat to
Ukraine’s cultural heritage. UNESCO has reported
damage to 270 cultural sites since February 2022.
Switzerland shares the concerns the Secretary-General
and UNESCO that Russian military aggression
represents a growing threat to Ukrainian culture. It
is not just walls that are collapsing, it is the country’s
cultural heritage that is under threat. We call for strict
compliance with the obligations of international law
concerning the protection of cultural property, including
the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. We also recall
that the intentional destruction of cultural property can
constitute a war crime, as provided for in the Rome
Statute and as reiterated by the Council in resolution
2347 (2017).
Thirdly, Russia’s decision not to extend the Black
Sea Grain Initiative and its attacks on Ukrainian port
cities have repercussions beyond Ukraine. We reiterate
our deep concern about the potentially disastrous
consequences for global food security, and we call on
Russia to reverse its decision. Attacks on port facilities,
including on the stretch of the Danube River near the
Romanian border, as well as threats to civilian navigation,
represent a dangerous possibility of escalation. We urge
for restraint and express our support for the efforts of

While attacks continue in the southern part of
Ukraine, the population is committed to rebuilding
its city, country and future. We hope that such efforts
will enable the city of Odesa to rise from the ashes,
as the Transfiguration Cathedral has done in the past.
Switzerland reaffirms its solidarity with and support for
Ukraine in its pursuit to rebuild the country.

Only last week, the Russian Federation decided
to withdraw from the Black Sea Grain Initiative. The
decision was made with full knowledge of the fact that
it seriously risks undoing everything that has been
achieved in the past year. It was made intentionally,
while knowing that it could exacerbate an already
exceptionally difficult food security situation. Since then,
the Russian Federation has repeatedly attacked Ukraine’s
port of Odesa, a key hub for exporting grain, and has
deliberately targeted port infrastructure and food storage
facilities. The collateral repercussions of those attacks
have global ramifications and stand to adversely affect
millions of people, particularly in developing countries.
As the Council, we must monitor the situation closely
and consider exploring new options, if needed, to ensure
that the food supply continues to flow as smoothly as
possible, despite that decision. Administrative, cultural,
religious and residential buildings have also been
subject to a barrage of strikes, resulting in a number of
civilian deaths.
Russia’s destruction of religious sites and places
of worship in Ukraine is appalling. Ukraine’s Institute
for Religious Freedom and UNESCO have catalogued
hundreds of religious sites that have been destroyed,
damaged or looted as a result of Russia’s invasion.
To those statistics, we must also add Sunday’s attack
against Odesa’s Transfiguration Cathedral, located in
the heart of Odesa’s UNESCO World Heritage-listed
historic centre. Such actions may constitute war
crimes. They are also a direct attack against Ukraine’s
identity and further compound the immense suffering
of the Ukrainian population. They illustrate once again
Russia’s complete disregard for the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and human life itself. We
remain firm in our position that the perpetrators must
be held accountable for their actions.

23-219469/12

S/PV.9386

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In that connection, last week, we welcomed the
establishment of the International Centre for the
Prosecution of the Crime of Aggression against Ukraine,
and the establishment of the register of damage caused
by the Russian Federation’s aggression. They are two
important steps towards achieving accountability and
ensuring the right to reparations for the citizens of
Ukraine, the legal entities of Ukraine and the State of
Ukraine. Let us remember all the damage and devastation
that Russia’s war of aggression has caused in Ukraine.
The deplorable and unacceptable attacks that we have
focused on today are yet another worrisome development
in a long series of grave and disturbing events directly
resulting from Russia’s senseless, unjustified and
unprovoked war. We must never forget that the attacks
against civilians and objects that are vital to the survival of
the civilian population are prohibited under international
humanitarian law. Equally, we strongly urge Russia to
facilitate the tracing of Ukrainian children and ensure
family reunifications.
Finally, we also stress that the liberation of Ukraine
and the full restoration of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, within its internationally recognized borders,
is the only way in which we can achieve a just and lasting
peace. In achieving that, we will also be restoring respect
for the Charter.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by joining others in
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
informative briefing.
Since it terminated the Black Sea Grain Initiative last
week, Russia has unleashed a new barrage of strikes on
Ukraine’s towns and cities. On Sunday, Russia attacked
Odesa’s UNESCO-listed city centre, injuring dozens,
including four children. Among the buildings badly
damaged, as we have heard, was the Transfiguration
Cathedral — Odesa’s largest Orthodox church. The
Transfiguration Cathedral has been bombed twice, in
1936 on Stalin’s orders and now by Putin’s order. That
act of cultural and religious vandalism struck at the
heart of the civilian community and was condemned by
the Director-General of UNESCO. Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine has left a wide trail of destruction across
the country. UNESCO has verified damage to more
than 270 cultural or historic sites, including libraries,
churches, theatres, museums and memorials. Thousands
of artworks and other artefacts have been stolen.
10/12

26/07/2023

Russia is imposing its laws and education systems
in Ukraine, restricting Ukrainian media and indigenous
languages and trying to indoctrinate Ukrainian children
through forced transfers to Russia. Russia is seeking
to destroy Ukraine’s history, identity and cultural
heritage. With those strikes, Russia is also harming the
world’s hungriest. By targeting Ukraine’s Black Sea
and Danube ports, Russia is trying to damage Ukraine’s
ability to export food. It has already destroyed tens
of thousands of tons of food and reduced Ukraine’s
ability to store its upcoming harvest, pushing up global
food prices.
We stand with the people of Ukraine, as they rebuild
after Russia’s attacks, and we fully support the United
Nations continued efforts to bring food onto global
markets. Russia is not even trying to hide the cynicism
and cruelty of its illegal war. It is trying to bring
Ukraine to its knees and to wear down the international
community. But Ukraine will not be subjugated, and we
will not relent in our support for Ukraine, including in
the Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the silent,
residual presence of Putin’s regime in the permanent
seat of the Soviet Union.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency for organizing this meeting of the Security
Council at the request of the delegation of Ukraine.
Last Friday we informed the Security Council
of Russia’s deliberate attacks in the Odesa region
immediately after Russia’s withdrawal from the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. Since that time, Russia has
escalated its missile terror against Odesa. On 23 July,
Russia carried out its fifth airstrike in a row, shelling
the city centre of Odesa with 19 missiles of different
types, including anti-ship missiles. We reiterate
that using anti-ship missiles against ground targets
effectively turns them into low-precision weapons of
indiscriminate effect. As a result, the historic centre
of Odesa, a designated World Heritage site, sustained
heavy damage. The barrage of Russian missiles hit 29
historic and cultural landmarks, including museums
and religious and residential buildings. As follows from
the statement made by UNESCO:
23-21946

26/07/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

“Taking place just two weeks after the strike that
destroyed a historic building in Lviv, this attack
is the second to date in an area protected under
the World Heritage Convention, in violation of
the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.
This strike also coincided with the destruction of
the Culture Centre of Folk Art and Art Education in
the city of Mykolaiv, a hundred kilometres away.”
A preliminary assessment in Odesa has revealed
damage to several museums inside the buffer zone
of World Heritage property, including the Odesa
Archaeological Museum, the Odesa Maritime Museum
and the Odesa Literature Museum. They had all been
marked by UNESCO and local authorities with the
Blue Shield, the distinctive emblem of the 1954 Hague
Convention. In total, nearly 50 buildings were damaged
or destroyed following the attack, including four
schools, five kindergartens and two extracurricular
educational institutions. The building of the Greek
Consulate was also damaged, and it is already the
second consular office in Odesa to be hit by Russian
terror. Just last week, following another such attack, the
Chinese Consulate was damaged.
What is most terrible is that each Russian attack
increases the number of fatalities among the civilian
population. The last strike on Odesa, on the night of
23 July, killed one civilian and wounded 22 people.
We appreciate the clear message from the SecretaryGeneral, who strongly condemned the Russian
Federation’s missile attack on Odesa. The SecretaryGeneral’s concerns about the increasing threat to
Ukrainian culture and heritage are completely justified,
as both are considered by the Russian aggressor to
be primary targets in their attempts to eliminate the
Ukrainian identity.
Ukrainian grain and other foodstuffs remain
another target that Russia is trying to eliminate, not
caring at all about the severe implications for global
food security. To that end, the aggressor continues its
attacks against port infrastructure and grain storage
facilities in Ukraine’s south. On 24 July, Russia
launched drones of Iranian origin to attack Reni, a port
city on the Danube River in the Odesa region. Three
storage facilities full of grain were destroyed. Those
aggressive actions merit a strong response; otherwise,
Russia will be encouraged to further undermine the
security situation in the Black Sea by attacking civilian
vessels and laying additional mines in the waters

S/PV.9386

adjacent to the Ukrainian coastline. There are grounds
to believe that Russia is preparing such incidents for the
purposes of blaming Ukraine and discouraging vessels
from other countries from entering Ukrainian waters
and using Ukrainian ports.
We reiterate that the Russian blockade of Ukrainian
ports, the destruction of their infrastructure, the
obstruction of grain exports and the intimidation of
foreign merchant vessels should be considered an attack
on the freedom of navigation. Those actions also aim at
eliminating a market competitor, thereby deliberately
raising world food prices and making a profit at the
expense of the millions of people around the world who
will suffer.
Odesa is not the only place where the Russian army
is increasing the scale of destruction and casualties,
in particular among children. On 24 July, Russia
deliberately shelled with multiple rocket launchers the
city of Kostiantynivka in the Donetsk region. Three
people, including two children, were killed; six others,
including four children, were wounded. Russian forces
insidiously and cruelly attacked the city in the evening,
targeting a local pond where families with children were
resting. The Ukrainian children who have been trapped
in the occupied territories of Ukraine are now subject
to anti-Ukrainian indoctrination and propaganda aimed
at instilling hatred towards Ukraine, its language,
culture and history. To that end, the Russian occupation
Administration sent children to the occupied Crimea,
the Russian Federation and Belarus for so-called
vacation and recreation. There is a significant increase
in the number of organized trips of groups of children,
not only to the territorially closer Crimea and the
Krasnodar region but also to Russia’s far east. There
are plans to take at least 30,000 children away from
the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine. The
main goal of such “recreation” for Ukrainian children
is claimed to be “to ensure the sociocultural integration
of children into Russian society”, which effectively
means aggressive brainwashing. According to available
information, since the beginning of the invasion, more
than 3,000 Ukrainian children have been transported
to Belarus from the temporarily occupied Donetsk
and Luhansk regions under the guise of so-called
health rehabilitation.
Yesterday the State Duma of the Russian Federation
adopted a law on increasing the age of conscription.
While introducing the draft, the Chair of the Duma
Defence Committee, Kartapolov, a former high-ranking

23-2194611/12

S/PV.9386

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Russian Army general, openly said that “this law has
been written for a big war, for general mobilization,
and now this big war is already being felt”. Instead of
seeking peace, they continue to dream of a big war in
which Ukraine would not be the sole target. Threats
from Putin’s ally Lukashenko about the intentions of
the Wagner Group “to go west to Warsaw, to Rzeszow”
serve as another example of their unwillingness to
proceed towards de-escalation.
Allow me to also reiterate that, unlike Russia,
which seeks only greater war, Ukraine has proposed
the peace formula, the fundamental principles of which
align with the resolution on principles of the Charter
of the United Nations underlying a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine (General Assembly
resolution ES-11/6), supported by 141 votes in the
General Assembly (see A/ES-11/PV.19). It includes,
among other things, food security, which the Russian
Federation is so desperately trying to undermine
through its devastating armed attacks and sea blockades
against my country. The peace formula introduced by

12/12

26/07/2023

President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in November 2022
stands today as the only guide pointing the way towards
restoring a just and lasting peace and stability in the
region and a world order based on the rule of law. We
appeal to Member States to join the initiative and to
take part in the implementation of the specific points
of the formula.
The only way to avoid further deterioration and
expansion of the scope of war is to maintain the solidarity
and unity of purpose towards the need to restore respect
for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
to ensure the military defeat of Russia in Ukraine and
accountability for the crime of aggression, war crimes
and crimes against humanity; and to deprive Russia of
the capabilities to wage wars and inflict harm on its
neighbours and people around the world.
To conclude, I join the demands of the previous
speakers who affirmed that the Council must — I
repeat — must act.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

23-21946
